
Niv£BsnY ViBn*", 



V924 101104929 









fHtlHiif'^^^^lilil 



iiUlli 







\H\\ 



Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104929 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDITED BY THE 



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 



AND BY THE 



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



WITH 



INTRODUCTIONS 



BY THE 



Vmx. JlRCHDEACON p. W. FAEEAE, D.D., P.E.S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., 
F.E.S.E.— VEET EBV. PEmCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EKV. CANON Q. 
RAWUNSON, M.A.-EirV. A. PLUMMEE, M.A., D.D. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
Kbw Yoek and Toronto. 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ; 
AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

PSALMS. 



By REV. G. RAWLINSON, M.A., 

CANON OF CANTERBURY. 

fomiletics : 
By rev. E. R. CONDER, D.D. 

l^omilies bji l)arious ^utl)ore: 

REV. C. CLEMANCE, D.D. REV. W. FORSYTH, M.A= 

REV. C. SHORT, M.A. 



VOL. I. 



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New York and Toronto. 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



INTEODUOTION. 

§ 1. Titles of the Work, and General Character, 

The nsnal Hebrew title of the work is Tehillim (D*Vnn), or Seplier 
Tehillim (p'hnn "ISD) ; literally, " Praises," or " Book of Praises " — a title 
whioh expresses well the general character of the pieces whereof the hook 
is composed, but which cannot be said to be universally applicable to 
them. Another Hebrew title, and one which has crept into the text itself, 
is Tephilloth Cm?an), " Prayers," which is given at the close of the second 
section of the work (Ps. Ixxii. 20), as a general designation of the pieces 
contained in the first and second sections. The same word appears, in the 
singular, ai the special heading of the seventeenth, eighty-sixth, ninetieth, 
hundred and second, and hundred and forty-second psalms. But, like 
Tehillim, this term is only applicable, in strictness, to a certain number of 
the compositions which the work contains. Conjointly, however, the two 
terms, which come to us with the greatest amount of authority, are fairly 
descriptive of the general character of the work, which is at once highly 
devotional and specially intended to set forth the praises of God. 

It is manifest, on the face of it, that the work is a collection. A number 
•of separate poems, the production of different persons,' and belonging to 
different periods, have been brought together, either by a single editor, or 
perhaps by several distinct editors, and have been united into a volume, 
which has been accepted by the Jewish, and, later on, by the Christian, 
Church, as one of the "books" of Holy Scripture. The poems seem 
■originally to have been, for the most part, quite separate and distinct ; 
each is a whole in itself; and most of them appear to have been composed 
for a special object, and on a special occasion. Occasionally, but very 
seldom, one psalm seems linked on to another; and in a few instances 

■ See the titles of Fsa. iii., zlii., Ixxii., Ixsiii., Ixxxviii., Isxxix., xo., In the Hebrew, 
*nd of Ps8. cxxxvL, oxxxvii., oxlv. — oxlviii., in the Septnagint. 

FSALMB. k 



INTRODUCTION TO 



there are groups of psalms intentionally attached together, as the group 
from Ps. Ixxiii. to Ixxxiii., ascribed to Asaph, and, again, the " Hallelujah " 
group — from Ps. cxlvi. to cl. But generally no connection is apparent, and 
the sequence seems, so to speak, accidental. 

Our own title of the work—" Psalms," " The Psalms," " The Book of 
Psalms " ^ — has come to us, through the Yulgate, from the Septuagint. 
>I'aX/ios meant, in the Alexandrian Greek, " a poem to be sung to a stringed 
instrument ; " • and as the poems of the Psalter were thus sung it the 
Jewish worship, the name *aX/ioi appeared appropriate. It is not, however, 
a translation of either Tehillim or Tephilloth, and it has the disadvantage 
of dropping altogether the spiritual character of the compositions. As, 
however, it was applied to them, certainly by St. Luke (xx. 42 ; Acts i. 20) 
and St. Paul (Acts xiii. 33), and possibly by our Lord ' (Luke xxiv. 44), we 
may rest content with the appellation. It is, at any rate, one which is 
equally applicable to all the pieces whereof the " book " is composed. 

§ 2. Divisions of thu Woek, and Probable Gradual Formation op thi 

collixjtion. 

A Hebrew tradition divided the Psalter into five books. The Midrash 
or comment on the first verse of Ps. i. says, " Moses gave to the Israelites 
the five books of the Law, and as a counterpart to these, David gave them 
the Psalms, which consist of five books." Hippolytus, a Christian Father 
of the third century, confirms the statement in these words, which are 
quoted and accepted by Epiphanius,* ToBto o-e [/.i) irapeXOoi, 5 ^iXokoye, on 
Kat TO 'ifaX.-njpiov eis irei/TC SutXov ^i^kia ol *Ey8patoi, uore etvat kol airb aXkov 
7r€VTdT€U)(pv '■ *'6- " Be sure, too, that this does not escape you, O studious 
one, that the Hebrews divided the Psalter also into five books, so that that 
likewise was another Pentateuch." A modern writer, accepting this view, 
observes, " The Psalter is also a Pentateuch, the echo of the Mosaic Penta- 
teuch from the heart of Israel ; it is the fivefold book of the congregation 
to Jehovah, as the Law is the fivefold book of Jehovah to the congre- 
gation." * 

The " books " are severally terminated by a doxology, not exactly the 
same in every instance, but of a similar character, which in no case forma 
any part of the psalm whereto it is attached, but is simply a mark of 
division (see Pss. xli. 13 ; Ixxii. 18, 19 ; Ixxxix. 52 ; cvi. 48). The books 
are of irregular length. The first book contains forty-one psalms ; the 

' "Psalms" is the title in the list prefixed to the Authorized Version of the Old 
Testament ; " The Psalms " is the title given in the Sixth Article ; " The Book of Psalms " 
appears as the heading to the collection itself in the Authorized Version. In the Prayer- 
book collection, on the other hand, the title given is " The Psalms of David," which ia 
misleading. 

' See Liddell and Scott's < Lexicon,' sub voce. 

• It is still disputed whether the language used by onr Lord ordinarily was Aramaio or 
Greek. 

* 'De Mens, et Pond.,' c. 6. » Delitzsch. 



THE BOOK OF PSALM8. 



second, thirtj'-one ; the third and fourth, seventeen respectively ; and the 
fifth, forty-foTir. The iirst and second books are mainly Davidical; 
the third is Asaphian ; the fourth, chiefly anonymous ; the fifth, about 
three-fifths anonymous and two-fifths Davidical. It is difficult to assign 
to the several books any special characteiistios. The psalms of the first 
and second books are on the whole more mournful, and those of the fifth 
more jubilant, than the remainder. The historical element is especially 
pronounced in the third and fourth books. Books I., IV., and V. are strongly 
Jehovistic ; Books II. and III. are, on the contrary, predominantly Elohistic.^ 
It is generally allowed that the collection was formed gradually. A 
strong note of division — "The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are 
ended " — separates the first two books from the others, and seems to have 
been intended to mark the completion either of the original edition or of 
a recension. A recension is perhaps the more probable, since the note of 
division at the close of Ps. xli., and the sudden transition from Davidical 
to Korahite psalms, raises the suspicion that at this point a new hand has 
intervened. Probably the " first book " was, speaking generally, collected 
together soon after the death of David, perhaps (as Bishop Perowne thinks^) 
by Solomon, his son. Then, not very long afterwards, the Korahite Levites 
attached Book II., consisting of a collection of their own (Pss. xlii. — xlix.), a 
single psalm of Asaph (Ps. 1.), and a group of psalms (Pss. li. — Ixxii.) which 
they believed to have been composed by David, though omitted from Book I, 
At the same time, they may have prefixed Pss. i. and ii. to Book I. as an 
introduction, and appended the last verse of Ps. Ixxii. to Book II. as an 
epilogue. The third book — the Asaphian collection — is thought, with 
some reason, to have been added in a recension made by the order of 
Hezekiah,' to which there is an allusion in 2 Chron. xxix. 30. It is a 
reasonable conjecture that the last two books were collected and added to 
the previously existing Psalter by Ezra and Nehemiah,* who made the 
division at the close of Ps. ovi. on grounds of convenience and harmony. 

§ 3. AUTHOBS. 

That the principal contributor to the collection, the main author of the 
Book of Psalms, is David, though denied by some moderns," is the general 
conclusion in which criticism has rested, and is likely to rest. The historical 
books of the Old Testament assign to David more than one of the psalms 
contained in the collection (2 Sam. xxii. 2—51 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 8—36). 
Seventy-three of them are assigned to him by their titles. The psalmody 
of the temple generally is said to be his (1 Chron. xxv. 1—6 ; 2 Chron. 
xxiii. 18). The Book of Psalms was known in Macc*bean times as " the 

' In the First Book (Pss. i.— xli.) Jehovah occurs 272 times, Elohim only 15. In the 
Beoond, Elohim greatly preponderates. In the fourth and fifth Jehovah occurs 339 times, 
Elohim (of the true God) once only. 

• ' The Book of Psalms,' vol. i p. 78. • Ibid. * Ibid., p. 79. 

• As Olshansen, Kuenen, Von Lengerke, and Hitzig. 



iT INTEODUCTION TO 



Book of David (to tov Aa/3iS) " (2 Mace. ii. 13). David is cited as the 
author of the sixteenth and the hundred and tenth psalms by the writer of 
the Acts of the Apostles (Acts ii. 25, 34). Internal evidence points to him 
strongly as the writer of several others. The extravagant opinion that he 
wrote the whole book ^ could never have been broached if he had not 
written a considerable portion of it. With respect to what psalms are to 
be regarded as his, there is naturally considerable doubt. Whatever value 
may be assigned to the " titles," they cannot be regarded as absolutely 
settling the question." Still, where their authority is backed up by internal 
evidence, it seems well worthy of acceptance. On this ground, the sober 
and moderate school of critics, including such writers as Ewald, Delitzsch, 
Perowne, and even Cheyne, agree in admitting a considerable portion of 
the Psalter to be Davidic. The psalms claiming to be Davidical are found 
chiefly in the first, second, and fifth books — thirty-seven in the first, 
eighteen in the second, and fifteen in the fifth. In the third and fourth 
books there are only three psalms (Pss. Ixxxviii., ci., and ciii.) which 
claim to be his. 

The next most important contributor would seem to be Asaph. Asaph 
was one of the heads of David's choir at Jerusalem (1 Chron. vi. 39 ; 
XV. 17, 19; xvi. 6), and is coupled in one place with David (2 Chron. 
xxix. 30) as having furnished the words which were sung in the temple 
service in Hezekiah's time. Twelve psalms are assigned to him by their 
titles — one in Book II. (Ps. 1.), and eleven in Book III. (Pss. Ixxiii. — ^Ixxxiii.). 
It is doubted, however, whether the real personal Asaph can have been the 
author of all these, and suggested that in some instances the sept or family 
of Asaph is intended. 

A considerable number of psalms — no fewer than eleven — are distinctly 
ascribed to the sept or family of Korahite Levites (Pss. xlii., xliv. — xlix., 
Ixxxiv., Ixxxv., Ixxxvii., and Ixxxviii.) ; and one other (Ps. xliii.) may be 
probably assigned to them. These psalms vary in character, and mani- 
festly belong to different dates ; but all seem to have been written in the 
. times preceding the Captivity. Some are of great beauty, especially 
Pss. xlii., xliii., and Ixxxvii. The Korahite Levites held a position of high 
honour under David (1 Chron. ix. 19; xii. 6), and continued among the 
chief of the temple servants, at any rate to the time of Hezekiah (2 Chron. 
XX. 19 ; xxxi. 14). Heman, the son of Joel, one of David's principal 
singers, was a Korahite (1 Chron. vi. 38, 37), and the probable author of 
Ps. Ixxxviii. 

In the Septuagint Version, Pss. cxzxviii., oxlvi., cxlvii., and oxlviii. are 
ascribed to Haggai and Zechariah. In the Hebrew, Ps. cxxxviii. is entitled 
" a Psalm of David," while the remaining three are anonymous. It would 
appear, from internal evidence, that the tradition respecting these three, 
embodied in the Septuagint, deserves acceptance. 

Two psalma (Pss. Ixxii. and cxxvii.) are in the Hebrew assigned to 

' * Speaker's Oommentary,' vol. iv. p. 150. ' See below, ) 4. 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



Solomon. A large number of critics accept tlie Solomonic anthorship of 
the former; but by most that of the latter is rejected. Solomon, however, 
Ib regarded by some as the author of the first psalm. 

A single psalm (Ps. xc.) is ascribed to Moses; another single psalm (Ps. 
Ixxxix.) to Ethan; and another (Ps. Ixxxviii.), as already mentioned, to 
Heman. Some manuscripts of the Septuagint attribute Ps. cxxxvii. to 
Jeremiah. 

Fifty psalms — one-third of the number — remain, in the Hebrew original, 
anonymous ; or forty-eight, if we regard Ps. x. as the second part of Ps. ix., 
and Ps. xliii. as an extension of Ps. xlii. In the Septuagint, however, 
a considerable number of these have authors assigned to them. Pss. 
cxxxviii., cxlvi., cxlvii., and cxlviii. (as already observed) are attributed to 
Zichariah, or to Zeohariah conjointly with Haggai. So is Ps. cxlix. in 
some manuscripts. David is made the author of Pss. xlv., xlvi., xlvii., 
xlviii., xlix., Ixvii., Ixxi., xci., xciii., xciv., xcv., xcvi., xovii., xcviii., xcix., 
civ., and cxxxvii. in several copies ; and in a few David is made joint author 
of two psalms (Pss. xlii. and xliii.) with the sons of Korah. On the whole, 
the collection may be said to have proceeded from at least six individuals — 
David, Asaph, Solomon, Moses, Heman, and Ethan — while three others — 
Jeremiah, Haggai, and Zechariah — may not improbably have had a hand 
in it. How many Korahite Levites are included under the title, " sons of 
Korah," it is impossible to say ; and the number of the anonymous authors 
is also uncertain. 



§ 4. Date and Value of the " Titles," or Supeescriptions to 
Particular Psalms, 

On a comparison of the " titles " in the Hebrew with those in the Sep- 
tuagint, it is at once apparent (1) that those in the Hebrew are the 
originals; and (2) that those in the Septuagint were taken from them. 
The antiquity of the titles is thus thrown back to at least as early as the 
second century B.C. Nor is this the whole. The Septuagint translator or 
translators clearly write considerably later than the original authors of the 
titles, since a largish portion of their contents is left untranslated, being 
unintelligible to them. This fact is reasonably regarded as throwing back 
their antiquity still further — say, to the fourth, or perhaps to the fifth 
century B.C. — the time of Ezra. 

Ezra, it is generally allowed, made a recension of the Scriptures of the 
Old Testament as existing in his day. It is a tenable theory that he 
affixed the titles. But, on the other hand, it is a theory quite as tenable 
that he found the titles, or at any rate a large number of them, already 
affixed. Lyrical compositions among the Hebrews from the earliest times 
had superscriptions attached to them, generally indicating the name of the 
writer (see Gen. iv. 23 ; xlix. 1, 2 ; Exod, xv. 1 ; Deut. xxxi. 30 ; xxxiii. 1 ; 
Judg. ▼. 1 ; 1 Sam. ii. 1 ; 2 Sam. i. 17 ; xxii. 1 ; xxiii. 1 ; Isa. ii. 1 ; xiii. 1 ; 



INTRODUCTION TO 



xxxviii. 9; Jonah ii. 1 ; "Hab. iii. 1). If the collection of the psalms was 
made gradually,' it is perhaps most probable that each collector gave titles 
where he could, to the psalms which he collected. In that case the titles 
of Book I. would probably date from early in the reign of Solomon;" those 
of Book II. from late in that reign ; those of Book III. from the time of 
Hezekiah; and those of Books IV. and V. from the age of Ezra and 
Nehemiah.' 

The earlier titles would, of course, be the more valuable, and the more to 
be depended on ; the later ones, especially those in Books IV. and V., could 
claim but little confidence.* They would embody merely the traditions of 
the Captivity period, or might be mere guesses of Ezra. Still, in every 
case, the "title" deserves consideration. It is prima facie evidence, and, 
though it may be very weak evidence, is worth something. It is not to 
be set aside as wh(jlly worthless, unless the contents of the psalm, or its 
linguistic characteristics, are distinctly opposed to the titular statement. 

The contents of the titles are of five kinds : 1. Ascriptions to an author. 
2. Musical directions." 3. Historical statements as to the circumstances 
under which the psalm was composed. 4. Notices indicative of the 
character of the psalm or its object. 5. Liturgical notices. 

Of the original (Hebrew) titles, one hundred contain ascriptions to an 
author, while fifty psalms are left anonymous. Fifty-five contain musical 
directions, or what appear to be such. Fourteen have notices, generally of 
great interest, as to the historical circumstances under which they were com- 
posed.' Above a hundred contain some indication of the character of the 
psalm or of its subject. The indication is generall}' given by a single word. 
The composition is called mizmor (iloiD), " a psalm to be sung with mnsical 
accompaniment;" or shir (ya>), "a song;" or masHZ (^pB>D), " an instruc- 
tion ; " or miktam (Dp3p), " a poem of gold ; " or tephilldh (n^Bfl), " a prayer ; " 
or tehillah (n^ni^), " a praise ; " or sMggaion (3V|B'), " an irregular ode " — a 
dithyramb.' Or its object is declared to be either " teaching " (nrs^!?),' or 
" thanksgiving " (niW/),' or " to call to remembrance " (l^Sfn^).'" Liturgical 
notices are such as naB'n DV? t'^, " a song for the sabbath day " (Ps. xcii.), 
ni'pysn fV, " a song of the goings up " (Pss. cxx. — cxxxiv.), and the like. 

• Compare above, § 2, p. iii. ' Ibid., note 2. • Ibid., note 4. 

• It Beems, certainly, highly improbable that Ezra and Nehemiah could have collected 
$eventeen genuine psalms of David which had escaped tho notice of all previous cnlleotors. 

' These are very obscure. The probable meaniug of each auoh direction is considered 
in the comment on the psalm where it first occurs (see the introductions to Pss. iv., v., 
vi., viii., ix., xxii., xlv., xlvi., liii., Ivii., Ixxx., etc.). 

» See tlie titles to Pss. iii., vii,, xviii., xxx., xxxlv., li., Iii., liv., Ivi., Ivii., lis., Ix., Ixiii., 
and cxlii. 

' MizmSr occurs by itself 44 times, with ehir 13 times ; ihir by itself 17 times ; maakil 
18 times; miktam six times; tephillah five times; tehillah and tldggaion each once only 
(Pss. vii. and oxlv.). 

• Pa. li. • Pi. o. '• Pb3. xxviii. and Ixx. 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



§ 5. Chief Geoups of Psalms. 

The chief groups of psalms are, first and foremost, the Davidioal ; secondly, 
the Asaphian ; thirdly, that of " the sons of Korah ; " fourthly, the 
Solomonio ; and fifthly, the anonymous. 

The Davidioal group is at once the most numerous and the most impor- 
tant. It consists of seventy-three psalms or hymns, which are thus 
distributed among the "hooks ; " viz. : thirty-seven in the first, eighteen in 
the second, one in the third, two in the fourth, and fifteen in the fifth. 
The compositions appear to cover the greater portion of David's life. 
Fourteen are assigned with much reason to the years before his accession 
to the throne ; nineteen to the earlier part of his reign, before the corn- 
mission of his great sin; ten to the time between that fall and his flight 
from Jerusalem ; ten to the period of his exile ; and three or four to the 
time after his return, the closing period of his long reign. The remainder 
contain no indications of date. These results of a very careful analysis ^ 
may be thus tabulated — 







Psalms from the 






Psalms of David's 


Psalms of the earlier 


time of his great sin 




Psalms of the last 


early Ufe. 


part of his reign. 


to bis flight from 
Jerusalem. 




period of his reign. 


vii. 


viii., ix., X. 


V.,Yi 


iii., iT. 




XI., xu., xm. 


XV., XVI., XVlll., 








xvn. 


XIX., XX., XXI. 








ixu., xxm. 


XXIV., XXVI. 

xxix. 




XXVll., XXVlU. 




XXIIV., XXXV. 


XXXVl. 


XXXU., XXX VUl., 

xxxix., xl., 
xli. 


xxxi. 


xxxviL 


lii., liv., Ivi., 


Iviii. 


li., Iv. 


lxi.,lxiii. 




iTii., llx. 












Ix., Ixviii. 


Ixiv. 


Ixix., Ixx. 






01., oviii., ox. 




oxliii. 


OUI., cxxxix. 



The Asaphian group is made up of a cluster of eleven psalms in Book III. 
(Pss. Ixxiii. — Ixxxiii.), and a single psalm (Ps. 1.) in Book II. Pss. ]., 
Ixxiii., Ixxv., Ixxviii., Ixxxi., Ixxxii., Ixxxiii., are not improb^ibly the work 
of the specified author; but the remainder (Pss. Ixxiv., Ixxvi., Ixxvii., Ixxix., 
Ixxx., Ixxxi., and Ixxxii.) seem improperly assigned to him. They may, 
however, have been written by a member or members of the same sept, 
and so may have crept into a small collection to which the name of Asaph 
was attached. "The history of hymnology," as Bishop Perowne observes, 
" shows us how easily this may have happened." " 

' See the arrangement made by Canon Cook, in hi» " Introduotion to the Bonk of Paalnu" 
(•Speaker's Commentary,' vol. iv. pp. 151—156), which is, in the main, here foUowad. 
* ' The Book of Psalms,' vol. i. p. 99 



viii INTEODUCTION TO 



The Korahite group of eleven or twelve * psalms belongs, in part to the 
second, and in part to the third hook. It is best regarded as comprising 
the first eight psalms of Book II. (Pss. xlii.— xlix.) and four psalms (Pss. 
Ixxxiv., lixxv., Ixxxvii., and Ixxsviii.) in Book III. These psalms are pn- 
dominantly Elohistio, though the name Jehovah occurs in them occa- 
sionally (Pss. xlii. 8; xliv. 23; xlvi. 7, 11; xlvii. 2, 5, etc.). They set 
forth the Almighty especially as King (Pss. xliv. 4; xlv. 6; xlvii. 2, 7, 8; 
xlviii. 2 J Ixxxiv. 3). They speak of him by names not used elsewhere, e.g. 
"the living God" ('n h^)? and "Jehovah of hosts" (niK3y nin;).' Their 
predominant ideas are, " delight in the worship and service of Jehovah, 
and the thankful acknowledgment of God's protection vouchsafed to Jeru- 
salem as the city of his choice." * Three of them (Pss. xlii., xlv., and Ixxxiv.) 
are psalms of special beauty. 

The Solomonic psalms are two only, if we confine ourselves to the 
indications given by the titles, viz. Pss. Ixxii. and cxxvii. ; but the first 
psalm is also thought by many to be Solomonic' These psalms have not 
many marked characteristics ; but we may, perhaps, note a sobiiety of tone 
in them, and a sententiousness that recalls the author of Proverbs. 

The anonymous psalms, forty-eight in number, are found chiefly in the 
last two books — thirteen of them in Book IV., and twenty-seven in Book V. 
They include several of the most important psalms : the first and second in 
Book I. ; the sixty-seventh and seventy-first in Book II. ; the ninety-first, 
hundred and fourth, hundred and fifth, and hundred and sixth in Book IV. ; 
and in Book V. the hundred and seventh, hundred and eighteenth, hundred 
and nineteenth, and hundred and thirty-seventh. The Alexandrian school 
assigned several of them, as already mentioned, to authors,' as the sixty- 
seventh, the seventy-first, the ninety-first, the hundred and thirty-seventh, 
and the entire group from Ps. xciii. to Ps. xcix. ; but their attributions are 
not often very happy ones. Still, the suggestion that Pss. cxlvi., oxlvii., 
cxlviii., and cxlix. were the work of Haggai and Zechariah is not alto- 
gether to be rejected. " Evidently they constitute a group of them- 
selves ; " ' and, as Dean Stanley says, " sum up the joy of the return from 
Babylon." 8 

A very mai'ked group is formed by the " Songs of Degrees " — liTT'E' 
nl^gffip — which extend continuously from Ps. cxx. to Ps. cxxxiv. These are 
most probably hymns composed for the purpose of being sung by the 

' Ps. xliii. can scarcely Iiave proceeded from any other than the writer of Pb. xlii. It 
"has the same metro, the same refrain, and refers to the same oircuMistauce-i" (' Speaker'^ 
Commentary,' vol. ir. p. 270). With Ps. xliii. the Koraliite psalms are twoira. 

' Bee Ps. xlii. 2 and Ps. Ixxxiv. 2. 

• See Pss. xlvi. 7, 11 ; xlviii. 8 ; Ixxxiv. 1, 3, 12. 

• Perowne, ' The Book of Psalms,' vol. i. p. 100. 

• Ibid., p. 108 ; ' Speaker's OommButary,' vol. iv, p. 173, 
' See above, § 3, p. v. 

' Cheyne, ' Book of Psalms,' p. 361. 

• Stanley, ' Lectures on the Jewish Olmrch,' vol. iii. p. M. 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Js 

provincial or foreign Israelites on their yearly "ascents" to keep the great 
festivals of Jerusalem^ (see especially Ps. cxxii. 1, 2). They comprise the 
De Prqfundis (Ps. cxxx.) and the blessing on unity (Ps. cxxxiii.). 

Other " groups " are the Hallelujah Psalms, the Alphabetic Psalms, and 
the Penitential Psalms. The title " Hallelujah Psalms " has been given to 
those vrhioh commence with the two Hebrew words, PIJ •l!?'?n> " Praise ye 
the Lord." They comprise the following ten : Pss. ovi., oxi., cxii., oxiii., 
Gxxxv., oxlvi., cxlvii., cxlviii., cxlix., and cl. Thus all but one (Ps. cvi.) 
belong to the last book. Seven of them — all but Pss. cvi., oxi,, and cxii. — 
end with the same phrase. Some critics adil Ps. cxvii. to the number of 
"Hallelujah Psalms," but this commences with the elongated form. 

The " Alphabetio Psalms " are either eight or nine in number, viz. 
Pss. ix., XXV., xxxiv., xxxvii., cxi., cxii., cxix., cxlv., and, to a small extent, 
Ps. X. The most elaborate is Ps. cxix., where the number of stanzas is 
determined by the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet, and each of 
the eight lines of every stanza begins with its own proper letter — all the 
lines of the first stanza with aleph, all those of the second with beth, and 
so on. Other psalms equally regular; but less elaborate, are Pss. cxi. and 
cxii., where the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet furnish, in 
regular sequence, the initial letters of the twenty-two lines. The other 
"Alphabetic Psalms" are all of them more or less irregular. Ps. cxlv. 
consists of twenty-one verses only, instead of twenty-two, omitting the 
verse which should have commenced with the letter nun. No reason cm 
be assigned for this. Ps. xxxvii. contains two irregularities — one in 
ver. 28, where the stanza that should have begun with ain begins actually 
with lamed ; and the other in ver. 39, where vau takes the place of tau as 
the initial letter. Ps. xxxiv. omits vau altogether, and adds pe as an 
initial letter at the end. Ps. xxv. omits heth, vau, and kapli, adding pe at 
the eud, like Ps. xxxiv. Ps. ix. omits daleih and yod, and jumps from Icaph 
to hoph, and from Ttoph to shin, also omitting tau. Ps, x., sometimes called 
alphabetic, is so only in its latter portion, where stanzas of four lines each 
commence lespectively with hopTi, resh, shin, and tau. The object of the 
alphabetic arrangement was, no doubt, in every case, to assist the memory ; 
but only Pss. oxi., cxii., and cxix. can have been of very much service in 
this respect. 

The " Penitential Psalms " are generally said to be seven ; but a far 
larger number of the Psalms have a predominantly penitential character,'' 
There is no authoritative limitation of the number to seven ; but Origen 
first, and after him other Fathers, have given a certain sanction to the 
view, which has on the whole prevailed in the Church. The psalms 
eflpeoially singled out are the following: Pss. vi., xxxii., xxxviii., li., cii., 

' Several other explanations have been given ; but this, which is preferred by Bisboi- 
Perowne, appears to be the best (see Ezra vii 9; Isa. ixx. 29). 
• As Pss. XXV., xxxL, Ixv., Ixix., etc. 



INTBODUOTION 10 



cxxx., and cxliii. It will he observed that five out of the seven are, by 
their titles, assigned to David. 

One other group of psalms seems to require special notice, viz. "the 
Impieoatory or Comminatoiy Psalms." These psalms have been called 
'• vindictive,'" and said to breathe a most unchristian spirit of revenge and 
hatred. To some truly pious persons they seem shocking ; and to a much 
larger number they are more or less a matter of difficulty. Pss. xxxv., 
Ixix., and cix. are especially objected to ; but the spirit which animates 
these compositions is one which constantly recurs ; e.g. in Pss. v. 10 ; 
xxviii. 4; xl. 14, 15; Iv. 16; Iviii. 6, 9; Ixxix. 6 — 12; Ixxxiii. 9 — 18, etc. 
Now, it is not, perhaps, a sufficient answer, but it is some answer, to note 
that these imprecatory psalms are, for the most part, national songs ; and 
that the utterers of them are calling for vengeance, not so much on their 
own personal enemies, as on the enemies of their nation, whom they look 
upon also as God's enemies, since Israel is his people. The expressions 
objected to are thus in some sort parallel to those which, find a place in our 
National Anthem — 

** O Lord our God, arise, 

Scatter her enemies . , . 

CSonfound their politicB ; 

Frustrate their knavish triotg." 

Further, the "imprecations," if we must so term them, are evidently "the 
outpourings of hearts animated by the highest love of truth and righteous- 
ness and goodness," ' jealous of God's honour, and haters of iniquity. They 
are the outcome of a righteous indignation, provoked by the wdckedness 
and cruelty of the oppressors, and by pity for the sufferings of their 
victims. Again, they spring, in part, oat of the narrowness of view which 
characterized the time — a time when men's thoughts were almost whoUj' 
confined to this present life, and a future life was only dimly and darkly 
apprehended. We are content to see the ungodly man in prosperity, and 
'• flourishing like a green bay tree," because vce know that it is but for a 
while, and that retributive justice will in the end overtake him. But they 
had no such assured conviction. Finally, it is to be borne in mind that 
one of the objects of the psalmists, in praying for the punishment of the 
wicked, is the benefit of the wicked themselves. Bishop Alexander has 
noticed that " each of the psalms in which the strongest imprecatory 
passages are found contains also gentle undertones, breathings of beneficent 
love." " The writers' desire is that the wicked may be recovered, while 
their conviction is that God's chastisements alone can recover them. They 
would have the arm of the wicked and evil man broken, that when God 
makes search into his wickedness, he may " find none " (Ps. x. 15).' 

' Kay, ' The Pualms,' appendix iv. p. 468. 

» ' Bampton Lectures' for 1876 : 'The Witness of the Psalms to Ohrist and Christianity,* 
p. 53. 

• Compare the commentary of Professor Cheyne on the passage (' Book of Psalms,' p. 27, 
note on ver. 15), " Punish it (his ungodliness) till thou find none, i.e. till the last atom of 
wickedness be removed." 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. xi 



§ 6. Value of the Book of Psalms. 

The FsalniB have always been regarded by the Church, Jewish as well 
as Christian, with a special affection. The " Psalms of Ascents " were 
probably used from the actual time of David by the worshippers who 
thronged to Jerusalem on. the occasions of the three great festivals. Other 
psalms were either originally written for the service of the sanctuary, or 
were introduced into that service at an early date, and thus made their 
way into the heart of the nation. David early acquired the title of " the 
sweet psalmist of Israel" (2 Sam. xxiii. 1) from a grateful people who 
delighted in his utterances. It was probably a feeling of special affection 
fur the Psalms that produced the division into five books, by which it was 
made into a second Pentateuch. 

In the Christian Church the Psalms won for themselves a place even 
above that which for centuries they had held in the Jewish. Jlorning and 
Evening Service each commenced with a psalm. In Passion Week, Ps. xxii. 
was recited every day. Seven psalms, selected on account of their solemn 
and mournful character, were set apart for the special additional services 
appointed for the season of Lent, and became known as " the seven peni- 
tential psalms." Tertullian, in the second century, tells us that the 
Christians of his day were wont to sing many of the psalms in their 
agapae.^ St. Jerome says ^ that " the psalms were continually to be heard 
in the fields and vineyards of Palestine. The ploughman, as he held his 
plough, chanted the Hallelujah ; and the reaper, the vine-dresser, and the 
shepherd sang something from the Songs of David. Where the meadows 
were coloured with flowers, and the singing birds made their complaints, 
the psalms sounded even more sweetly." Sidonius Apollinaris represent.s 
boatmen, while they worked their heavy barges up the waters, as singing 
psalms till the banks echoed with "Hallelujah," and applies the repre- 
sentation to the voyage of the Christian life — 

" Here the choir of them that drag the hoat, 
While the banks give back Tesponsive note^ 

' Alleluia I ' full and calm, 
Lifts and lets the friendly bidding float — 
Lift the psalm. 
Christian pilgrim ! Christian boatman ! each beside his rolling river, 
Sing, O pilgrim I sing, O boatman I lift the psalm in music ever." • 

The primitive Church, according to Bishop Jeremy Taylor,* " would 

' Quoted by Bishop Peiowne, in his comment on the Psalms (vol. i p. 23). 

• See Bishop Alexander's ' Bamptoii Lectures,' pp. 235, 236. 
" Ibid., p, 236. Compare the original — 

" Ourvorum liino chorus heloiariorum 
Besponsantibus Alleluia ripis 
Ad Christum levat amnioum celeusmsi. 
Sic, sic psallite, nauta et viator I " 

• See the 'Sermon on the Whole Duty of the Clergy,' in his ' Works,' edit. 0. P. llde» 
(vol. viii. p. 507). 



INTRODUCTION TO 



admit iio mac to the superior orders of the clergy iinless, among other 
pre-required dispositions, he oould say all David's Psalter by heart." 
The Fathers generally delighted in the Psalms. Almost all the more 
eminent of them — Origen, Busebius, Hilary, Basil, Chrysostom, Athanasius, 
Ambrose, Theodoret, Augustine, Jerome — wrote commentaries on them, or 
expositions of them. " Although all Divine Scripture," said St. Ambrose, 
in the fourth century," " breathes the grace of God, yet sweet beyond all 
others is the Book of Psalms. History instructs, the Law teaches, prophecy 
announces, rebuke chastens, morality persuades ; in the Book of Psalms we 
have the fruit of all these, and a kind of medicine for the salvation of man." 
" To me it seems," says Athanasius," " that the Psalms are to him who sings 
them as a mirror, wherein he may see himself and the motions of his soul, 
and with like feelings utter them. So also one who hears a psalm read, 
takes it as if it were spoken concerning himself, and either, convicted by his 
own conscience, will be pricked at heart and repent, or else, hearing of that 
hope which is to Godwards, and the succour which is vouchsafed to them 
that believe, leaps for joy, as though such grace were specially made over to 
him, and begins to utter his thanksgivings to God." And again, "In the 
other books of Scripture are discourses which dissuade us from those things 
which are evil, but in this has been sketched out for us how we should 
abstain from things evil. For instance, we are commanded to repent, and 
to repent is to cease from sin ; but here has been sketched out for us how 
we are to repent, and what we must say when we repent. . . . Again there 
is a command in everything to give thanks ; but the Psalms teach us also 
what to say when we give thanks. . . . We are enjoined to bless the Lord, 
and to confess to him. But in the Psalms we have a pattern given ns, both 
as to how we should praise the Lord, and with what words we can suitably 
confess to him. And, in every instance, we shall find these Divine songs 
suited to us, to our feelings, and our circumstances." Abundant other 
testimonies might be added with respect to the value of the Book of Psalms ; 
but perhaps it is more important to consider briefly in what its value 
consists. 

In the first place, then, its great value seems to be that it furnishes for 
our feelings and emotions the same sort of guidance and regulation, which 
the rest of Scripture furnishes for our faith and our actions. " This book," 
says Calvin,' " I am wont to style an anatomy of all parts of the soul, for 
no one will discover in himself a single feeling whereof the image is not 
reflected in this mirror. Nay, all griefs, sorrows, fears, doubts, hopes, cares, 
anxieties — in short, all those tumultuous agitations wherewith the minds 
of men are wont to be tossed — the Holy Ghost hath here represented to 
the life. The rest of Scripture contains the commands which God gave to 
his servants to be delivered to us ; but here the prophets themselves, holding 

• ' Opera ' (Venet, 1748), toI. il., comment on Pi, L 

• 'Epist. ad MaroeU.,' §§ 10—12. 

• Preface to ' CommeDtary on the Psalms.' 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



converse with God, inasmuch as they lay hare all their inmost feelings, 
inyite or impel every one of us to self-examination, that of all the infirmities 
to which we are liable, and all the sins of which we are so full, none may 
remain hidden." The portraiture of the emotions is accompanied by 
sufficient indications of which of them are pleasing and which displeasing 
to God, so that by the help of the Psalms we may not only express, but 
also regulate, our feelings as God would have us regulate them. 

Further, the energy and warmth of devotion exhibited in the Psalms is 
suited to stir up and infiaaie our hearts to a greater affection and zeal than 
they could otherwise readily attain to, and thus to raise us to spiritual 
heights beyond those natural to us. As flame enkindles flame, so the 
fervour of the psalmists in their prayers and praises passes on from them 
to us, and warms us to a glow of love and thankfulness which is something 
more than a pale reflex of their own. Without the Psalms, without the 
constant use of them, Christian life tends to become dead and dull, like the 
ashes of an extinguished fire. 

Other uses of the Psalms, which add to their value, are intellectual. The 
historical psalms help us to picture to ourselves vividly the life of the 
nation, and often add touches to the narrative of the historical books which 
are of the highest interest. Those rightly ascribed to David fill out the 
portrait faintly sketched in Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, turning into a 
living and breathing figure what, apart from them, were little more than 
a skeleton. The Messianic psalms address themselves in great part to our 
reason, and furnish an argument, second to few others, for the truth of 
Christianity. The whole Psalter is instinct with those truths which are 
felt on all sides to be of the essence of the Christian religion — ^its " theistic 
ideas are those which we find in our Creeds;" its Christology "unlocks 
many [obscure] passages . " its " view of the mystery of man's conception, 
birth, and destiny is precisely that which has commended itself to Chi istian 
thought"^ as most reasonable. As St. Basil says, "The I'salms. contain a 
perfect theology." ^ In reading them, studying them, saturating with them 
our hearts and minds, we indoctrinate ourselves with the purest religious 
ideas expressed in language of the most perfect beauty. 

§ 7. LiTEEATURB OF THE PsALMS. 

" No book has been so fully commented on as the Psalms," says Canon 
Cook, in the ' Speaker's Commentary ; ' " the literature of the Psalms makes 
up a library." ' Among the Fathers, as already observed,* commentaries 
on the Psalms, or expositions of them, or of some of them, were written by 
Origeu, Eusebius, Basil, Chrysostom, Hilary, Ambrose, Athanasius, Theo- 
doret, Augustine, and Jerome ; that of Theodoret being, perhaps, the best, 

' See Bishop Alexander's ' Bampton Lectures,' p. 220. 

• 'Ev VcA/ioTs ivi Beo\oyla 7e\ela. 

' ' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. Iv. p. 147. 

♦ See above, § 6, pp. xi., xii. 



xi7 INTRODUCTION TO 



but that of Jerome having also a high value. Among Jewish commentators 
of distinction may be mentioned Saadiah, who wrote in Arabic, Aben Ezra, 
Jarchi, Kimohi, and Eashi. At the era of the Eeformation the Psalmg 
attracted great attention, Luther, Mercer, Zwingle, and Calvin writing 
commentaries, while other expository works were coatributed by Kudinger, 
Agtjllius, Genebrard, Bellarmine, Lorinus, Geier, and De Mnis. During 
the last century or so, the modern German school of criticism has laboured 
with great diligence at the elucidation of the Psalter, and has done some- 
thing for the historical exegesis, and still more for the grammatical and 
philological exposition of the Psalms. The example was set by Knapp, 
who in 1789 published at Haile his work entitled, 'Die Psalmen tibersetz' 
— a work of considerable merit. He was followed by Eosenmiiller not long 
afterwards, whose 'Scholia in Psalmos,' which made its appearance in 1798, 
gave at once " a full and jndicions presentation of the most important 
results of previous labours," ^ including the Eabbinical, and also threw fresh 
light on several subjects of much interest. Ewald succeeded to Eosenrauller, 
and in the early portion of the present century, gave to the world, in his 
' Dichter des alt. Bundes,' those clever, but somewhat overbold, speculations, 
which elevated him into the leader of German thought on these and kindred 
subjects for above fifty years. Maurer lent his support to the views of 
Ewald, and helped greatly to the advance of Hebrew scholarship by his 
grammatical and critical researches, while Hengstenberg ' and Delitzsch,' in 
their able and judicious Comments, toned down the extravagances of the 
Berlin professor, and encouraged the formation of a more subdued and 
reverent school of criticism. More recently Koster and Giatz have written 
in a similar spirit, and have helped to vindicate German theology from the 
charge of rashness and recklessness. 

In England, not much was done to elucidate the Psalms, or facilitate 
the study of them, till about eighty years ago, when Bishop Horsley's son 
published his iather's work, entitled, ' The Book of Psalms, translated from 
the Hebrfew, with Notes explanatory and critical' (2 vols. 8vo, London, 
1815), with a dedication to the Archbishop of Canterbury. This publica- 
tion gave a stimulus to Hebrew studies, and especially to that of the 
Psalter, which led in a short time to an issue from the press of several 
works possessing considerable value, and not even yet wholly superseded 
by the productions of later scholars. One of these was a 'Key to the 
Book of Psalms ' (London, Seeley), published by a Eev. Mr. Boys, in 1825 ; 
and another, still more useful, was " D'bnn "ISD, The Book of Psalms 

' See the " Introduction to the Book of Psalms," by Canon Cook, in the ' Speaker's 
Commentary,' p. 148. 

* Hengstenberg'B 'Comment,' in three volumes, published at Berlin in 1842, has been 
made acceBsible to English readers by Messrs. Clark of Edinburgh, who reproduced it in 
an English dress in 1846. 

• Delitzsoh's ' Commentar,' published in 1860, has been pronounced by a most competent 
critic to be "the diligent work of a sober-minded theologian" ('Speaker's Cummeiitary,' 
vol. iv. p. 960). 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



In Hebrew, metrically arranged," by tbe Eev. Join Eogers, Canon of 
Exeter Cathedral, published at Oxford by J. H. Parker, in 1833. This book 
contained a-seleotion from the various readings of Kennicott and De Bossi, 
and from the ancient versions, and also an " Appendix of Critical Notes," 
which excited a good deal of interest. About the same time appeared the 
' Translation of the Psalms ' by Dr. French and Mr. Skinner, which was 
issued from the Clarendon Press in 1 830. A metrical version of the Psalms, 
by Mr. Eden, of Bristol, was published in 1841; and "An Historical Out- 
line of tbe Book of Psalms,' by Dr. Mason Good, was edited and published 
by his grandson, the Eev. J. Mason Neale, in 1842. This w>)S succeeded 
in a few years by ' A New Version of the Psalms, with Notes, Critical, 
Historical, and Explanatory,' from the pen of the same author. Of these 
last two works it has been ssid that they were " distinguished by taste 
and originality rather than by sound judgment and accurate scholarship ; " 
nor can it be denied that they did but little to advance the critical stud)' 
of Hebrew among us. Dr. Jebb's ' Literal Translation and Dissertations,' 
published in 1846, was more important ; and Mr. Thrupp's 'Introduction 
to the Psalms,' given to the world in 1860, together with his article on the 
Psalms in Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible ' ^ (published in 1863), raised 
the character of our psalmodio literature to a higher level. In the year 
1859, Professor Alexander, of Princeton University in America, furnished 
to English and Anglo-American t.tudents an even more valuable treatise.^ 

But a still more advanced period now set in. In the year 1864 Canon 
(now Bishop) Perowne published the first edition of his elaborate work in 
two volumes, entitled, ' The Book of Psalms, a New Translation, with Intro- 
ductions and Notes Explanatory and Critical ' (London : Bell and Sons). 
This excellent and standard production has gone on from edition to editiuti 
ever since that date, leceiving improvements at every step, until it is 
now decidedly one of the best, if not absolutely the very best, comment 
upon the Psalter. It is the work of a first-rate Hebraist, of a man of 
superior judgment and discretion, and of one whose erudition has been 
surpassed by few. English scholarship may well be proud of it, and may 
challenge a comparison of it with any foreign exposition. It was not left 
long, however, to occupy the field without a rival. In the year 1871 
appeared the smaller and less pretentious work of Dr. Kay, once Principal 
of Bishop's College, Calcutta, entitled, ' The Psalms translated from the 
Hebrew, with Notes chiefly exegetical' (London : Eivingtons), a scholarly 
production, oharacteiized by much vigour of thought, and an unusual 
acquaintance with Oriental manners and cnstoms. Almost simultaneously, 
in 1872, a work in two volumes, by Dr. George Phillips, President of 
Queen's CoUege, Cambridge, made its appearance under the title of ' A 
Commentary on the Psalms, designed chiefly for the use oi Hebrew Students 

' Thrupp, in Dr. Smith's 'Dictionary of the Bible,' vol. ii. p. 960. 
' 'The Psalms translated and explained,' by Joseph Addison Alejcander, D D., Prufessot 
«f Theology, Princeton. 



«▼! INTEODUCTION TO THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



and of Clergymen ' (London : Williams and Norgate), wliicli deserved more 
attention than was accorded to it, sinoe it is a storehouse of Eabbinioal and 
other learning. A year later, in 1873, a fresh step in advance was made by 
the publication of the very excellent ' Commentary and Critical Notes on 
the Fbalms ' (London : Murray), contributed to the ' Speaker's Commentary 
on the Old Testament,' by the Eev. P. C. Cook, Canon of Exeter, assisted 
by Dr. Johnson, Dean of Wells, and the Eev. G. J. Elliott. This work, 
though written above twenty years ago, maintains a high place among 
English critical efforts, and is worthy of being put upon a par with the 
comments of Hengstenberg and Delitzsch. Meanwhile, however, a demon- 
stration had been made on the other side by the more advanced school of 
English critics, in the production of a work edited by " Four Friends," and 
entitled, ' The Fsalms chronologically arranged, an Amended Version, with 
Historical Introductions and Explanatory Notes ' (London : Macmillan, 
1867), wherein Ewald was followed almost slavishly, and the genuine 
" Fsalms of David " were limited to some fifteen or sixteen. Efforts on the 
opposite, or traditional, side, however, were not wanting ; and the Bampton 
Lectures of Bishop Alexander,' and the sober and learned comments of 
Bishop Wordsworth and Canon Hawkins, may be especially noticed. The 
slighter work of the Eev. A. S. Aglen, contributed to Bishop Ellicott's ' Old 
Testament Commentary for English Eeaders ' (London: Cassell, 1882), is of 
less value, and yields too much to the German sceptical writers. The same 
must be said of Frofessor Cheyne's more elaborate contribution to the 
literature of the Fsalms, published in 1888, and entitled, • The Book of 
Fsalms, or the Fraises of Israel, a new Translation, with Commentary,' 
which, however, no student of the Fsalter can alTord to neglect, since the 
aouteness and learning displayed in it are undeniable. Excellent service 
has also been rendered to English students, comparatively recently, by the 
publication of the ' Eevised Version,' issued at the instance of the Convoca- 
tion of the Province of Canterbury (Oxford and Cambridge, 1885), which 
has corrected many errors, and given, in the main, a most faithful repre- 
sentation of the Hebrew original. 

I ' The Witness of the Fsalms to Christ and Ohristianity,' being the Bampton Leotoiea 
for 1876. London : Murray, 1877. 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



BOOK I. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM I. 



It Is remarkable that neither the first nor 
the second psalm haa any title. Titles are 
so much the rule in the first and second 
books of the Psalter, that, when they are 
absent, their absence requires to be ac- 
ooanted for. As thirty-eight out of the 
forty-one psalms in this section are dis- 
tinctly assigned to David, we must suppose 
that the compiler did not view this psalm 
as his. Perhaps he did not know the 
author. Perhaps, if he was himself the 
author, he shrank from giving himself the 
prominence which could not but have 
attached to him if his name had, in a 
certain sense, headed the collection. Beti- 
cenoe would have specially become Solomon, 
if he was the author. 

Commentators have generally recognized 
that this psalm is introductory and pre- 
fatory. Jerome says that many called it 
"the Preface of the Holy Ghost." Some 
of the Fathers did not even regard it as a 
psalm at all, but as a mere preface, and so 
reckoned the second psalm as the first 
(in many manuscripts of the New Testa- 
ment, the reading is " first psalm " instead 
of "second psalm "in Acts xiii. 33). The 
composition is, as Hengstenberg observes, 
" a short compendium of the main subject 
of the Psalms, viz. that God has appointed 
salvation to the righteous, perdition to the 
wicked ; this is the great truth with which 
the sacred bards grapple amid all the pain- 

PSALMS. 



ful experiences of life which apparently 
indicate the reverse." 

The psalm divides naturally into two 
nearly equal portions. In vers. 1 — 3 the 
character and condition of the righteous 
are described, and their reward is promised 
them. In vers. 4—6 the condition of the 
wicked is considered, and their ultimate 
destruction predicted, 

Ver. 1. — Blessed is the man; literally, 
blessings are to the man. But the Autho- 
rized Version exactly gives the sense (comp. 
Fs. ii. 12). That walketh not in the counsel 
of the ungodly. The margin gives, "or 
wicked," and this is probably the best 
rendering of the word used (D'y^i). The 
righteous man is first described negatively, 
under three heads. (1) He " does not walk 
in the counsel of the ungodly;" i.e. he 
does not throw in his lot with the wicked, 
does not participate in their projects or 
designs ; (2) he standeth not in the way of 
sinners ; i.e. he does not take part in their 
actions, does not follow the same moral 
paths; and (3) he sitteth not in the seat 
of the scornful ; i.e. has no fellowship with 
them in the " scorn " which they cast upon 
religion. The word used for scornful (yjj) 
is Solomonian (Prov. i. 22; iii. 31; xiii. 1), 
but in the Psalter occurs only in this 
place. 

Ver. 2. — But his delight is in the Law 
of the Lord. The righteous man is now 
described positively, under two heads. (1) 
He delights in the Law (oomp. Ps. ciz. 16, 
47, 77; Eom. vii 22). (2) He constantly 
meditates in it. The "Law" intended — 
m'ln, not minn — is probably not the mere 
Law of Moses, but God's law, as made known 
to man in any way. Still, the resemblance 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. 1. 1— «. 



of the passage to Josh, i, 8 shows the Law of 
Moses to have been very specially in the 
writer's thoughts. In his Law doth he 
meditate day and night; compare, be- 
sides Josh. i. 8, the following : Fss. Ixiii. 6 ; 
oxix. 15, 48, 78, 97. Constant medita- 
tion in God's Law has characterized all 
saints. 

Yer. 3. — And he shall be like a tree 
planted by the rivers of water. The com- 
parison of a man to a tree is frequent in 
the Book of Job (viii. 16, 17; liy. 7—10; 
XV. 32, 33, etc.), and occurs once in the 
Pentateuch (Numb. xxiv. 6). Wo find it 
again in Ps. xcii. 12 — 14, and frequently 
in the prophets. The " rivers of water " 
spoken of (Q'.5~'As) are undoubtedly the 
" streams " (Bevised Version) or " canals 
of irrigation" so common both in Egypt 
and in Babylonia, by which fruit trees were 
planted, aa especially date-palms, which 
need the vicinity of water. That such 
planting of trees by the waterside was 
known to the Israelites is evident, both from 
this passage and from several others, as 
Numb. xxiv. 6 ; Eocles. ii. 5 ; Jer. xvii. 8 ; 
Ezek. xvii. 5, 8, etc. It is misplaced in- 
genuity to attempt to decide what particular 
tree tlie writer had in his mind, whether 
the palm, or the oleander, or any other, 
since he may not have been thinking of any 
particular tree. That bringeth forth his 
fmit in his season. Therefore not the 
oleander, which has no fruit, and is never 
planted in the East, but grows naturally 
along the courses of streams. His leaf also 
shall not wither. Compare the contrary 
threat of Isaiah against the wicked of his 
time, " Ye shall be as an oak whose leaf 
fadeth, and as a garden that batli no 
water" (Isa. i. 80). And whatsoever he 
doeth shall prosper ; rather, perhaps, in 
whatsoever he doeth he shall prosper. 

Ver. 4. — The ungodly are not so; or, 
the wioked (see the comment on ver. 1). 
But are like the chaff which the wind 
driveth away. "Chaff" is used throughout 
Scripture as an emblem of what is weak 



and worthless (see Job xxi. 18 ; Ps. xxxv 
5; Isa. V. 24; xvii. 13; xxix. 5; xxxiii. 
11; xlL 15; Jer. xxiii. 28; Dan. ii. 35; 
Hos. xiii, 3; Zeph. ii. 2; Matt. iii. 12; 
Luke iii. 17)- in ancient times it was 
considered of no value at all, and when 
corn was winnowed, it was thrown up in 
the air until the wind had blown all the 
chaff away (see the representation in the 
author's 'History of Ancient Egypt,' ol. 
i. p. 163). 

Ver. 5.— Therefore the ungodly (or, the 
wicked') shall not stand in the judgment. 
" Therefore," as being chaff, i.e. "destitute 
of spiritual vitality" (Kay), "the wicked 
shall not stand," or shall not rise up, " in 
the judgment," ».«. in the judgment of the 
last day. So the Targnm, Bashi, Dr. Kay, 
Canon Cook, and others. It is certainly 
not conceivable that any human judgment 
is intended by "the judgment" (ngp'Qn), 
and though possibly " aU manifestations of 
God's punitive righteousness are compre- 
hended " (Hengstenberg), yet the main idea 
must be that the wioked shall not be able 
to " stand," or " rise up," i.e. " hold up their 
heads" (Aglen), in the last day. Nor 
sinners in the congregation of the right- 
eous. Here the human judgment comes in. 
Sinners will be cast out, not only from 
heaven, but also from the Church, or " con- 
gregation of the righteous," if not before, 
at any rate when the " congregation " ia 
finally made up. 

Ver. 6. — ^For the Lord knoveth the way 
of the righteous. God is said to " know " 
those of whom he approves, and on whom 
he " lifts up the light of his countenance." 
The wioked he does not " know ; " he " casts 
them out of the sight of his eyes " — " casts 
them behind his back; " refuses to acknow- 
ledge them. God "knows the way of the 
righteous," and therefore they live and 
prosper ; he does not know the way ot the 
wioked, and therefore the way of the 
(wioked, or) ungodly shall perish (com- 
pare the beginning and end of Ps. cxii). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The godly man. This psalm nobly fills the place of prologue to the 
whole Book of Psalms. It reminds us of our Saviour's words when Nathanael drew 
near : " Behold an Israelite indeed 1 " With that marvellous, condensed fulness and 
graphic force which peculiarly mark the Scriptures, it draws the portrait of the godly 
man. If we compare the Old Testament picture of " an Israelite indeed " with the 
New Testament picture of the true believer — " a good man, full of the Holy Ghost and 
of faith," we find no discord, only a fulness, richness, tenderness, power, in the latter, 
impossible before the Light of the world shone on human hearts and lives. The one ig 
like a clear, perfect outline ; the other, like the painting which adds to the out'ine 
colour, light, and shadow. 



P8. 1. 1— 6J THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 3 

I. The godly man is described negatively, in sharp contrast with the ungodly. 
They are as little to his mind as he to theirs. The Eevised Version here gives a 
stricter rendering — " wicked." But our English word " ungodly " expresses the real 
essence of all wickedness, the secret spring of sin (comp. Fss. liv. 3 ; zzxvi. 1 ; Jer. 
iL 13). 1. He is not guided by this world's maxims, walks not " in the counsel " — ^by 
the rule, of those who leave God out of their reckoning. N.B. — The chief thing in 
life is the cownsel — plan, ruling principles, and maxims — by which it is guided. E.g. one 
man's aim in life is " to die rich ; " another's motto, " Short life and merry ; " another's, 
" To me to live is Christ." 2. His conduct, therefore, openly contrasts. " Nor standeth," 
etc. Closely associated, it may be, in business, society, public affairs; for else he 
" must needs go out of the world " (1 Cor. v. 10) ; yet, as his aim is not theirs, so their 
means are not his means, nor their path his path (Prov. iv. 14, 15). Business life 
has temptations from which recluse life is free, but also opportunities for witnessing 
for truth and Christ. 3. His chosen company corresponds with counsel and conduct. 
"Nor sitteth," etc. Not frequenting their haunts, sharing their revels, making them 
his bosom friends (Prov. i. 15 ; xiii. 20). N.B. — A steady progress in sin is indicated 
—walking, standing, sitting. First, stepping aside from the right path into crooked 
ways in compliance with evil counsel ; secondly, continuing a line of conduct con- 
science condemns ; at last, sitting down at the banquet of sinful pleasure, conscience 
drugged or seared, God openly despised. A picture of how many lives once bright 
with hope 1 

II. Positively, by one unmistakable, distinguishing mark : delight in God's Law. 
1. The written Word is dear to him. The primary reference is, of course, to the Law ot 
Moses, of which every letter was dear and sacred to the devout Israelite. How much 
dearer should the completed Scriptures be to the Christian (1 John i. 17) ! 2. The deep 
spiritual truth of God's Word engages his profound study, is "the rejoicing of his 
heart " (Jer. xv. 16 ; Col. iii. 16). Take Ps. cxix. as the consummate expression of 
the value of God's Law to a mind taught by God's Spirit. Note the great principles 
embodied — that God rules by law; that each of us stands in direct relation to God, as 
subject to his Law ; that this Law is plainly revealed. N.B. — No Israelite, however 
ungodly, could call in question the fact that God spake to and by Moses, without 
pouring contempt on the law and constitution of his country ; this was the comer- 
stone. 3. He loves God's Law as the practical guide of his life (comp. John viiL 12, 
31, 32). 

Conclusion. This picture is realized in ideal perfection in our Lord Jesus. All the 
severity of vers. 4 — 6 is found in his denunciations of the impenitent cities, of guilty 
Jerusalem, of the hypocritical scribes and Pharisees, of wilful unbelievers (John xii. 48). 
But joined to this is the tender, sympathizing compassion, gracious humility. Divine 
love and forgiveness which made him "who knew no sin" the " Friend of sinners" — 
" able to be touched with the feeling of our infirmities," as well as " able to save to the 
uttermost " (Heb, vii. 25, 26 ; iv. 15; Matt. ix. 10—13). 

Ver. 3. — " Ee shall he like a tree," etc. Among the costly works in which King 
Solomon exercised his wisdom and displayed his magnificence were gardens rich in 
fruit trees and watered by channels and reservoirs (Eccles. i. 5, 6). Among these would 
be citrons and oranges, with their lustrous evergreen leaves and golden fruit ; palms also, 
which love water and soil free from all foul decay and refuse. Some have fancied the 
similitude taken from the oleamders abounding by the streams of Canaan ; but its fruit 
is poison ; no one cares to plant it. An evergreen, fruit-bearing tree is here the bright 
image of the prosperous soul. (Solomon very possibly the author.) 

I. The secret of a oodly life. Source and sustenance. " Planted," not self- 
sown, not dropped into its place by chance — ^planted by God's own hand (Jas. i. 18). 
" Bv the waters," drawing life and freshness from an unfailing source (Isa. iv. 14 ; 
vii. 37 — 39 ; xv. 4). Some lives that make a fair show are like trees whose roots run 
near the surface — the storm uproots them. The soul "rooted" in Christ (Col. ii. 7) 
is as the pine, sending down so strong a tap-root that the avalanche may break th« 
trunk, but cannot uproot it. 

II. Its peuitfulnebs. "Bringeth forth," etc. (comp. 2 Pet. L8; contrast Juie 12; 
see Gal. v. 22; Isa. xv. 6 — 8). Good deeds are fruitful deeds, "The seas n" may 



4 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [w. L 1—6. 

twry, but it will come (Jas. v. 7; Gal. tI. 9, 10). But if we "abide in Christ," our 
fruit will be always in season, like the orange, covered with fragrant flowers, green 
fruit and ripe fruit all at once — full of beauty and hope, aa well as food. 

in. Its secdbity ahd viooub. " Its leaf shall not wither." Evergreen. The 
primary reference may be to outward prosperity, like Joseph's (Gen. xxxix. 2 — 5, 23 ; see 
1 Tim. iv. 8). Sickness, accident, hard times, losses through the failure or dishonesty 
of others, may befall the child of Gkid as well as the child of the world ; but the 
natural tendency of thorough integrity, of the diligence of one who does everything 
with his might as unto the Lord, and of the wisdom, courage, and good temper which 
are among the fruits of the Spirit, and the guidance of God's providence in answer to 
prayer, is to bring prosperity (Ps. zxxvii. 4—7 ; Phil. iv. 4 — 7). Yet observe, the Old 
Testament, as fully as the New, teaches the need and benefit of adversity (Prov. iii. 
11, 12 ; Ps. xxxiv. 17 — 19). But there is prosperity that fears no change, glory that 
fades not, labour that cannot be lost (3 John 2 ; 1 Pet. i. 4 ; v. 4 ; 1 Cor. xv. 58). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — 27i« title: The Book of Psalms: the Psalms — their variety and 
value. In the Book of Psalms, or, strictly speaking, in the five Books of Psalms, 
we have illustrations of most of the varied kinds of documents of which the entire 
Bible is made up. In their entirety the collection forms the Hebrews' ' Book of 
Praise,' or, as Professor Cheyne puts it, 'The Praises of Israel.' * It is probable, how- 
ever, that very few, in their private devotions, read all the Psalms with equal frequency 
or delight. There are some " favourites," such as Psa. xxiii., xlvi., cxlv., etc. The 
fact is that spiritual instincts are often far in advance of technical definitions, and 
the heart finds out that which is of permanent value over and above its historic 
interest, far more quickly than the intellect defines the reason thereof. Ere we pursue 
the study of the Psalms one by one, it may be helpful to note the main classes into 
which they may be grouped, as such classification will enable us the better to set in 
order the relation which each one bears to " the whole counsel of God." In the last of 
the Homiletics on Deuteronomy by the present writer, there is a threefold result 
indicated of communion between the Spirit of God and the spirit of man.* When such 
fellowship is in the devotional sphere, it subserves the life of religion ; when the Spirit 
of God impels to the going forth on a mission or the writing of a record, that is 
inspiration ; when the Spirit of God discloses new truth or forecasts the future, that 
is revelation. These three divisions indicate three main groups under which the Psalms 
may be classified. For the most part, each one speaks for itself, and with sufficient 
clearness indicates to which of the three groups it belongs; and according to the 
group in which it is found will he the value and hearing of the psalm on thf heliever's 
experience, faith, and life. 

1. Many op the psalms are the outcomb of private ob public bistotion. 
It is in these that we get a priceless glimpse into the heartwork of Old Testament 
saints, and see how constant was their habit of pouring out their souls to God. Pss. iii., 
iv., v., vii., viii., x., xiii., et edii, are illustrations of this. Whether the soul was 
elated by joy or oppressed with care, whether bowed down with fear or rejoicing over 
a great deliverance, whether the presence of God was enjoyed or whether his face was 
hidden, whether the spirit was soaring in rapture or sinking in dismay, — amid all 
changes, from the overhanging of the blackest thundercloud to the beaming of the 
brightest sunshine, all is told to God in song, or plea, or moan, or plaint, or wail, as 
if the ancient believers had such confidence in God that they comM tell him anything 1^ 

' The new edition of Dr. Wm. Binnie's book, ' The Psalms, their History, TeaohingB, 
and Use' (1886), will amply repay perusal ; Cheyne, ' The Book of Psalms,' Preface (1888); 
also his Bampton Lectures thereon (IS89). 

' 'Pulpit Commentary on Deuteronomy,' pp. 570, 571. 

' "The multiplied experiences of the soul, the various states of mind through which the 
regenerate children of the second Adam pass, from tlieir first entrance upon the life of 
faith to the period when that life is swallowed up in light, are all exemplified in the Book 
of Psalms " (Edward Irving's Introductory Essay to Home's ' Commentary on the Psalms. 
Thu whole essay is extremely eloquent and powerful. 



P8. 1.1— 6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 6 

Many of these private prayers bear marks of limited knowledge and imperfect concep' 
tioD, and are by no means to be taken as models for us. But no saint ever did or could 
in prayer rise above the level of his own knowledge. Still, they knew that Ood heard 
and answered, not according to their thoughts, but according to his loving-kindness ; 
hence they poured out their whole souls to God, whether in gladness or sadness. And 
so may we ; and God will do exceeding abundantly for us above all that we ask or 
think. 

II. AnOTHEB QBOUF of F8ALMS CONSISTS OF THOSE WHICH ABE THE FBODUOTS OF 

ANOTHBB FOBH OF DlTOJE INSPIBATION. These are not necessarily addresses to God ; 
they are, for the most part, an inspired and inspiriting rehearsal of the mighty acts of 
the Lord, and a call to the people of God to join in the song of praise. Pss. xxxiii., 
xlvi., xlviii., Ixxviii., Ixxxi., Ixxxix., and many others, are illustrations of this. At the 
back of them all there is a revelation of God known, accepted, and enjoyed. And 
according to this great and glorious redemption are the people exhorted to join in songs 
of praise. There is, moreover, this distinction, for the most part, between the first 
group and the second — the first group reflects the passing moods of man ; the second 
reflects the revealed character and ways of God. The first group is mostly for private 
use, as the moods of the soul may respond thereto ; the second group is also for sanctuary 
song, and indicates the permanent theme of the believer's faith and hope, even " the 
salvation of God." With reganl to the first group we may say, "As in water face 
answer«th to face, so the heart of man to man." As to the second, the motto might 
be, "The Lord hath made known his salvation: therefore with our songs we will 
praise him." Under this head may also be set those calmly and sweetly meditative 
psalms, such as Pss. xxiii., xxxii., in which God's revelation of his works and ways gives 
its own hue to the musings of the saint. These are now the delight of believers, in 
public and in private worship, as the expression of an experience which is renewed in 
regenerate hearts age after age. None of them could possibly be accounted for by the 
psychology of the natural man ; they accord only with the pneumatology of the 
spiritual man. 

in. The thibd grotip of psalms consists of those in which thkrb is a 
DIRECT OB INDIEEOT Messianic REFERENCE AND FORECAST. Of these there are three 
kinds. 1. There are those directly and exclusively Messianic, such as Pss. ii., xlv., xlvii., 
Ixxii., ex. Of all these, the second psalm is, perhaps, thioughoiit, as much as any of 
the psalms, clearly and distinctly applicable to the Coming One, and to him only. 
For the purpose of seeing and showing this, it may well be carefully studied. Every 
verse, every phrase, every word, tells ; in fact, even the glorious fifty-third chaptei of 
Isaiah is scarcely more clearly Messianic than the second psalm. Even Professor Chej ne 
is compelled to admit its Messianic reference, and he tells us that Ibn Ezra does so like- 
wise.* And that some of the psalms apply to the Lord Jesus Clirist, our Lord himself 
assures us (Luke xxiv. 44). And in an age like this, when destructive criticism is so 
popular, it is needful for the believing student to he the more accurate, clear, and firm. 
2. Some psalms point to the era rather than to the Person of the Messiah. Such are the 
fiftieth and the eighty-seventh psalms. They are prophetic expositions of truths which 
pertain to the Messianic times, and receive their full elucidation from the developed 
expositions of the apostles and prophets of the New Testament; they cover the ground 
of the Messianic age. 3. Other psalms refer immediately to the writer himself, and 
have come to be regarded as Messianic because some of the words therein were quoted by 
the Lord Jesus Christ and adopted as his own. Such a one is the twenty-second 
psalm, in which the writer bemoans his own suflerings and (according to the LXX.)hi« 
own transgressions. But it is not possible to apply every verse of this psalm to the 
Lord Jesus.2 He, however, being in all things made like unto his brethren, was " in 
all points tempted like as we are ; " hence the very groans of his brethren fitted hii 
own lips. He came to have fellowship with us in our sufferings that we might hav« 
fellowship with him in his ! Thus there is established a marvellously close sympathy 
between Jesus and his saints, since his temptations, sorrows, and groans resembled 

* Cheyne on the Psalms, p. 4 (1888). Much of his exegesis is, however, extremely 
tmaatisfactory, being vitiated by a foregone psychological theory. 

• See the exposition of Pa. xxii. 



6 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb, L 1— «. 

theirs.i To this discriminating and believing study of the first fifty psalms, the writer 
ventm'es to invite the Christian student and expositor. We must avoid the extreme 
of those who, with Home, would refcard most, if not all, the psalms as Messianic ; and 
also the extreme of those who would regard none as such. Because our Lord said that 
all things must be fulfilled that were written in the Psalms conceraing him, we may 
not infer that words which were written concerning him filled up all the Psalms ; nor, 
with the unbeliever, may we regard the claim of prophecy as invalid through any 
repugnance to the supernatural. Intelligent discernment and loving faith are twin 
sisters; may they both be our attendants during our survey of these priceless 
productions of Hebrew pens I And may the Spirit of God be himself our Light and 
our Guide ! — C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The happy man. The word " blessed " means " happy." The phrase used 
night, indeed, be rendered, " Hail to the man," etc. 1 The psalm itself may be called 
" a psalm of congratulations," for the psalmist regards the man whom he here describes 
as one who has great reason for gladness, and who therefore may be fittingly congratu- 
lated. Ages ago the heathen said, "Call no man happy till he is dead." But we 
have before us the picture of one who is certainly hapfiy even now ; who has a joy, of 
which neither crosses nor losses can deprive him ; who will be happy as long as he 
lives ; and who has still more happiness in store for him when death is past. It may 
be asked whether it is the highest kind of virtue to aim at being happy, or whether 
it is the noblest inducement to it to assure us that to be virtuous is to be happy ? 
Perhaps nor. But such a question could scarcely be asked unless the point of the 
psalm is altogether missed; for the psalmist is not speaking of the good man as 
happy because he is aiming at happiness, but as lieing so because he follows the Law 
of God, and finds joy therein, without seeking for joy for its own sake. And, anyway, 
if it be so that God has annexed joy to a life of loyalty to him, it cannot make such 
loyalty less desirable if it is crowned with gladness of heart. But, as we hope to point 
out shortly, the personal happiness is but a very small part of the " blessedness " which 
the good man possesses. Let us consider — 

I. The life hebe described. Several marks are furnished to us here of "the 
blessed man." 1. Negative. He is wisely careful not to have evil companionship. 
He knows that " he that walketh with wise men shall be wise, but a companion of 
fools shall be destroyed." Hence he shuns (1) the ungodly — those who have no fear 
of God before their eyes, and are perpetually restless in their self-will; (2) the sinners 
— those who indulge in open sin ; (3) the scornful — those who ridicule religion and 
laugh at such as fear the Lord. His separation from such is complete. He will 
neither (1) follow their counsel; nor (2) sit in their seat; nor even (3) stand in their 
way. Note : If ever a man is to become wise, he must not mix promiscuously with 
otiiers. We know well, in penning these words, that we are liable to the remark from 
some readers, "How commonplace! " We admit it. But it is just by non-attention 
to commonplace truth that millions are undone. We cannot reiterate too frequently, 
"Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men." 2. 
Positive. In avoiding evil, he does not throw himself upon a blank. But it is remark- 
able that, as the antitheses of " ungodly," " sinners," " scornful," we do not get " godly," 
" pure," " reverent." The fact is, the man whom this psalm df scribes will not be 
supremely anxious to have any companions. If he cannot have the right ones, he will 
do without them. And yet he will not be lonely. For the Law of Jehovah, the 
revealed covenant of God, will be before his eyes and in his heart. And herein he will 

' See Dean Perowne's admirable chapter on " The Theology of the Psalms," in his 
Introduction to his 'Notes on the Psalms,' pp. 41 — 69, 6th edit. The Bampton Lecture 
by Bishop Alexander, 'The Witness of the Psalms to Christ and Christianity,' a new 
edition of which Is just published (1890), is worthy of careful perusal; and so is also the 
fourth chapter in Mr. Glailstone's book, ' The Impregnable Eock of Holy Scripture ' 
(I8bi8ter,1890). 'The Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges; ' 'The Psalms. Book I.,' 
edited by Professor A. F. Kirkpatrick, B.D., has just come into our hands (1891). It contains 
more helpful material in small compass, for students, than any other volume on the Psalmi 
that we have chanced to see. The Eeligions Tract Society has just issued (1891) a neat 
and carefully edited edition of the Book of Psalms, with explanatory notes. 



M. 1. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



have a safe guide for the pathway he should follow. In thus following Gtod'i Law 
he will have : (1) Ample material for thought. " In his Law doth he meditate day 
and night" (ver. 2). "The Hebrew word tdrah has a much wider range of meaning 
than " law," by which it is always rendered iu the Authorized Version. It denotes 
(a) teaching, instruction, whether human (Prov. 1. 8) or Divine ; (6) a precept or law ; 
(c) a tody of laws, and in particular the Mosaic Law, and so, finally, the Pentateuch. 
It should be taken to include all Divine revelation as the guide of life." ' We do not 
understand the psalmist as meaning that such a man will always be thinking of one 
topic. But that (o) by day he will use the Law of God as a direction-post to point 
the way ; (5) by night he will use it as a pillow on which to rest his head. For in the 
Law there are revealed to him mercy, forgiveness, sacrifice, intercession, grace, strength. 
He will enthrone the Word of God in the place of honour, above all other books in the 
world. Some may raise a difficulty here, saying, " Yes ; in the psalmist's time that 
might have been so. Then the sacred books of the Hebrews comprised their national 
history and their religious literature. There was not so much to call off men's 
thoughts from the Bible as there is now." That is so. But, nevertheless, the follow- 
ing facts remain : That in the Bible is the only authoritative revelation of the mind 
and will of God ; that our Scriptures are to us a far richer treasure than the Scriptures 
of the psalmist's time ; that therein we have the only guide through life to immortality. 
Other books may inform the mind. The Bible still retains its supremacy as the book 
to regulate the life. Hence in the Bible the believer has : (2) £ich nutriment for 
character. Hence he is described as " a tree planted by the rivers of water " (see also 
Jer. xvii. 8). Psalmist and prophet agree. The Scriptures reveal God. In God the 
believer puts his trust. So that the study of the book makes him like a fruitful tree, 
because it leads np to God. Thus there will be (a) unfailing supplies ; (6) fruit in 
season ; (c) a fadeless leaf; (d) entire success. " Whatsoever he doeth shall prosper." 

II. Such a life has its own outlook and destiny. As the man is now, so is 
his uplook and outlook here and hereafter. 1. There is now Divine approval. " The 
Lord knoweth the way of the righteous." 2. Eis work and way will be influential for 
good long after he has ceased to live below. (Ver. 6.) 3. Se loill be approved at the judg- 
ment-day. (Ver. 5.) He will be found " in the congregation of the righteous." And 
all this is set forth even more strikingly by the hints here given of the destiny of those 
with whom he would not be associated. As the Vulgate most touchino;ly has it, " Non 
sic impii, non sic." As he would not mingle with them here, he shall not be thrown 
with them hereafter. They will be as " chaff which the wind driveth away." Their 
quality, as chaff. Their destiny, as chaff. Terrible I How blessed to have a different 
destiny separately assigned, as the result of a course separately chosen! 

III. The blessedness of such a life is here declared and defined. If we 
put the question, " By whom is this blessedness pronounced ? " the answer is : 1. They 
are intrinsically Uessed, ipso facto, in being what they are. They are right, good, 
glad, strong, full of living hope. 2. In the judgment of all good men they are blessed, 
and even men who are not godly know that a life spent in accordance with the will 
of God is the truly right one. 3. The Lord Jesus Christ declares them to be so now. 

(Matt. V. 1 11.) 4. At the last judgment the King will confirm the blessing. Note ; 

The purposes to be served by such a psalm as this are manifold. They are independent 
of its author, age, or land. 1. To parents this psalm is a treasure of infinite value, 
•s giving them in outline (1) what they may well desire their children to be ; and 
(2) the place of honour the Bible should occupy in their children's hearts. 2. To 
teachers. It discloaes to them the life to be urged on their scholars, and tells them 
whence alone the nutriment for such a life can be drawn. 3. To children. It shows 
them that true happiness, in the highest sense, is attained only through true good- 
ness ; that true goodness can only be attained by feeding on the truth of God ; and 
that to such a God-like character there is ensured everlasting life, an ever-during home. 
"Light is sown for the righteous." — 0, 

Vers. 1 6. — Z%e blessedness of the true. " God is Love." He must, therefore, seek 

the happiness of his creatures. Man is the highest of his earthly creatures, and hii 

' Eirkpatriok. See also Professor Forbes's • Studies in the Book of PsalmB,' pp. 192, 198 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [PM. 1— & 



happiness must be of the highest kind, not only fit for him to receive, but worthy ol 
Uod to bestow. Such is the happiness here depicted. It does not come anyhow, 
but in accordance with law. It dues not depend upon what a man has, but upon what 
he is. It is inward, not outward. It is of the spirit, not of the flesh. Happiness is 
blessedness — the blessedness of the true in character. 

I. Mark the foundation. Sin is self-will. This implies separation from God ; and 
this separation must be final, unless God himself prevent. But the godly man has 
been brought back into a right relation to God. God's will is his will. To know 
and to love and to obey God is his delight. His life is centred in God. Thus he is 
able to receive the blessing in its fulness, which God is ready freely to bestow. His 
character is founded upon the rock of the eternal, and not upon the shifting sands 
of time. 

IL Mark next THE harmonious development. This is shown under the figure of 
a tree, fair and flourishing. 1. The situation is choice. It stands, not in the desert, 
but in a fit place. "Planted." The hand of God is seen in the godly man's life. 
This is his security. Where God has put him, God can keep him. 2. The environment 
is favourable. From the heavens above and the earth beneath nourishment is pro- 
vided. The supply is rich and sure. Though worldly supplies may cease, and the 
waters of earth fail (Isa. xii. 5), the river of God will still run free (1 Kin?s xviii. 5 ; 
Isa. Iv. 1 — 3). 3. The progress is appropriate. There is the power of assimilating 
(Mark iv. 27, 28). Life develops according to its own order. What the plant does 
unconsciously, subject to the law of its being, the godly man does freely and con- 
sciously, under the benign rule of Christ. 

III. Lastly, mark the consummation. God's work always tends to completeness. 
Every advance is an approach. Every fulfilment is a prophecy of the perfect end. In 
the life of the godly there is the truest pleasure, the noblest usefulness, the heaven- 
liest beauty. And the charm of all is permanence. There is not only moral freshness, 
as where there is real soundness of health, but there is enduringness. This is brought 
out vividly by contrast. " The ungodly are not so." With them there is no reality. 
Separated from the true life, everything is unstable and uncertain. There may be a 
kind of prosperity, but it is false and delusive. The pleasures of sin are but for a 
season; but the love of God is for ever. In the day of trial the just shall stand, 
accepted and blessed ; but the wicked shall be winnowed out of the society of the true 
Israel, and swept away, as the worthless chaff, by the swift and resistless judgment of 
God.— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Character. This psalm supplies us with — 

I. Test of chaeacter. A man is known by the company he keeps. What doest 
thou, my soul ? With whom dost thou " walk " and " .sit " (Ps. cxix. 63) ? 

II. EuLE OP LIFE. What should we do ? Surely the right thing is to ask counsel 
of God, and to submit ourselves to his holy and blessed rule. Let us do this, and we 
shall not only have life (Ps. xl. 8), but food (John iv. 44) ; and not only food, but 
society (Matt. xii. 50) ; and not only society, but education (Ps. cxliii. 10) j and not 
only education, but joy unspeakable and full of glory (Ps. cxix. 65 ; 1 Pet. i. 8). " He 
that doeth the will of God abideth for ever " (1 John ii. 16, 17). 

III. Foreshadowing of destiny. Acts fix habits, habits settle character, and 
character determines destiny. " The wind " may represent the various trials which 
meet us, and which so far show what we are and whither we are going. By conscience, 
by public opinion, by experience of the results of conduct, we are premonished of the 
coming end and the perfect judgment of God. Thus, not in an arbitrary way, but by 
our own deeds and life, our destiny for weal or woe is being settled. Eternity is the 
harvest of time. " Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Greatness, happiness, prosperity. We learn here the true idea of — 

I. Greatness. It is not mere intellectual power, but moral worth. Greatness it 
goodness — the being like God. 

II. Happiness. It is living together with God, doing his will, in the light and joy 
•f hia love. 

III. PaosPBRiTT. It is of the soul — the true health of the soul (3 John 2). Itl 



w. 1.1— «.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



measure is personal activity. Deeds carry social influence. The weak and the unfor- 
tunate are too often despised, hut let a man he true, let him stand up for the right 
let him honestly serve God in his day and generation, and he will not only have peace 
within, hut he will be " blessed in his deed." His influence will work for good, and 
will live and move others to noble ends when he himself is gone. 

•Our many thoughts and deeds, our life and loTe» 
Our happiness, and all that we have been : — 
Immortally must live, and burn, and move. 
When we shall be no more." 

W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Blessedness. The word "blessed" might be rendered "blessings." 
God's people are blessed (Numb. vi. 24 ; Matt. v. 1 — 10). 

I. There is the blessing of peace. The firuit of righteousness is peace. The heart is 
right with God. 

II. The blessing of a true pueposb. Not gain, nor pleasure, nor merely to save the 
Boul, but to do God's will. This is the supreme thing. This gives strength to the 
heart and unity to the life. 

in. The blessing of the noblest society. Into what a goodly fellowship do we 
enter as we join the company of God's people I The saints are our brethren ; holy 
angels are our ministers; Christ is our abiding Friend. 

rV. The blessing of uobal advancement. Our path is onward. The more good a 
man does the nobler he becomes. By every act of self-denial and virtue he rises in 
dignity and strength. 

"V. The blessing of spieituai. usEruLNESS. Only the good can do good. To augment 
the happiness of others ia the sweetest pleasure. 

VL The blessing of a bbisht futubb. Life's interests are secured. The outlook, 
though at times clouded, ends in light. 

VII. The BLBBSINS OF God's eternal love. (Ver. 6, "fcnoweth.") "There is 
nothing in the world worth living for, but doing good and finishing God's work — doing 
the work Christ did " (Brainerd).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — A contrast. This psalm is introductory to all the rest, perhaps 
written after the finding of the " hook of the Law " in Josiah's time, in an age of 
revival, when men were roused to consider the conflict between good and evil, and who 
were the truly blessed, and on what their blessedness was grounded. There ia a con- 
trast drawn in it between the righteous and the wicked. 

I. The chabacter and privileges of the bightbous. 1. Thei/ have no sym- 
pathetic relations with the wicked. (Ver. 1.) They cannot help having some associati. ns 
with them ; but they do not walk with them, nor stand with them, nor sit with them, 
as they do with congenial friends. This description suggests the progress of the wicked. 
Walking only with a man we may soon part from him ; but if we stand with him we 
linger in his company, and at last come to sit with him, scorning all goodness. 2. Irre- 
sistibly attracted to the Divine Law. (Ver. 2.) He is " in " it with all his afiection 
and with his unceasing thought, rather than the Law is " in " him. Though both are 
true, t.e., it solicits, commands, and absorbs him, and rules the world of thought, 
affection, and imagination. 3. They are fruitful according to the time and circwm- 
ttances of their lives. (Ver. 3.) In youth, mature manhood, and ripe age. Patient in 
aflSiction, constant in trial, grateful in prosperity, and zeadous when opportunity of 
work offers itself. 4. Unfading freshness of hea/rt and experience. (Ver. 3.) His life 
is progressive, his faith grows deeper, and his power of achievement increases, and his 
hope becomes brighter, and bis affections purer, and he. blossoms with a green freshness 
for ever. 5. He prospers in his undertakings. (Ver. 3.) As a general rule, because he 
deserves it ; for he aims at only right and lawful things, and employs only right and 
lawful means. 

n. Charaoteb and destiny of the wicked. 1. Intrinsic worthlessnest. (Ver. 4.) 
*• Dead, unserviceable, without substance, and easily carried away " — dispersed by the 
wind. This is only a negative description, as a contrast with the living tree and its fruit. 



10 



THE BOOK 3F PSALMS. 



[PB.II. 1—12, 



It says nothing of such a man's poisonous influence. 2. Unable to endure the scrutiny 
of the great Lawgiver. (Ver. 5.) One inquiring glance of God shatters the whole 
structure of his life. God does not " know " his way. " I never knew you." 3. Their 
relation to the Church only an outward one. (Ver. 5.) Though they mingle with the 
congregation, they do not really "stand with them." 4. Their habits of life are 
destructive. (Ver. 6.) Their " way " is not the way everlasting, but leads to perdition, 
if it be not forsaken. — S. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — True blessedness. " Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel 
of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the 
scornful," etc. 

I. The natubb of tbub blessedness. 1. Vigorous life of the sotd. "Like a tree 
planted," etc. The blessedness of the body is vigorous health. 2. Productiveness. 
Bringeth forth his fruit in his season. It must grow before it becomes fruitful. 
3. Perpetuity of life. " His leaf also shall not wither." 4. Success in his undertakings. 
" Whatsoever he doeth shall prosper." Success in the greatest undertaking, the true 
blessedness. 

II. The means op blessedness. 1. To shun the company and the counsels of the 
ungodly. Standing in tlieir way, partaking in their designs. 2. Delight in Divine 
truth. Z. Persevering study of it. Converting it into juice and blood. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM II. 



Hbbe we have again a psalm without a 
title, and, bo far, we are left to conjecture 
its age and author. The Jews, however, 
have always regarded it as Davidleal; and 
there is evidence in Scripture itself (Acta 
iv. 25) that the early Christiana were of 
the same opinion. Modem critics, for the 
most part, agree, although there are some 
(Ewald, Paulns, Bleek) who aacribe it to 
Solomon, and others (Maurer, Delitzach) 
who suppose it written by Hezekiah or 
Isaiah. 

The psalm ii certainly Messianic. It is 
assumed to be bo in Acts iv. 25; ziii. 33; 
Heb. i. 5; v. 5. However it may, to a 
cei tain extent, apply to David, David can- 
not exhaust its allusions. Vera. 7, 8, and 
12 are inapplicable to David, and must 
refer to the Messiah. The Jews admitted 
the Measianic character of the psalm, until 
driven into denial by the controversy with 
Christiana. Moat modern critics allow it. 

There ia a certain correspondency between 
Psa. i. and ii., which may account for their 
being placed together. In both the main 
idea is the antagonism between the right- 
eous and the wicked. Fa. i. seta forth this 
antagonism by a contrast between two typi- 
cal individuaU. Pa. ii. shows the two king- 



doms of light and darkness engaged in their 
internecine conflict. 

Ver. 1. — Why do the heathen rage 1 The 
psalmist writes with a vision before his 
eyes. He " sees Jehovah upon hia throne, 
and Meaaiah entering npon his uniyerasl 
dominion. The enemies of both on earth 
rise up against them with frantic tumult, 
and vainly strive to oast off the fetters of 
their rule " Hence his andden outburst. 
" What ails the heathen (goini)," he says 
"that they rage?" or "make an uproar" 
(Kay), or " assemble tumultuously " (margin 
of Authorized Version and Revised Version) ? 
What are they about ? What io they de- 
sign ? And why do the people — rather, the 
peoples, or " the masses " (Kay) — ^imagine 
(or, meditate) a vain thing ? It must be " a 
vain thing ; " i.e. a purpose which will come 
to naught, if it is something opposed to the 
will of Jehovah and Messiah. The vision 
shows the psalmist Jew and Gentile banded 
together against the gospel of Christ. Its 
soope is not exhausted by the exposition 
of Acts iv. 26, but extends to the whole 
struggle between Christianity on the one 
hand, and Judaism and pao^anism on the 
other. " The peoples " still to this day 
"imagine a vain thing" — imagine that 
Oliristiauity will succumb to the assaults 
made upon it — will fade, die away, and 
disappear. 

Ver. 2.— The kinga of the earth set them- 
selves; or, draw themselves up in array 
(comp. Jer. xlvi. 4). Such kings aa Herod 
the Great, Herod Agrippa, Xero, aalerina, 



, n. 1—12.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



11 



Diocletian, Julian the Apostate, eto. There 
is always a warfare between the world and 
ttie Church, in which kings are apt to take 
a part, most often on the worldly side. ' And 
the rulers take counsel together. " Rulers " 
■re persons having autliority, but beluw 
the rank of kings. Such were the ethnarchs 
and tetrarohs of the first century, the go- 
yernors of provinces under the Roman em- 
peror, the members of tlie Jewish Sanhedrin, 
and the like. These last frequently " took 
counsel against the Lord " (see Matt. xxvi. 
3—5; xxvii. 1; Acta iv. 5, 6; v. 21—41). 
Against the Lord, and against his Anointed, 
laying. In David's time the recognized 
"anointed of the Lord" was the divinely 
appointed King of Israel (1 Sam. ii. 10; 
xii. 3, 5; xvi. 6; xxiv. 6, 10; xxvi. 7, 16; 
2 Sam. i. 14, 16: xix. 21; xxii. 51; I'ss. 
xviii. 50 ; xx. 6 ; xxviii. 8) — first Saul, and 
then David ; but David here seems to deeig- 
aate by the term a Greater than himself — 
the true theocratic King, whom he typified. 

Ver. 3. — Let us break their bands asunder. 
Wicked men always feel God's rule and 
his Law to be restraints. They chafe at 
them, fret against them, and, in the last 
resort — so far as their will goes — wholly 
throw them off. And cast away their oords 
fcom us. "Bauds" and "cords" are the 
fetters that restrain prisoners. The rebels 
determine to burst them, and a«ert tlieir 
absolute freedom. 

Ver. 4. — He that sitteth in the heavens 
shall laugh. God "laughs" at the vain 
and futile efforts of man to escape from the 
control of his laws and throw off his 
dominion (comp. Pbs. xxxvii. 13 ; lix. 8). 
It is impossible that these efforts should 
Bueceed. Men must obey God willingly, or 
else unwillingly. The Lord {Adonay in 
the ordinary Hebrew text, but a large 
number of manuscripts have Jehovah) 
shall have them in derision, "Laughter" 
and "derision" are, of course, anthropo- 
morphisms. It is meant that God views 
with contempt and scorn man's weak 
attempts at rebellion. 

Ver. 5. — Then shall he speak unto them 
in his wrath. "Then" (in) means "after 
a time "— " presently " (' Speaker's Com- 
mentary'), when the fitting period has 
arrived. " He shall speak " — not in articu- 
late words, not by a voice from heaven, not 
even by a commissioned messenger, but by 
accomplished facts. Christ does rule ; Christ 
does reign ; he sits a King in heaven, and 
is acknowledged as a King upon earth. In 
Tain was all the opposition of tlie Jews, 
in vain persecution after persecution by the 
Gentiles. God has established his Church, 
and "the gates of hell shall not prevail 
against it." And vex them. " Strike terror 
and dismay into them " (Kay). In his sore 



displeasure; or, "in the heat of his anger" 
(Trench and Skinner). 

Ver. 6. — Yet have I set my King upon my 
holy hill of Zion ; literally, and at for me, 
I have let my King upon Zion, the mount oj 
my holiness. The words are uttered by 
Jehovah, and must refer to the Anointed 
One of ver. 2. This Anointed One God has 
set up as King upon Zion, his holy moun- 
tain. Without denying some reference to 
David, the type, we must regard the Anti- 
type, Christ, as mainly pointed at. Christ 
ig Bet up for ever as King in the heavenly 
Jerusalem (Rev. xxi. 2 — 7; xxii. 1 — 5). 
There is no need to substitute " anointed " 
for " set " or " set up," as is done by Rosen- 
miiller, Gesenius, Siwald, Zunz, Umbreit, 
and others, since 7|d] has both meanings 
(oomp. Prov. viii. 23). 

Ver. 7. — I will declare the decree. It is 
best to suppose that Messiah here takes the 
word, and maintains it to the end of ver. 9, 
when the psalmist resumes in his own per- 
son. Messiah "declares," or publishes, a 
" decree," made by God the Father in the 
beginning of all things, and communicated 
by him to the Son, whereby he made known 
the relationship between them, and invested 
the Son with sovereign power over the uni- 
verse. The Lord bath said unto me ; rather, 
said unto me (see the Revised Version). It 
was said, once for all, at a distant date. 
Thou art my Sou. Not " one of my sons," 
but " my Son ; " i.e. my one Son, my only 
one — " my Sou " kot' i^oxhv (comp. Ps. 
Ixxxix. 27; Heb. i. 5). This day have I 
begotten thee. If it be asked, "Which 
day?" the answer would seem to be, the 
day when Christ commenced his redemptive 
work : then the Father " committed all 
judgment" — all dominion over creation — 
" to the Son " (John v. 22), gave him, as it 
were, a new existence, a new sphere, the 
throne of the world, and of all that is oi 
that ever Will be, in it (see ' Speaker's Com- 
mentary,' ad Zoo.). 

Ver. 8. — Ask of me, and I shall give thee 
the heathen for thine inheritance. A very 
small part of the heathen were the inheri- 
tance of David, and therefore the Messiah 
only can be spoken of in this verse. Before 
Messiah " all kings " were to " fall down ; 
all nations to do him service " (Ps. Ixxii. 
11 ; comp. Isa. xlix. 22 ; Ix. 3, 4 ; Matt. 
xxviii. 19, etc.). And the uttermost parts 
of the earth for thy possession (comp. Isa. 
lii. 10 ; Jer. xvi. 19 ; Micah v. 4 ; Zech. ix. 
10 ; Acts xiii. 47). 

Ver. 9. — ^Thoa shalt break them with a 
rod of iron. It is said that these words, and 
tliose of the next clause, " cannot describe 
the mild rule of Christ " (Rosen miiller, De 
Wette, Hupfeld, etc.). But the objectors 
forget that there is a severe, as well as a 



12 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[PB. n. 1-12 



mild, side to the dealings of God with his 
human creatures. St. Paul notes in the 
same verse both the "severity" and the 
" goodness" of God (Bom. xi. 22). Christ, 
though "the Prince of Peace," "came to 
send a sword upon the earth " (Matt. z. 31). 
As the appointed Judge of men, he takes 
vengeance on the wicked, while he rewards 
the righteous ^uke iii. 17 ; Matt. xxv. 46). 
Nay, St. John, in the Apocalypse, declares 
that " out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, 
that with it he should smite the nations, 
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron " 
(Eev. six. 15; comp. ii. 27; xii. 5). So, 
with respect to the other clause of the verse 
— Thou Shalt dash them in pieces like a pot- 
ter's vessel — ^it is to he noted that there is 
a similar threat made by the Lord of hosts 
against Jerusalem in the Book of Jeremiah 
(xix. 11), and that under the new covenant 
the same is threatened in the Bevelatiou 
(ii. 27). In truth, both covenants are alike 
in denouncing the extreme of God's wrath 
on impenitent sinners, such as those here 
spoken of. 

Ver. 10. — Be wise now therefore, ye 
kings. The remainder of the psalm con- 
tains the advice of the psalmist to the rebels 
of vers. 1 — 3, and to all who may be inclined 
to imitate them. " Be wise," he says, " be 
prudent. For your own sakes desist from 
attempts at rebellion. Jehovah and Messiah 
are irresistible. Ye will find && 'hard to 
kick against the pricks.'" Be instructed, 
ye judges of the earth. " Be taught," i.e., 
" by experience, if ye are not wise enough 
to know beforehand, that opposition to God 
is futile." Compare the advice of Gamaliel 
(Acts V. 38, 39). 

Ver. 11.— Serve the Lord with fear. " If 
ye will not serve him (i.e. honour and obey 
him) from love, do it from fear;" "The 
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom " 
(Fi. oxi. 10). And rejoioe. Do not be con- 



tent vrith fe«r. Qo an from fear to love, 
and so to joy. Good men " rejoice in God 
alway " (Phil. iv. 4). But such rejoicing 
must be with trembling; or, with reverence 
(Prayer-bnok Version), since no service is 
acceptable to God but such as is rendered 
"with reverence and godly fear" (Heb. 
xu. 28). 

Ver. 12. — ^KisB the Son. It is certainly 
remarkable that we have here a different 
word for "Son" from that employed in 
ver. 7, and ordinarily in the Hebrew Bible. 
Still, there is other evidence that the word 
here used, tar, existed in the Hebrew no 
less than in the Aramaic, viz. Prov. xxxi. 
2, where it is repeated thrice. It was pro- 
bably an archaic and poetic word, like our 
" sire " for " father," rarely used, but, when 
used, intended to mark some special dignity. 
Hengstenberg suggests that the writer's 
motive in prefer! ng bar to ben in this place 
was to avoid the cacophony which would 
have arisen from the juxtaposition of ben 
and pen (js) ; and this is quite possible, but 
as a secondary rather than as the main reason. 
By " kits the Son " we must understand " pay 
him homage," salute him as King in the 
customary way (see 1 Sam. z. 1). Lest he 
be angry. The omission of a customary 
token of respect is an insult which natu- 
rally angers the object of it (Esth. iii. 5). 
And ye perish from the way; or, a» to 
the way." To anger the Son is to bring 
destruction on our " way," or course in life. 
When his wrath is k^dled but a little; 
rather, for soon his wrath may be hindled 
(tee the Bevised Version). Blessed are 
all they that put their trust in him. The 
writer ends with words of blessing, to 
relieve the general severity of the psalm 
(oomp. Pss. iii. 8; v. 12; xxviii. 9; xli. 13, 
etc.). (On the blessedness of trusting in 
God, see Pss. xxxiv. 8 ; xL 4 ; Izxzir. 12, 
etc.) 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 8. — The kingdom and glory of Christ. "Ask,''eto. We have the highest 
authority for regarding this psalm as a prophecy of the kingdom and glory of Christ. 
Interpreters labour in vain to fix on some occasion in Israel's history to account for 
its composition. No adequate explanation can be imagined of Its scope and language 
but that given in Acts iv. 25 (comp. xiii. 33 ; Heb. i. 5).- Vers. 10 — 12 would be 
blasphemous arrogance if spoken by and of a mere earthly king. Here is a declaration 
and a coridition. 

I. The declaration. 1. The voice of supreme authority. A grant of absolute 
dominion over the whole human race. This must be a Divine promise; else it were 
meaningless, impious (Ps. xxii. 28). Subordination is implied, as in 1 Oct. xv. 27 , and 
in our Saviour's own declarations (John vi. 38 ; xv. 1). But not inferior nature. U 
it were — if Jesus were human only — then the gospel would have immeasurably lowered 
our position towards God ; put us further away, instead of bringing us nigh. For 
under the old covenant, Jehovah himself was King and Shepherd of IsraeL On th« 



ri.n. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 18 

other hand, the real Manhood of Christ is as indispensable to this Kingship as bii Deitj 
(see John v. 27). 2. Of almighty power. What God promises, he is able to perform. 
How ? How is human freedom reconciled with Divine control of all things, m>m the 
counsels of kin<2S (Prov. xxi. 1) to the sparrow's fall (Matt. x. 29) ? A problem this 
that utterly defies human reason. But practically it is solved by faith and prayer 
(Phil. ii. 13 ; Dan. iv. 35). 3. Of Divine /oi<A/«Jnesg. God's word is pledged and can- 
not be broken (Isa. zi. 9, 10). As matter of right, the kingdom is Christ's (Matt« 
xxviii. 18). It shall be so in/ac< (1 Cor. xv. 26) one day. 

II. Thb condition. " Ask of me." 1. Our Lord Jesus personally fulfilled this 
condition, claimed the fulfilment of the promise, when he said, " I have finished," etc. 
(John xvii. 4 ; comp. Phil. ii. 9 — 11). 2. But Christ is one with " the Church, which is 
his body." As he by his intercession makes our prayers bis own, so we are to make 
this great request ours. He has taught us to set it foremost in our prayers : " Thy 
kingdom come " (comp. Pg. Ixxii. 15 ; and note the commencing fulfilment, Acts i. 14). 

CoNCLTTsioN. 1. The scope of Christiao hope and effort is as wide as God's presence 
— it embraces the whole world (Matt, xxviii. 19 ; GaL iii. 8). 2. Gbd'i promisea await 
our prayers (John xvi. 23). 

Yer. 12. — The kiss of homage. " Kiss the Son," etc. That la, the Son of Ood, 
spoken of in ver. 7. Our Saviour loved to call himself " Son of man," but he did not 
shrink from using also this name for which the Jews accused him of blasphemy (Matt, 
xi. 27 ; John ix. 35 ; x. 36 ; xix. 7). The kiss of friendly greeting, still the ordinary 
custom in many countries, is referred to in innumerable passages of Scripture. Else the 
traitor Judas had not dared so to crown his treachery. Jesus noted the neglect of the 
kiss of hospitality (Luke vii. 45) ; did not disdain the kisses showered on his feet by 
the weeping penitent. But the text speaks, not of any of these, but of the kisi of 
homage or worship. 

I. The suuhonb. " Kiss the Son." Kings and judges of the earth fcf. Pi. oxlviii. 
11) are summoned to do homage to " the Son " as " Head over all '' (Luke v. 6). 
" Serve the Lord " (ver. 11) implies this homage. Why rulers ? As representing the 
nations (yen. 1, 2). Civil power is God's ordinance (Bom. xiiL 1, etc!). Otherwiw 
neither despots nor democracies could have any right to make and execute laws 
(though they may have power). Christ's kingdom is not a kingdom of this world ; 
but he is the Buler of nations as well as individuals (Ps. xxii. 28). Till this is practi- 
cally acknowledged — ^the whole of human life, public and private, rendered obedient to 
Christ's l»w— the nations cannot be " blessed in him" (Gal. iii. 8; Bev. xi. 16). 

II. The wabnino. " Lest he be angry." The compassion, gentleness, tenderness 
of Jesus, are sometimes dwelt on to the exclusion of his majesty and righteouanesa 
(but aee Matt. xxiv. 44, 50, 61; xxv. 81, etc.; Luke xix. 27). There is no more 
tremendous phrase in Scripture than " the wrath of the Lamb" (Bev, vi. 16). 

III. The doom of the disobedient. " Perish from the way. '' What way? The 
way of salvation — of Gbd ; of truth ; of holiness ; of peace ; of life (Acts xvi. 17 ; Matt. 
xxii. 16 ; 2 Pet. ii. 2, 21 ; Isa. xxxv. 8 ; Luke i. 79 ; Matt. vii. 14 ; Prov. xv. 24). 
The most fearful punishment of sin is incapaeitt/ /or holineu — spiritual death (Bev. 
xxii. 11). " Lest " is the awful shadow over the future, if you are rejecting Onrist. 
" Now ''is the sunshine on the path of faith and repentance (2 Oor. tL 2 ; t. 20). 

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOBS. 

Vers, 1 12. — The King in Zum : a Messianic psalm. A close examination of this 

pstdm will show it to be at once prophetic and Messianic. Its date and author are not 
certainly known. The style rather points to David as the probable writer. To him 
especially the promise of a King who should reign in righteousness formed part of that 
" everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure." By faith in that covenant he 
foresaw him, who, being emphatically the Just One, should rule in the fear of Qtoi (see 
2 Sam. xxiii. 2 — 5, where, as well as in this psalm, we have a remarkable illustration of 
what the Apostle Paul speaks of as the foresight evinced in the Old Testament Scrip- 
tures ; see alio Gal. iii. 8). In fact, we regard this psalm, though much briafer than 



U THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [ps. n. 1—12. 



Iia. liii., yet as being as distinctly and clearly, yea, as wonderfully, Messianic as even 
that celebrated chapter of the evangelical prophet. Hence we regard it as affording as 
dear a proof of the guidance of a foreseeing Spirit, and of the facts of inspiration and of 
revelation, as are the starry heavens of the glory of God. For we know, as matters of 
fact, (1) that this psalm finds its fulfilment in Christ ; (2) that it has been fulfilled in 
no one else ; (3) that hundreds of years intervened between prophecy and event ; and 
(4) that there are here not merely general statements, but numerous minute details 
which no human eye could possibly have discerned beforehand ; so that we are shut 
up, by a severely intellectual process, to the conclusion that the author of this psalm is 
none other than he who sees the end from the beginning. This will, we trust, appear 
as we proceed to examine and expound it.' 

L Hebb is an Anointed One fobeseen. (Ver. 2.) " His Anointed.* Who Is this 
Anointed One ? Let us see. Anointing was chiefly for purposes of consecration and 
inauguration. It signified the setting apart of the anointed one for God's service, and 
■ymbolized those heavenly gifts which were needed in its discharge. Priests, prophets, 
and kings were anointed (i^. Lev. iv. 3, 5, 16 ; vii. 35 ; 1 Kings xix. 16 ; 1 Sam. xvl. 
12, 13 ; 1 Kings i. 39). There is in this psalm One referred to as the Anointed One. 
The Hebrew word for the Anointed is " Messiah." The Greek word, in its Anglicized 
form is " Christ." Thit Anointed One is the Son of Gk>d (see ver. 7). He is King 
(ver. 6). He has the nations for his possession (ver, 8). He is One before whom kings 
are to bow (vers 10—12). This cannot possibly be any other than the King of kings. 
To no one can the words of the psalm possibly apply but to him who is Lord of the 
whole earth, i,i. to the Lord Jesus Christ (cf. Ps. cxxxii. 17 ; Dan. ix. 25, 26 ; 
Acts xviL 3). 

n. BEBiBTANoa TO GK)D, AND TO HiB Anointsd Onk, fobetold. This resistance 
eomes (1) from the nations, and also from (2) kings and rulers. Five forms of resist- 
ance are indicated, 1. Raging. Tumultuous agitation, as when waves of ocean are 
lashed to fliry. 2. Imagining. Meditating (same word as in Ps. i. 2). Turning over 
and over in the mind some plan of opposition. 3. Setting themselves. The result of the 
meditation in a resolution, i. Taking eoumd together. For combined action. 6. 
Baying, etc. Meditation, resolution, and concerted action taking effect in a verbal 
utterance : " Let us break their bands asunder," etc. (For the fulfilment of all this, see 
Matt. xxi. 33—44; xiiii. 31—35; John v. 16—18; vii. 1, 30, 45; viii. 40—69; i. 
89 ; xi. 63, 57 ; xii. 10 ; xviii. 3 ; xix. 16, 16, 30 ; Acts iv. 24, 27.) 

IIL Resistance to the Anointed One is follt. (Yer. 1.) Why do the nations 
rage ? Vers. 4 — 6 foretell the utter discomfiture of the opponents, in four respects. 
1. The utter impotence of the auault would he matter for infinite ridicule and scorn. 
(Ver. 4.) It were as easy for a spider to remove Mont Blanc from its base as for 
puny man to injure the Lord's Anointed One. 2. The displeasure of Ood should 
trouble the opposers. (Ver. 6; cf. Matt, xxiii. 37, 38.) Note how fearfully the 
imprecation in Matt, zxvii. 25 was fulfilled. Bead the account in Josephus of the 
miseries that came on the Jews at the destruction of their city (cf. Acts xiL 1, 2, 
23). 3. 2%e power of Ood would effect a mighty restraint, and even a etnnplete 
destruction. (Ver. 9.) See Spurgeon's ' Treasury of David,' vol. i. p. 29, for some 
admirable remarks on ver. 9 ; Dr. Geikie, in his ' Holy Land and the Bible,' vol. ii. 
p. 60, d seq., for some strikingly instructive remarks on the pottery of the East ; and 
also Dr. Plummer's extraordinary collection of historic facts on the miseries which 
have be&llen the persecutors of the Church (in Spurgeon's ' Treasury of David,' vol. 
L pp. 17, 18). 4. 2%e Anointed One would be enthroned in spite of all. (Vers. 6, T.) 
The seat of Christ's throne is called " my holy hill of Zton," in allusion to Zion as the 
atj of David. Christ is the Son and Lord of David, and hence David's thrcs<> ui the 
trpe of Christ's. Christ is now reigning in heaven. He is at once onr Prophet, 
fiiest, and King (see Acts iu 22—36; iiL 13—15; iv. 10—12; Heb. x. 12, 13; 
1 Cor. XT. 26). 

IV. Whatbveb hat n ths dbobbeb or babth, these is a dbobkb in hkavbn, 

• Bee Fanaset's • Studies in the CL. Psalms,' leot. viii. 2nd edit., 1885 ; ' The Psalm^' by 
Or. W. Binnie, new edit, 1886, pp. 339, 340 ; also Kirkpatriok's introduction to the Second 
Psalm in ' The Cambridge Bible,' 1891. 



PS. n. 1—12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 16 

WHICH THE Akointed One DBCLAKE8. (Vers. 7 — 9.) " I will declare the decree." The 
decree of the kings and rulers, which fhey resolve to carry out, is given in ver. 3 ; but 
I will tell of a decree from a higher throne. It has four parts. 1. The Anointed One 
is to be the begotten Son of Ood. (Ver. 7.) 2. fie is to have the sway over the whole 
world. (Ver. 8.) 3. He is to have this as the result of his intercession. " Ask of me" 
(ver. 8.) 4. His sway and conquest are to he entire and complete. (Ver. 9.) If men 
will not bend, th^y must treak. 

V. The Holt Ghost calls fob bubmibbiok to the Anointed Son of God. This 
is set forth in five ways. 1. Be wise. Kings and judges are reminded that the only 
true wisdom is found in yielding to the Anointed One. There is no reason why he 
should be resisted. Resistance can end only in defeat. 2. Be instructed. Learn the 
Bivine purpose and plan concemiug the King in Zion. 3. Serve the Lord with fea/r. 
Not in servile terror, but iu loyal reverence. 4. Rejoice with trembling. Be glad that 
the sceptre is in such hands. 5. Kiss the Son. Do homage, acknowledging his 
supremacy. This course is urged on them by two powerful pleas, (1) If they refuse, 
they perish from the way ; i.e. they wander ; they miss the way so seriously as to be 
lost ; they perish as the result of being lost. Professor Cheyne's rendering is, " Ye go 
to ruin." (2) If they yield the Anointed One allegiance and trust, they will be happy 
indeed (ver. 12).* 

Note : 1. It is very foolish to fret and chafe against the government of God. 2. All 
mankind are under Christ's sway, whether in this state of being or in any other. 3. 
Christ has a heart of love as well as a sceptre of power ; and he rules to save. 4. Those 
who will not submit to the sceptre of Christ's grace must feel the weight of his iron 
rod. 5. True blessednesA is found in submission to Christ; this blessedness is greater 
than tongue can express or heart conceive. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — I%e Jieatlien in three aspects. L As slates or but. The condition of 
peoples varies. Civilization was more advanced in Greece and Rome than in other 
parts of the world. But though there may be superiority in some respects, with 
regard to the highest things there is no difference (Rom. iii. 9). What a terrible 
picture have we in this psalm of the crimes and violence and miseries that desolate the 
world, where " the lust of the eye, and the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life " 
prevail, and not the Law of God ! 

II. Ab objects of Divine interest. The Jews were in covenant with God as his 
peculiar people. But this did not imply that other peoples were unloved and uncared 
for. God has his purposes with regard to all the tribes and kindreds of the earth. 
Though they have forsaken him, he has not forsaken them. In their conscience they 
feel his presence. In the results of their actions they are subject to his Law. In their 
fears and darkness they are groping after him, and in their cruel rites and superstitions, 
consciously or unconsciously, they are declaring that without God they are without 
hope, and that the desire of their hearts is for his light and blessing. Things are dark 
and gruesome, but yet, in ways unknown to us, God is ruling over all, and working 
for the accomplishment of his own wiU and holy ends. The heathen are in God's 
hand. He promises to give them to Christ. All prayer and evangelistic effort should 
be founded on this : " Ask of me," Prayer is good ; but prayer without work is vain. 
Have we the mind of Christ ? Do our hearts yearn in love and pity over the multi- 
tudes who are sitting in darkness and the shadow of death ? Then let us plead God's 
word, and labour to carry out Christ's command (Matt, xxviii. 19, 20). 

III. As the subjects op Messiah's kingdom. "Thine inheritance." 1. This 
inheritance is moral, not material. It is the people that God is concerned about. 
" All souls are mine." 2. This inheritance is obtained by right, and not by might. 
God " gives," not in an arbitrary way, but in accordance with law. There will be no 
forcing. The heathen must be won by truth and conviction if they are to be won at 
all. Hence there is scope for all reasonable motive and argument. 3. This inheritance 
is for spiritual good, not for personal aggrandizement. Empire has been often sought 
for selfish ends. If the heathen are given to Christ, it is not that they may remain in 

' " To propose any mere earthly sovereioB aa the object of trust would be opposed to the 
whole tenor of Scripture " (« The Book ot Psalms,' E.T.S,. 189U 



W THE BOOK OF P8ALM& [w. n. 1— 12. 

thdr heathenism, bat that they may be renewed in the spirit of their minds and receive 
tha blessings of the gospel. The more that we ourselves, who have so many representa' 
tives among the heathen, recognize that the power we have as a nation is given us of 
Qod, and should be used as a sacred trust for Qod's glory and the good of the people 
with whom we have to do, the better for us all. Woe to us if we seek our own and 
not also the things of others, if we are eager to make gain and to advance our own 
■elfish ends and forget the claims of our brethren, who as surely belong to Christ as we 
do, and for whom he died I — W. F. 

Vers. 2 — 6. — Thefalta and the true in hlngthip. There is a silent contrast through- 
out this psalm between the " kings of earth " (ver. 2) and " my King " (ver. 6). 

I. The FALSB is OHABAOTKRIZED by BELF-BEGKIKQ ; the TBUE by SELF-SAOBinOB. 

The false begin and end with self. They act from and for " themselves " (ver. 2). 
The true have regard to others, and are always ready to subordinate and sacrifice them- 
selves for the good of others. In the one case it is the many for the one, the people 
for the king ; in the other, it is the one for the many, the king for the people. 

II. The false bttlb bt fobce ; the true bt biohteoubnesb. " Bands " and 
" cords " mark the restraints of law, but the false care for none of these things. Might, 
not right, is their rule. Whatever stands in the way must give place to their ambi- 
tions. On the other hand, the true are animated by the spirit of iustice. Instead of 
grasping violently what does not belong to them, they accept their place and use their 
powers as from God. They hold that the " decree " must be righteous to be respected 
— ^that the law must be just and good to commend itself to reason, and to command the 
obedience of the heart. Power that a man gains for himself he will use for himself, 
but power that is held as a trust from Gk>d will be wisely and rightly employed. 

IIL The false ib marked bt oobbuftion ajtd misebt ; the tbue ib PBOBUOTrrE 
OF THE HioHEBT GOOD. Great are the perils of power. Well did the Preacher say, 
" Oppression [i.e. the power of oppressing] maketh a wise man mad " (Eccles. vii. 7). 
If this be so with the wise, how much worse will it be with the unwise I The Books 
of Chronicles and Kings in the Old Testament, and the history of heathen and Christian 
nations, are full of proofs as to the evils of power wrongly and wickedly used. Crimes, 
revolts, revolutions, wars upon wars, with manifold and terrible woes, mark the course 
of the Pharaohs and the Nebuchadnezzars, the Herods and Napoleons of this world. 
On the other hand, the rule of the true is conducive to the highest interests of men. 
Their aim is to do justly and to love mercy. Their motto is, " Death to evil, life to 
good." " The work of righteousness is peace " CIsa. xzxii. 17). 

lY. The false abb DOOUED to FAILDBE ; the TBITK to VICTOBT and IHIiOBTAJt 

HONOUB. The rule of the false inevitably leads to ruin. Sin is weakness. Evil can 
only breed evil. Where obedience is given from fear, and not from love, it cannot last. 
Where homage is rendered for reasons of prudence, and not from conviction, it can- 
not be depended upon. Where there is not desert on the one hand, there cannot be 
devotion on the other. Empire founded on the wrong is rotten through and through. 
But the true reign after another fashion. Their character commands respect. Their 
government, being founded in righteousness, secures confidence and support. Their 
rule, being exercised for the benign and holy ends of love, contributes to the general 
good. 

Two things follow. 1. God's ideal of kingship is found in Jesus Christ, and the nearer 
earthly kings resemble him, and the more perfectly they conform their lives and rule 
to his mind, the better for them and their subjects. 2. On the other hand, our first duty 
is to accept Christ as our King, and in love and loyalty to serve him. Thus we 
shall best fulfil our duty in all other relationships. The best Christian is the best 
subject.— W, F. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The Divine King. This psalm is supposed by some to have been 
written about the time of the coronation of Solomon. The heathen might then be the 
subject nations outside of Palestine, which threatened rebellion at this time. The 
seventh verse is applied to Christ in Heb. i. Let us use the psalm in this higher appli- 
cation of it to Christ. 

L The bebbllioh or thb wobld aoainst Chbist. 1. Ii an unrighteoui rebellion. 



w. in. 1—8.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



17 



Rebellion against eril powers is a righteous thing. But Christ's rule is infinitely ji^st 
and good and merciful. 2. la an unsuccessful rebellion. " The people imagine a vain 
thing" if they think they can orerthrow the rule of Christ. That belongs to the 
eternal order. The sea can shatter granite cliffs, but the throne of Christ is for 
ever and ever. 3. Such rebellion recoils upon the heads of the rebels. Every blow we 
strike against justice, love, anil goodness rebounds upon ourselves ; but we cannot 
injure God, however we may grieve his Fatherly heart. 

II. Christ is King of men. 1. By Divine appointment. (Ver. 6.) And therefore 
Grod is said to laugh at, deride, and utter his wrath in sore displeasure against those 
who opppose him (vers. 4 — 6). 2. By Divine nature and character. " Thou art my 
Son ; this day have I begotten thee " (ver. 7). The Divinest Being of all history, and, 
therefore, a King by the highest of all rights. 3. A King by the actual and possible 
extent of his empire. " I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance," etc. (ver. 8). 
He who has conquered a world is its rightful ruler. Christ is now worthy ; but one 
day he will actually conquer the world. 

ni. The unavoidable inference. That we should be reconciled to God, and be at 
one with Christ. The wrath of God is imendurable, but " blessed are all they that put 
their trust in him." — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM IIL 



This psalm is entitled, "a Psalm of David 
when he fled from Absalom his son ; " 
literally, "in his flight from Absalom his 
son." The historical correctness of the 
title has been questioned (Hitzig, De 
Wette), but without any sufficient reason. 
The Davidioal composition is almost uni- 
versally allowed. If it be asked at what 
time during the flight the psalm may be 
supposed to have been written, the best 
answer would seem to be that of Paulus, 
" on the eve of the battle which is described 
in 2 Sam. xviii. 1—8." 

The composition is made up of three 
parts— a strophe, an antistrophe, and an 
epode, each terminated by the word selah. 
Some critics, however, make out four parts, 
by dividing the epode. But the absence of 
the word selah at the close of ver. 7 is 
against this. 

Yer. 1. — Lord, how are they increased that 
trouble me ! rather, Lord, how numerous are 
they that trouble me ! We are told, in the 
Book of Samuel, that " the conspiracy was 
strong, for the people increased continually 
with Absalom '' (2 Sam. iv. 12), and again, 
» Absalom, and all the people, the men of 
Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel 
with him " (2 Sam. xvi. 15). Ahithophel 
proposed to attack David with twelve 
thousand men only (2 Sam. xvii. 1), but tlie 
actual number which went against him 
must have been far larger, for some twenty 

F8ALUS. 



thousand men, ahlefly, no doubt, Absalom's 
partisans, fell in the battle (2 Sam. xviii 
7). Many are they tbat rise up against me ; 
i.e. " that rebel against me, and rise up in 
arms to make war upon me" (comp. Pas. 
xviii. 48 ; xliv. 5 ; liz. 1, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — Many there be which say of my 
soul, There is no help for him in God. When 
Absalom first raised the standard of revolt, 
there were no doubt many who looked to 
see some signal Divine interposition on 
behalf of the anointed king and against 
the rebel ; but when David fled, and with 
BO few followers (2 Sam. xv. 18), and in his 
flight spoke so doubtfully of his prospects 
(2 Sam. XT. 26), and when no help seemed 
to arise from any quarter, then we can well 
understand that men's opinions changed, 
and they came to think that David was 
God-forsaken, and would succumb to his 
unnatural foe (comp. Ps. Ixxi. 10, 11). 
Partisans of Absalom would see in David's 
ex(>ulsion from his capital a Divine Nemesis 
(2 Sam. xvi. 8), and regard it as quite 
natural that God should not help him. 
Selah. There is no traditional explanation 
of this word. The LXX. rendered it by 
StA^aKjia, which is said to mean " a change 
of the musical tone;" but it is against 
this explanation that selah occurs some- 
times, as here, at the end of a psalm, where 
no change was possible. Other explanations 
rest wholly on conjecture, and are valueless. 

Ver. 3. — But thou, Lord, art a Bhleld for 
me ; or, ahaut me (see the Revised Version). 
(For the sentiment, comp. Gen. xv. 1 ; Deut. 
xxxiii. 29 ; 2 Sam. xxii.' 3 ; Pss. iiviii. 7 ; 
xxxiii. 20 ; Ixxxiv. 9, etc.) The expression 
has peculiar force in David's mouth, who, 
as a " man of war," fully appreciated ths 



18 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. L I. 1— R 



sHving power of a shield. My glory (comp. 
Ps. Ixii. 7). And the lifter up of mine head. 
As God had raised up David to the throne 
(2 Sam. li. 4 ; v. 3), and prospered him in 
his wars (2 Sam. viii. 1—14), and exalted 
him above all the other kings of the period, 
80 he was well able now, if he so willed, to 
restore him to his place and re-establish 
him in the monarchy (comp. 2 Sam. xv. 25 ; 
Ps. xliii. 3). 

Ver. 4. — I cried unto the Lord with my 
▼oice ; rather, I cry unto the Lord with my 
voice ; i.e. earnestly and constantly (comp. 
Pgs. Ixxvii. 1 ; cxiii. 1). And he heard (rather, 
hears) me out of his holy hill ; or, " the hill 
of his holiness " (comp. Ps. ii. 6). Though 
David is in exile at Mahanaim (2 Sam. 
xvii. 24), his thoughts revert to Jerusalem, 
to the holy hUl of Zion, and the ark of 
God, which he has there " set in its place" 
(2 Sam. vi. 17) ; and he knows that God, 
who "dwelleth between the cherubim" 
(1 Sam. iv. 4), will hear him, though so far 
off. Selah (see the romment on ver. 2). 

Ver. 5. — I laid me down and slept ; 
literally, at for me, I laid me doton, etc. A 
contrast seems intended between tlie king 
and some of his companions. "I, for my 
part," he says, "confident in God, calmly 
laid me down and slept; I did not allow 
the danger which I was in to interfere with 
my repose at nij-ht." Others, probably, 
were less trustful. I awaked. When 
moroing eame, i.e., I awoke, as usual, from 
quiet and refreshing slumbers. For the 
Lord sustained me ; rather, tuataineth me. 
Now and always I am sustained by the 
Almighty. 

Ver. 6. — I will not he afraid of ten 
thousands of people. (On the vast multitude 
of people th»t bad collected to attack the 
fugitive king, see the comment on ver. 1.) 
David, however, did not fear them. Like 
Asa (2 Chron. xiv. 11) and Judas Maccabeus 
(1 Mace. iii. 18), he knew that there was no 
real might iu " the multitude of an host " 
(Ps. xxxiii. 16). God could save equally 
with many or with few, and against many 
or against few (comp. 2 Kings vi. 15 —17). 
That have set themselves against me round 
about ; or, ranged themselvei against me 



(Kay) — a military term (comp. Isa, 
xxii. 7) 

Ver. 7. — Arise, lord (comp. Numb. x. 
35; Pss. vii. 6; ix. 19; x. 12; xvii. 13; 
Ixviii. 1). This call is generally made when 
God's forbearance towards his enemies is 
thought to have been excessive, and his 
tolerance of sinners too great. Save me, 
my God. David was in Imminent danger 
" All Israel " had come against him (2 Sam 
xvi. 15). He was short of supplies (2 Sam. 
xvii. 29). He was doubtful how God was dis- 
posed towards him (2 Sam. xv. 25, 26). It was 
a time when, unless God would save, there 
could be no hope. Hence the in tense earnest- 
ness of his prayer. For thou hast smitten 
all mine enemies upon the cheek-bone. Here- 
tofore, i.e., thou liast always taken my part — 
thou hast smitten mine enemies, and given 
me victory over them, and by breaking their 
jaw-bones tliou hast taken away from them 
all power to hurt (see Ps. Iviii. 6). The 
reference is, of course, to David's long series 
of victories, as those over the Philistines 
(2 Sam. v. 17—25; viii. 1), over Moab (2 
Sam. viii. 2), over Hadadezer, King oi 
Zobah (2 Sam. viii. 3, 4), over the Syrians 
of Damascus (2 Sam. viii. 6), over the 
Edomites (2 Sam. viii. 13, 14), over the 
Ammonites (2 Sam. x. 7 — 14), and over the 
" Syrians beyond the river" (2 Sam. x. 16 — 
19). Thou hast broken the teeth of the 
ungodly (comp. Job iv. 10 ; Ps. Iviii. 6). 
The ungodly, enemies alike of David and 
of God, are represented as wild beasts 
whose weapons are their jaws and teeth. 
Let God break these, and they are harmless. 

Ver. 8. — Salvation belongeth unto the 
Lord ; or, salvation is the Lord's (Kay). " To 
him alone it belongs to save or to destroy. 
Therefore is my prayer addressed to him, 
and him only " (see ver. 7). Thy blessing 
is upon thy people ; rather, let thy blessing 
be upon thy people. " Whatever becomes of 
me," i.e., " let thy people be blest " (Kay). 
David is not deterred, by the revolt of almost 
the whole people against him, from com- 
mending them to God, entreating God's 
blessing upon them, and desiring their wel- 
fare. He echoes Moses (Exod. xxxii. 81, 
32) ; he anticipates Christ (Luke xxiii. 34). 



HOMILBTICS. 

Ver. 3. — God the believer's Olory. " My Glory." When Joseph said to his brothers 
"Ye shall tell my father of all my glory," he meant the dignity and power to which 
God's wonder-working providence had raised him from the dungeon. In an hour it had 
suddenly become his ; and any hour death might as suddenly bereave him of it. When 
God says, " My glory will I not give to another," he speaks of that which is eternally, 
essentially, unchangeably his own. But in the text, faith boldly blends these two 
in one. It claims as portion no perishable glory, but the everlasting (creator himself. He 



PB. in.l— «.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 19 

permits his creature, servant, child, to say, " Thou, Lord, art . . . my Glory ! " How 
may we Christians make these words our own ? How may we make God our " Glory " ? 

I. By the knowledge of God. Knowledge is the key of power over nature. 
Man's pre-eminence over all lower creatures is in his intellect. The world pays 
homage to great thinkers and discoverers, who widen the sphere of human knowledge. 
But " thus saitb the Loid " (Jer. ix. 23, 24 ; John xvii. 3 ; 2 Cor. iv. 6). 

IL By cub belonging to God. What honour attends even the infant children of 
a king ! But the humblest Christian is a child of God (1 John iii. 1). What reverence 
is paid to relics, even of little value, that belonged to some great poet, statesman, warrior, 
etc. I But the poorest Christian is among God's jewels (Mai. iii. 17, where the 
Authorized Version is more nearly literal than the Revised Version). 

IlL By claiming his promise. His pledged word is ours. Men glory in wealth 
that lays the world at their disposal ; in a fortress no foe can seize ; a victorious army ; 
a matchless navy. What are these compared with the wealth, security, triumph, of 
trust in (iod (Ps. xxvii. 1 ; Prov. iviii. 10; 1 Cor. iii. 22, 23)? 

IV. By likeness to Gad. (2 Cor. iiL 18; 1 John iii. 2.) This will be the glory 
of the Church for ever (Isa. Ix. 19). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — A morning song in perilous times. In this case, as in othert, the 
words which in our version form the title of the psalm are in the Hebrew its first 
verse. And they enahle us, with less than the usual uncertainty, to fix on the historic 
occasion on which it was written. This is one of those psalms which come under 
those in the first division of the introductory homily. It is an historical psalm, and 
as such it must be studied and estimated.* As an illustration of the way in which 
excellent men have turned aside from the obvious intent of a psalm to put fancied 
dogmatic meanings of their own into it, Luther's interpretation of this psalm is a choice 
specimen.' By such a process, men not only proceed on insecure bases, but they lose 
very much of the instruction which the historical psalms are calculated to afibrd. 
The evangelical truth which they think they find here is abundantly taught else- 
where ; hence nothing is gained ; while very much is lost by their_ failing to note 
the fine shades of personal experience, emotion, and character with which these psalms 
are marked. We have here one of the many priceless specimens of an Old Testament 
saint's experience — struggle, prayer, victory, song. "As in water face answereth 
to face, so the heart of man to man." And it has brought comfort to many a struggling 
soul in the hard conflicts of life, to find how believers in bygone times have gone 
through trials even sharper than their own. We note in this psalm five stages of 
personal experience. 

I. Peril. (Vers. 1, 2.) (In order to introduce this psalm vividly to the people, 
a preacher should study closely the historic incidents to which it refers.') The writer 
was (1) compassed with foes ; (2) surrounded with plots and snares ; (3) scoffed at 
for his piety. " There is no help for him in God." Those who were plotting against 
him thought they had laid their plans securely, and that none could upset them. So it 
was with Daniel and with St. Peter. Note : If the people of God have to strugo:le hard 
with opposers and revilers, let them remember that they have had and shall have 
" companions in tribulation ; " and that the experience of the saints of old, and of the 
course they adopted, is here recorded as a help for them. 

II. Peayeb. (Ver. 4.) " I cried unto the Lord with my voice." The name of God 

> « We can hardly be wrong in accepting the title, which states that the third paalm was 
written by David when he fled from Absalom his sou, and the third psalm carries the 
fourth with it" (Kirkpatriok, 'Cambridge Bible,' p. 13). 

' See SpuTgeon's 'Treasury of David,' vol. i., in loc, and also another view of the psalm 
by Cheyne (1888), who also omits the title. But he gives no reason either for the 
omission or for his view of the psalm as a national one. In his Bampton Lectures, Dr. 
Cheyne says that the Jewish Church, in whose name the psalmist speaks, did not exist in 
the days of David. What is his warrant for these statements? 

• 2 Sam. xvi., xvii- See also the marvellous sketch in Dean Stanley's lectures. 



20 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. at. 1—8 

used by the psalmist is the revealed name of Israel's redeeming Qod, Jehovah. Of 
the vast meaning of this name the scoffing heathen knew nothing. And now, when 
the world scornfully asks, " Where is their God ? " they do so in entire ignorance of 
the blessed throne of grace to which the believer can repair. " With my voice " — while 
their voice defies God, my voice shall address God. The blessed reality of inter- 
communion with the infinite and eternal Qod, through his own appointed way of sacrifice 
and mediation, is one of which the carnal mind knows absolutely nothing. None 
laugh at prayer who understand what it is. Those who know Oroi know well that he 
is a Refuge and a Hiding-place in any time of trouble. 

III. Kbscde. In Ood he has a deliverer. In three forms is this expressed, each 
one full of suggestivenesB. 1. A Shield. The word means more than this, even 
a protection which compasses one around. 2. My Qlory. The believer can make 
his boast in God, even when men are scoffing at the great Name. 3. The Li/ter-ttp oj 
my head. One who enables me to rise superior to my troubles, and to smile upon 
them. All these expressions show not only what God was to David, but what he ii 
to the saints still. Note : Whether we sink in trouble or rise above it will depend on 
our faith and prayer. We may fetch such help from Gk)d as will enable us to " smils 
at the storm." 

IV. Peablessness. 1. In spite of aU his foes. Tie could lie down and sleep. How 
many a wakeful night would have become one of sweet repose if the troubled ones did 
but thus hide in God I As the little child sleeps away his griefs on his mother's breast, 
so we can have sweetest repose when we make God our Hiding-place. The prophecy 
is, " A man shall be as a hiding-place from the wind," etc. 2. As he sleeps in holy 
calm, so he awakes in holy eowage, (Ver. 6.) " I will not be afraid," etc. (of. Pss. xivi., 
xlvi.). The courage of David, Elijah, Jeremiah, Daniel, etc., may well be repeated in 
us. "Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?" 3. The 
answers to prayer already received strengthen his confidence /or the/uture. (Vers. 4, 7.) 
" He heard me," etc. ; " Thou hast smitten all mine enemies," ^ etc. ; and because this 
has been so, his faith in future deliverances is confirmed. 

V. Testikont. The psalmist had prayed to Jehovah; he now testifies /or him, 
as the result of bis experience. 1. ExperieTKe furnishes the best answer to the scorner. 
In ver. 2 David quotes the words of the heathen, "There is no help for him in 
God ; " but he knows better. He has tried what prayer will do. He has asked for 
help, and help has come. So that in direct opposition to wicked men, and as the 
result of positive knowledge, he can affirm, " Salvation belongeth unto the Lord," i.«. 
(same Hebrew word as in ver. 2) " help " or deliverance. This, of course, would b« 
true of salvation from sin, etc. ; but that is not its reference here. It means deliverance 
or help in any time of trouble. 2 Experience warrants a confident statement of the 
truth. " Thy blessing is upon thy people." How rich this blessing (or favour) of God 
is cannot be told in words. Not even the Old Testament saints knew its fulness of 
wealth and glory. Not till such teachings as Bom. viii. 31 — 39 were known to 
believers was it possible that they should. Of this blessing it was then true, " Eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man, what God hath 
prepared for tbem that loye him." And in Rev. vii. the double form of that blessing 
is given (see the present writer's homily thereon), viz. safe keeping now, while in 
the tribulation ; and safe leadership out of the great tribulation, to the glory yet to be 
revealed! — 0. 

Ver. 8. — Bright morning after a dark night. L The sobbows or the night. Th» 
darkness without images the darkness within. 1, There is the consciousness of danger. 

> No diffioulty ought ever to have arisen on the " morality " of such phrases in the psalma. 
They are the expressions of man, not words of God. And, when read in the light of the history 
to which they belong, it would be very strange if any should find fanlt with them ; since no 
believer's thoughts and prayers can possibly rise above the measure of light to which that 
believer has attained. With our fuller light, we ought to rise above such expressions, but 
it is unseemly if we reflect disparagingly upon those who, in those early days and in such 
eiroumstances, uttered them. Old Tesrameiit morality is not to be measured by the 
expressions of this or that individual believer, any more than New Testament morality ii 
to be me.isured by the letters of Cromwell. 



n. m. 1— «.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 81 

Enemies are numerous. Thrice are they called " many." They are also strong and 
merciless — wild beasts that make the night hideous with their roaring. 2. Worse still, 
there is the feeling of helplessness. Friends are p;one. Solitary and forsaken, all seems 
lost. There is no star of hope to break the gloom. The piteous cry of onlookers is 
echoed by our own hearts, " No help 1 " 3. But worst of all is the sense of sin. If 
conscience were clear, if we could say that trouble had come upon us without fault of 
our own, this might help us to be brave and patient. If all were right within, we 
might dare the rage of our enemies, and defy the babble of an idle world; but alas! it 
is otherwise. We have been foolish and disobedient. We have obstinately persisted 
in our own way, and have not set the Lord before us. Hence the heart sinks. At 
inch a time the peril is great. We are on the brink of the gulf. Well for us if in 
our misery we turn to God, 

II. Thb jots of the MOBNmo. As the true light shines, we see things more 
clearly. We gain more self-control, and better thoughts arise. As from a troubled 
dream awaking, we look back with shame at our weakness and our fears. If the 
"many" are against us, "God is for us." This is enough. Therefore we put on the 
armour of light, and gird ourselves with invigorated strength and hope for the work 
of a new day. 1. Refreshment. " Slept." Body and soul have been benefited. We 
feel that virtue has come to us. It is of God. He giveth sleep, 2, Renewed hope. 
Another night is gone, and we are not only spared, but saved. If there is work to do, 
we have now the will to take it in hand. If there are difSculties before us, we have 
now the heart to face them with resolution. Our enemies may shoot at us, but God 
is our Shield. 3. Anticipated victory. (Vers. 8, 9.) We rise to a better conception of 
God. So far as we are in sympathy with him, we are in the right. So far as we are 
on the side of God, and fighting for him, we are strong and must prevail. His honour 
is concerned for our" defence. What he has promised, he will surely perform. 
Alleluia I But let us take a word of caution. While we seek the destruction of evil, 
let us work for the salvation of our enemies. Also a word of encouragement. Belief 
does not always come, or does not come in the way we wish. The grief that saps the 
mind may be ours, the burden of care and trouble may lie heavy on our souls. The 
morning, which brings joy to others, may leave us still in gloom. Our very trials 
may be enhanced by contrast. The light once sweet to the eyes may now be bitter. 
The music and the flowers and the beautiful things of earth, that once brought us 
delight, may only aggravate our woe. Our interest in others may falter, and our 
capability for the duties of life may fail. But still let us hope in God. The morning 
Cometh, and also the night ; but for God's people there is the sure hope of the morning 
that will usher in eternal day. — W. P. 

Ver. 6. — The truth about numbers. We have heard of the vox regis, and in these 
last days we are threatened with the equally dangerous and delusive vox populi. Let 
us consider — 

I. Numbers do not deteeminb the question of bioht. There is a tendency 
with many to shirk responsibility. They look to others. Surely what the many 
say must be right. But this is folly. God has given us reason and freedom. We 
must judge for ourselves. Only what we know to be true can be truth to us ; only 
what we" feel in our consciences to be right can be binding upon us as duty. 
Besides, we see how often in the past the few b»ve been in the right, not the many. 
Noah by his faith condemned the world. Elijah acood alone against the priests of Baal. 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego dared the fiery furnace rather than bow with the 
multitude before the golden idol. Only when the people are all righteous can they be 
all right. 

II. Numbers do not determine thb question of success. No_ doubt there are 
time's when numbers prevail. The few are crushed by the mere weight and force of 
the multitude. It has been said that « God is on the side of the biggest battalions ; " 
but this is true in only a limited sense. Suppose the battalions are undisciplined or 
badly commanded, defeat may come instead of victory. But in the nobler fields — in 
the strife of truth and felsehood — how often has the victory been with the few, instead 
of the many 1 Besides, the question, in the deepest sense, is not — What will succeed ? 
but— What is ri<.'ht ? 



22 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. it. 1—8. 

" He is a slave, who will not be 
In the right, with two or three." 

Farther, we must not meai-ure suocesa by the poor standards of this world. What 
seems failure to us may be victory in the sight of the holy angels and of God. 

IIL Numbers do not detbrminb the question op happiness. It is hard to stand 
alone. It costs a struggle to dare tn be singularly good. But better far have peace 
within than sacrifice conscience to convenience, and freedom to popularity. St. Peter was 
happier shut up in prison than when, in fear of men, he denied his Lord. St. Paul was 
infinitely more calm and joyous when he stood before Nero than when, with all the 
authority of the Sanhedrin, he set out on his fierce crusade against the Christians. Better 
be true than false ; better be free than the slave of opinion ; better, with St. Stephen 
and the martyrs, press heavenwards through " peril, toil, and pain," than follow a multi- 
tude to do evil. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — David's dependence on God. This psalm written by David at the time 
Df Absalom's revolt, reminds one of the poet's lines — 

" Most wretched men 
Are cradled into poetry by wrong; 
They learn in suffering what they teach in song." 

I. A COURSE OF AGGRAVATED TROUBLE AND DANGER. 1. Gaused by a tenderly hehved 
son. And yet David never mentions him ; a sign how deeply he was wounded. The 
silence tells more than speech would do. 2. Not only his throne, but his life, was in 
danger. See the account of David's flight in 2 Sam. xv. 3. Sis enemies charge him 

' with being abandoned of God. As well as deserted by the people. His late sin with 
Bathsheba would make the charge plausible, and tend to shake his faith in God. 

II. David's resolute faith in God. 1. Inspired by his past experience. (Vers. 3, 
4.) God had been his Defence, Inspiration, and Help in times past, in answer to Lit 
constant cries. "Shield" (Gen. xv. 1). "Lifter up of my head." The head hangs 
down in trouble. " Holy hill : " Zion, where was the ark of the covenant. 2. Inspiring 
• present sense of peace and security. (Vers. 5, 6.) The Divine arm was his pillow, 
and lie slept; the Divine hand raised him up, and he woke with such a sense of 
security that he was not afraid of the thousands that were encamped against him. 

III. A PASSIONATE CRT FOR HELP AND VICTORY IN HIB PRESENT STRAITS. Urged 

again by an appeal to the past. "Thou that didst save me from the teeth of the lion 
and the bear, and didst destroy mine enemies on every side, rise up now for me against 
them that rise up against me." " Help me, God ! " This w his courageous aw^st 
to the mocking exultation of bis enemies when they say, " ITiere is no help for him 
in God." He replies, " To JehovaJ" belongeth help," or " the victory ; " help, not in this 
strait only, but help for the need), li all times and ia all places. 

IV. A NOBLE PRATER FOR HIS MISGUIDSD, REBELLIOUS SUBJECTS. He thought of 

the horrors of a civil war, and he forgot himself in his anxiety for the welfare of his 
people. This is royal and generous — when we in our utmost danger can cherish a 
deep concern for the safety of others. David reminds us of St. Stephen, who, with 
the spirit as well as the face of an angel, cried, " Lord, lay not this sin to their charge ; " 
and pre-eminently of him who said, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what 
they do."— S. 

EXPOSITION. 



PSALM rv. 

Again thn p.-alm has a title, "Tn the 
chief Musician on Nfginoth. A P.-alm of 
David ; " literally, " to the superintendent or 
foreman," which, in this instance, wonld he 
the choir-leader, or "precentor" (Kay). 
"On Nepinoth " is supposed tn mean "for 



stiing<d instruments " (Hensstenberg, R.aj, 
' Speaker's Cnmmentary,' Revised Version 
etc.); comp. Isa. xxxviii. 20. The author- 
ship of David is generally allowed; but 
there is nothing to mark the exact oiroum- 
stances under which the psalm was written. 
In its metrical structure it very much re- 
semlilea Ps. iii., bein? composed, like that, 



PB. IV. 1—8.] 



THE BOOK oF PSALMS. 



23 



of a short strophe (vers. 1, 2), a short anti- 
strophe (vers. 3, 4), and a longer epode 
(vers. 5 — 8). The division- are marked, a< 
in Pi. iii., by the introduction of the word 
wlah, perhaps meaning " pause," or "rest." 

Ver. 1. — Hear me when I call, God of 
my righteousness. Not "the God who 
imputes to me righteousness," as some 
render, but " the God wlio sees that I and 
my cause are righteous," and who will 
therefore certainly lend me aid. Thou hast 
enlarged me ; or, made room for me — " set 
me at ease." In the language of the Old 
Testament, "straits" and "narrowness" 
mean trouble and affliction; "room," 
"space," "enlargement," mean prosperity. 
David has experienced God's mercies in the 
past, and therefore looks for them in the 
future (comp. Ps. iii. 7). When I was in 
distress; literally, in [my] distress. Have 
mercy upon me, and hear my prayer. This 
is David's usual cry, repeated in a hundred 
varied forms throughout the Psalms (see 
Pss. V. 2; vi. 2; ix. 13; xxvii. 7; xxx. 10, 
etc.). 

Ver. 2. — ye sons of men. '' Sons of 
men " — heney ish — is not a mere periphrasis 
for " men." It is a title of some honour 
and dignity. Kay translates, " sons of the 
brave ; " but that is scarcely the meaning. 
The phrase is rather equivalent to our 
"sirs" ('Speaker's Commentary'). How 
Jong will ye turn my glory into shame 1 By 
your misconduct. See the clause which 
follows. The appeal is, perhaps, to Joab, 
Abishai, and others of David's own party, 
whose proceedings were a disgraee to his 
reign, and tended to bring tlieir master to 
shame rather than to honour. How long 
will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing t 
i.e. after lying. Joab's treachery and 
falsehood were notorious (2 Sam. iii. 27; 
IX. 8—10). 

Ver. 3. — But know that the Lord hath set 
apart him that is godly for himself. The 
best Older of the words would be, " Know 
that the Lord hath set apart for himself the 
man that is godly." The godly man is not 
contaminated by the evil doings of those 
who associate with him, and profess to act 
in his interest, if he neithei' authorizes nor 
condones their conduct. David had pro- 
tested against Joab's proceedings on one 
occasion (2 Sam. iii. 28), and never at any 
time pardoned them (1 Kings ii. 5, 6). 
The Lord will hear when I call unto him. 
Although I am disgraced (ver. 2), resisted, 
in many ways brought to shame, by you, 
yet still I am God's servant, set apart to 
his service, and therefore 1 shall be heard 
by him. He will hearken to and grant my 
prayer. 



Ver. i. — Stand in awe, and sin not. Tlie 
LXX. render, 'OpyiCfoSe xai /lij aixapriveTe, 
"Be ye angry, and sin not;" and this 
meaning is preferred by Dr. Kay, Hengsten- 
berg, and others. It may also seem to have 
the sanction of St. Paul in Bph. iv. 26. If 
we adopt it, we must suppose the exhorta- 
tion to be addressed mainly to David's own 
followers, who are warned against excessive 
anger and its natural result, undue violence 
(comp. 2 Sam. xvi. 9; xviii. 11, 14; xix. 
21, etc.). Commune with your own heart 
upon your bed, and be stUl (compare St. 
Paul's injunction, "Let not the sun go down 
upon your wrath "). Anger couls if a little 
time be suffered to pass — if a night be 
allowed for reflection, and no action be 
taken till the morrow. Ilouei yiip op-fyv i 
Xpivos (Aristotle). Selah. The second 
strophe being ended, another " pause " is to 
take place, during which the ps.ilmist's 
exhortation may be made the subject of 
consideration. 

Ver. 5 — Offer the saorifioes of righteous- 
ness. Sacrifices of victims are scarcely 
meant ; certainly not, if tlie time of the 
composition is that of David's exile, since 
victims could be offered nowhere but at 
Jerusalem. We may suppose a reference 
to those sacrifices which are most truly 
" sacrifices of righteousness," viz. " a broken 
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart," which 
God " will not despise " (Ps. li. 17). And 
put your trust in the Lord. Sacrifice with- 
out faith is vain. Even "sacrifices of 
righteousness," to be of any service, must 
be accompanied by trust in the Lord. 

Ver. 6. — There be many that say, Who 
will show us any good? Pessimists are 
numerous in all ages. Among David's 
adherents in his times of distress (ver. 1) 
would be many who doubted and desponded, 
anticipating nothing but continued suffer- 
ing and misfortune. Tlwy would ask the 
question of the text. Or the scope may be 
wider. Men are always seeking for good, 
but not knowing what their true good is. 
David points it out to them. It is to have 
the light of God's countenance shining on 
them. Lord, lift thou up, etc. ; compare the 
form of Levitical benediction (Numb. vi. 
24 — 26), and see also Pss. xxxi. !'• (xxx. 3, 
7, 19. If we bask in the suushinfa of God's 
favour, there is nothing more t^ded for 
happiness. 

Ver. 7. — Tlioa hast put gladness in my 
heart. David is an example to the de- 
sponding ones. Notwithstanding his suffer- 
ings and calamities, God has looked on him, 
and so "put gladness in his heart" — a glad- 
ness which far exceeds that of his adver- 
saries. Though they are in prosperity, and 
have their com and wine increused, and 
enjoy all the " outward material blessings 



24 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. IT. 1—8. 



promised ts Israel — the wheat and the 
grape— for a supply of which he is indebted 
to the generosity of friends " (Kay), yet he 
would not change places with them. The 
ipiritual joy which fills his own heart is 
preferable to any amount of material com- 
forts and pleasures. 

Ver. 8. — I will both lay me down in peace, 
and sleep (oomp. Ps. ili. 5). His. con- 
fidence in God enables David to lay himself 
down calmly and tranquilly to sleep, what- 
ever dangers threaten him. He seeks hia 



couch, and at onee (I'^n*) ilumber Tisiti 
him. No anxious thoughts keep him toss- 
ing on his bed for honrs. 7or thou, Lord, 
only makest me dwell in safety. David has 
a satisfaction in thinking that it is Gk>d 
only who watches over him. All other help 
would be vain, superfluous. God alone 
brought Israel through the wilderness 
(Deut. xxxii. 12); God alone established 
Israel in Canaan (Ps. xliv. 2, 3). David 
feels that he needs no second helper and 
protector. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 3. — OotCs care for the righteous, " But know ... for himself," A tone of 
solemn calm, like summer twilight, pervades this evening pialm, which naturally 
follows Ps. lii., a morning psalm. But here is no lotmd of war or peril from foei. The 
psalmist speaks, not as king to rebels, but as prophet to the " soni of men " — the nnbe- 
Ueving world. "My glory" (ver. 2) may be taken as in Ps. iii. 3. Idolatry turns 
worship from man's most glorious to his most debasing act (Ps. cvi. 20 ; Rom. i. 23). 
Israel was a little isle of light amid heathen darkness. The psalmist warns his fellow- 
men — especially Israelites tempted by the gorgeous impure heathen rites — that idolatry 
ii "emptiness" and "lies" (ver. 2). In contrast, he affirms two glorious certainties: 
(1) the righteous is God's special care ; (2) God does hear prayer. 

I. The BIOET1S0U8 is God's bpeciai. oabe. " The Lord hath set apart," etc. This 
is just the most offensive view in which salvation can be presented to a great many. 
They have no objection to a religion that deals in generalities, involves no personal dis- 
tinctions, consists in doctrines which all can assent to, rites all can join in. But a iharp 
separation " between him that serveth God, and him that serveth him not " (Mai. iiL 18) 
is intolerable to them. They resent it, as narrow, Pharisaical. Tet, on the reality 
and certainty of such severance, here and hereafter, the whole religious teaching 
of the Bible, Old Testament and New Testament alike, turns. You and I stand each 
in perianal relation to God, for good or for ill. 1. "Set apart" hj /orgiveneu of 
tin. Pardon is universally proclaimed (Luke xxiv. 47), but can be bestowed and 
received only personally (Matt. ix. 2). " He pardoneth and dbtolveth," etc. (English 
Liturgy). True repentance and unfeigned faith are personal ; so, therefore, is forgive- 
ness. As it cannot be collective, so neither can it be partiaH. You are forgiven or 
not forgiven; reconciled or not reconciled (John iii. 36; 2 Cor. v. 20). 2. By the 
illumination, guidance, strength, quickening and sanctifying grace of the Holy Spirit. 
(Bom. viii. 9.) 3. Hence, by practical disdpleship ; personal obedience. (John viii. 12 ; 
xiv. 21 — 24.) "For himself." No higher glory and happiness are conceivable than 
that promised (Mai. iii. 17). There is nothing narrow or arbitrary in this. God says, 
" All souls are mine." But we have the fearful power of ignoring this claim, refusing 
God's offers, disobeying his commands, despising his promises and warnings ; practically 
denying our relation to him ; and, if so, must take the consequences (1 John v. 12). 

n. God does bsab pkateb, "The Lord will hear," etc. This follows as an 
inference. 1. Such personal relationship to God would be impossible unless we can 
speak to him and be sure of an answer. Prayer is the natural language of faith ; the 
obvious condition of pardon ; the appointed means of obtaining the Holy Spirit (Luke 
ix. 9, 13). 2. Prayer is the expression and exercise of our personal relation to God 
(Ps. cxix. 73, 94). That God should invite and bring us into this personal relation, 
and then refuse to hold converse with us, is utterly incredible. It would be to deny 
himself. This is the testimony of experience. Reason says it must be so. Etxperi- 
ence says it ii so. 



Ver. 4. — Fear of tin, " Stand in awe, and sin not, 
afraid of sin ; no true courage in daring to break 



." There is no cowardice in being 
God's Law and defy God's anger. 



PS. nr. 1— 8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 25 



Joseph was no coward, but a brave man, when he said, " How can I do this great 
wickedness, and sin against God?" "Perfect love," St. John tells us, "castethout 
fear, because fear hath torment." Here slavish fear is meant — the fear that drives men 
from God, makes them hypocrites, hating God all the more because they make believe 
to love him. But there is a fear which has no torment, but is akin to love, not love's 
foe; a fear that does not drive us from God, but makes us flee from ourselves tn 
take refuge ia him ; • fear that has nothing base or weak in it, but ennobles aud 
strengthens the soul. 

" Fear him, ye saints, and you will then 
Have nothing else to fear." 

To such fear our Saviour gives a place of honour and power among evangelical motives 
(Luke xii. 4, 5). Proposition : To point out some chief reasons for cherishing the fear 
of sin. 

I. Because of what bin is in BEaABD to Qod. 1. It insults the majesty of Qod. 
Sin practically denies the existence or else the authority of God ; and puts scorn on his 
warnings, as though he means not what he says, " The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 
Scripture represents sin as atheism (Pa. xivr. 1; Titus i. 16). Yet Plato was not 
correct when he thought <M sin ignorance. Sin is often wilful, against light (Bom. 1. 32 ; 
Luke xii. 47). There is a way of talking of the love of God which tends to rob love 
itself of all moral character. People talk almost as if they thought of the eternal 
Creator as the almighty servant-of-all-work of the taniverse, whose business is to 
minister to his creatures and make them happy, whether they obey him or not. Take 
away the authority of God, and you take away worship. How could we worship a 
Being who made laws to be kept or broken at pleasure, and uttered threats he never 
meant to fulfil ; affixed nominal penalties, only to make his justice the jest of the 
universe ? This is what sin would do, if allowed to run to its full length — what every 
wilful sin tends to. Imagine an insult publicly offered to the sovei'eign of this great 
nation. What indignation I Why ? Because, in the person of the sovereign, the 
whole nation would be insulted and injured. But the Divine majesty does not repre- 
sent the universe — is not derived from it. God is the sole Fountain of all that is 
glorious, noble, right, good, happy. 2. Sin grieves Ood. How can we think other- 
wise? He is "the Father of spirits." Does not he desire to see in every spirit the 
filial likeness, the image of himself? Scripture uses very bold language; but its 
strongest figures do not exaggerate, but fall below the truth (Gen. vL 6; Amos ii. 13; 
Isa. xliii. 24). It was no light burden, no imaginary load, when the Son of God " bare 
our sins." We might go on to speak of how sin robs Ood by destroying all that is 
precious. But this leads to another reason for fearing sin. 

IL Beoadbb or what sin is to the sinneb. 1. Sin breaks the inward law of man's 
nature ; defaces God's image ; destroys man's power to know God. People complain 
that the Bible is over-severe regarding sin ; too hard on human nature in representing it 
as fallen, corrupt, dead. They forget the reason — the noble and lofty view the Bible takes 
of man. '* A little lower than the angels ; " " The offspring of the Godhead ; " " Made in 
the image of God." A ruined hut is no great matter, but a palace in ruins is a woeful 
spostacle. We need not go back to Paradise. We see what human nature ought to 
be, and, but for sin, wmM be, in Jesus (Rom. viii. 3). 2, Sin is the bitter fountain of 
haman misery ; it is spiritual death. Sin must die, or we must die in our tins (John 
Tiii. 24; Rom. vi. 12,21). 

III. Because op what sin is to othebs. Oh, the harvest of broken hearts, ruined 
lives, blasted hopes, wasted powers, desolate homes ; of disease, agony, despair, death j 
which sin sows and reaps every day ! " One sinner destroyeth much good." He perishes 
not alone (Josh. xxii. 20). This is a false proverb, " Nobody's enemy but his own." 
His own enemy is everybody's enemy. Pt-ople gloss sin over with light words. On« 
of the sweetest words in our tongue, " gay," is used as a perfume to drown the stench 
of the vilest sins. " He is only sowing his wild oats." His f Where did he get 
them ? Prom what happy home did he steal them ? Who gave him leave to steal 
them ? What will be the harvest ? and who will reap it ? You say, " He will come all 
right by-and-by." Suppose he does ; will those come right whom he has helped to 
mislead and ruin ? " No man dieth tn himsplf." 



26 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. it. 1—8, 

IV. Lastly, because of what sin has cost. " The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth 
from all sin" (1 John i. 7). What must sin be, if that is what was needed for its 
cleansing ? Everywhere in the N-iw Testament, side by side with the freest invitations 
of the gospel, stands the awful trith that he who knew no sin has been " made sin for 
us." " By his stripes we are healed." The cross is the mightiest persuasive to " stand 
in awe, and sin not." 

Vers. 6, 7. — The supreme quest of life. " There be many,'' etc. Both the Church 
and the world were very different in David's day from what they were in our Lord's 
day ; and in that from what they are to-day. But the contrast was as real, the 
opposition as strong. The cleavage between the party of God's will and the party of 
self-will went right through the heart of human life then, and does now. Consciously 
or not, we all rank on one side or the other. These words bring out the contrast very 
strongly as regards the supreme aim and quest of life. 

I. The wokldliko's mistake. David looked out on the rush and bustle of life, and 
listened to the voices of the crowd. One cry came from all sides, " Who will show us 
any good?" Where can we find happiness? On all sides there is the same illusion 
and blunder — the notion that happiness means something outside us instead of within. 
It is the same to-day. Happiness, people think, can be purchased with gold, packed in 
bales and boxes, poured out of bottles, caught in crowds, assured by parchments duly 
signed. Everywhere are the broken empty cisterns, crying out against the folly of 
those who hewed them out ; yet everywhere is the same din of hammer and chisel 
hewing out new ones, the same neglect of " the Fountain of living waters." 

II. The believer's ohoiob. " Lift thou," etc. From the world, the psalmist turns 
to God. " Light " sometimes means knowledge (John xvii. 3 ; 2 Cor. iv. 6) ; but 
here rather the favour and manifested love of God. Smiles are the sunshine of the 
face, lighting up the inmost chambers of the heart (comp. Numb. vi. 25; Frov. 
xvi. 15). 

III. The saints' bxpeeibnce. (Ver. 7.) The psalmist's prayer (ver. 6) was not 
for a new iUssing — not a sudden aspiration. It was the outcome of experience. He 
contrasts the golden harvests and " rivers of oil " of him who has " much goods laid up 
for many years," but " is not rich toward God," with his own portion — joy in the heart ; 
and feels that this is " the true riches." If he has not what the world calls "happi- 
ness," he has something infinitely richer — blessedness. The worldling's quest is like 
chasing a will-o'-the-wisp ; the Christian's, like steering by the north star. If we 
have received God's greatest gifts, we may well trust him for the rest (Bom. viii. 32) 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — An evening song in perilous times, showing us the secret of happiness. 
It is not diflSoult to be cheerful when we have everything we desire. But when 
life seems to be a series of catastrophes, disappointments, and vexations, buoyancy 
of spirit is not so easily attained. If our lives were in peril every moment througi* 
rebellion at home and plots and snares around, few of us would be found capable, 
under such circumstances, of writing morning and evening hymns. Yet such were the 
circumstances under which David wrote this psalm and the one which precedes it. 
Both of them belong, in all probability, to the time of Ahithophel's conspiracy, of 
Absalom's rebellion, when the king was a fugitive, camping out with a few of his 
followers. Such reverses, moreover, were none the easier to bear, when he had the 
reSection that because of his own sin the sword was in his house, and was piercing his 
own souL Yet even thus, as he htd "a heart at leisure from itself" to write his song 
of morning praise, so does he also j«n his evening prayer.' We picture him thus : Any 

' On the relation between Pss. iii. and iv., see Dr. Forbes's ' Studies on the Psalms ' (1888), 
pp. 199, 200 — a most suggestive and instructive work). What Dr. Cheyne means by 
thinking of this and the preceding one as Church psalms, we cannot imagine. There is not 
a trace of anything of the kind. 



PS. IT. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 27 

moment a fatal stroke may fall on him. His adversaries prowl around. They hav- 
rich stores of provisions and of gold, while he himself has to depend for the means of 
subsistence on supplies brought to his camp from without. Unscrupulous rebels were 
in power, while David and his host were like a band of men who are dependent on 
begging or on plunder. But it was precisely this combination of ills that brought out 
some of the finest traits in his character. Even then he can take up his pen and 
write, " Thou hast put gladness," etc. ; " I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep : 
for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety." Here, then, we have one of God's 
people, who has seen calmer days, writing in his tent and telling of a secret of peace 
and joy which nothing can disturb. It is a secret worth knowing. Let us ascertain 
what it is. 

I. Herb is an inquiry put. •• Who will show us good? " By which is meant, not 
so much — What is good in itself? as — What will make us happy, and bring us a 
sense of satisfaction ? Over and above our intellectual, we have emotional faculties. 
The emotions are to the spiritual part of us what the sensations are to the bodily part. 
Among the various fallacies of some wise men of this world, one of the wildest is that 
emotion has no place in the search after, and in the ascertainment of, truth. It would 
be quite safe to reverse that, and to say that unless the emotions have their rightful 
play, few truths can be rightly sought or found. An equilibrium of absolute indiffer- 
ence concerning truth or error would be a guilty carelessness. Our craving after 
happiness is God's lesson to us through the emotions, that we are dependent for 
satisfaction on something outside us ; and when such satisfaction is actually reached, 
it is so far the sign that the higher life is being healthfully sustained. Our nature is 
too complex to be satisfied with supply in any one department. Our intellectual 
nature craves the true. Our moral nature craves the right. Our sympathetic nature 
calls for Love. Our conscious weakness and dependence call for strength from another. 
Our powers of action demand a sphere of service which shal' neither corrupt nor 
exhaust. Our spiritual nature cries out for God, life, and immortality. Who can 
show us " good" that will meet ail these wants? Such is the inquiry. 

II. There are those who know how to answer the inquiry. (Ver. 7, " Thou 
hast put gladness in my heart," etc.) The psalmist shows us : 1. The source of his joy. 
God — God himself. How often do the psalmists luxuriate in telling wliftt God was 
to them — Bock, Shield, Sun, High Tower, Fortress, Refuge, Strength, Salvation, their 
Exceeding Joy ! Much more is this the case now we know God in Christ. In him 
we have revealed to us through the Spirit nobler heights, deeper depths, larger 
embraces, and mightier triumphs of divinely revealed love than Old Testament saints 
could possibly conceive. 2. One excellent feature of this joy is the sense of security 
it brings with it in the most perilous surroundings (see last verse). (Let the Hebrew 
student closely examine this verse. He will gain thereby precious glimpses of a 
meaning deeper than any bare translation can give.) The psalmist discloses and 
suggests further : 3. The quality and degree of the joy, "More than . . . when their 
corn and their wine increaseth." (1) The gladness is of a far higher quality. A 
filial son's joy in the best of fathers is vastly superior to the delight a child has in his 
toys. So joy in God himself for what he is, is infinitely higher than delight in what 
he gives. (2) It is a gladness of greater zest. No joy in worldly things that a carnal 
man ever reached can approximate to the believer's joy in God. It is a joy " unspeak- 
able, and full of glory." (3) It is a gladness remarkable for its persistency. The 
worldling's joy is tor the bright days of life. Joy in God is for every day, and com( s 
out most strikingly in the darkest ones— David, Daniel; Shadrach, Meshach, and 
Abednego; Peter, John, Stephen, Paul and Silas, etc. We never I; now all that God 
is to us until he takes away all our earthly piops, and makes us lean with all our 
weight on him. (4) The believer's joy in God surpasses the worldling's gladness in 
the effects of it. It not only satisfies, Vrnt suiotifies the mind. (5) This joy never 
palls upon the taste. "The world passetu -tway, and the lust thereof; but he that 
doeth the will of God abideth for ever." 

III. The psalmist shows us how this jot in God was attained. After his 
delights the worldling has many a weary chase. To ensure his, the psalmist sends up 
a prayer, " Lord, lift thou up," etc. This prayer had been taught him of old. It was 
a part of the priestly benedictinn (^■"n\^. v\. 12. ad fin. \ Its meaning is, "Give us 



28 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [w. iv. 1— «. 

the sign and seal of thy favour, and it is enough." Truly in this all else is ensured. 
Forgiveness from God and peace with him prepare the way for the fulness of joy. 
Nothing is right with a tinfvl man till there is peace between him and God. If our view 
of the chronology of the Psalms be correct, Pss. li. and xxxii. preceded this. If it be 
true that the believer attains the highest heights of joy, it is also true that he has first 
gone down into the deep vale of penitential sorrow. As in Christian toil, so in personal 
religion, " They that sow in tears shall reap in joy." Let the sinner " behold the 
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world," and then his hope, bis joy, 
will begin. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Quieting thoughts for a time tf trmible. It is a mark of man's greatness 
that he can go out of himself. Some commune with nature, some with the great 
minds of the past, some with prophets and teachers of their own time. But the 
grandest thing is to commune with God. The evening is a fit time. Then we have 
rest; then we can retire from the stress and turmoil of the world, and in the secrecy 
of our hearts hold converse with God. Here we have some quieting thoughts for a 
time of trouble. 

I. That God bdIiES oveb all. God is love. His Law is holy and just and good. 
Then it must be well with all those who do his will. There may be clouds and 
darkness, there may be grievous trouble ; but God reigneth, and his truth and mercy 
are spread out as wings, under which we can always find refuge. 

II. That in fobmeb stbaits God has bbought dblivbbance. (Ver. 1.) We 
can look back. It is sweet to remember God's loving-kindness. What he has done 
for us is not only a cause of thankfulness, but a ground of hope. His acts bind God 
as well as bis promises. He does not change. Nothing can elude his eye ; nothing 
can surprise his wisdom or bafSc his power. He will bring enlargement in distress, 
room, breathing space, ampler freedom, and a diviner air. 

III. That God is as entbgatablb ab eveb by his people. (Vers. 3, 4.) God does 
not tie his presence to place or ordinance. He regards character. There are times 
when he seems not to hear; but this is our infirmity. The throne of grace stands 
ever accessible. If we ask, we shall receive. We may be cast off and dishonoured by 
men ; but God will never forsake those who trust in him. 

IV. That teust in God will subely bbino peace. (Vers. 5, 6.) Things may grow 
worse. AfSictions may come, not as single spies, but in battalions. For a time the 
machinations of the wicked may seem tu prevail. But we know what the end must 
be. What can come from opposition to God but ruin ? Beflection not only confirms 
our faith, but strengthens our attachment to. QoA, The future of the wicked is dark ; 
but the future of the righteous is bright as the heavens shining with countless stars. 
Whatever happens, therefore, let us hold fast to God. The priestly benediction 
(Numb. vi. 20) finds an echo in the trusting heart. " Peace." 

V. That in the bnd God's people shall subelt have jot in God. (Vers. 6 — 8.) 
He is the supreme good, true, satisfying, inalienable, the everlasting Portion of the 
•ouL 

" O thou bounteous Giver of all good. 
Thou art of all thy gifts thyself the crown I 
Give what thou canst, without thee we are poor, 
And with thee rich, take what thou wilt away." 

This psalm, as many others, ends with praise. Like the last strain of a cradle-song, 
its accents fall gently, lulling the child of God to rest. Luther, it is said, often sang 
himself to sleep with this psalm. — W. F. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Three great things. I. The question of questions. The feeling 
indicated is common. Amid disappointments and cares, evermore the cry is heard, 
*' Who will show us any good ?" 

II. Thb pbayeb of pbatebb. Somewhere there must be help. Gain, pleasure, 
worldly honours, and such -like, give no satisfaction. But when we tnm to Ood m 
find all we need. He is gracious and merciful. Light and joy and peace beam from 
his countenance. Here we have the gospel prone-fed beforehand. 



p». nr. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 29 

IIL Thk jot of jots. The "joy of harvest" is proverhial. Here we have more, 
infinitely more. Not only rest from fear, and recompense for lahour, and provision for 
the Aitore ; hut this in the highest sense, spiritually and eternally — the Giver as well 
as the gif t.— W. P. 

Vers. 1 — B.—A cry for deliverance. This psalm refers (according to some) to the 
same event as the previous psalm — that composed probahly in the morning, and this 
in the evening, of the same day. We have in it — 

L A CBT FOB DIXIVEBANOE FBOU THE UNBISHTEOnS PLOTS OF BIB ENEUIES. The 

appeal is based upon two facts. 1. His relation and fellowship with the righteous Ood. 
Thou art my God, and the God of my righteous cause, and therefore thou wilt not 
leave me to the wicked designs of my enemies. 2. Sis experience in former straits 
and troubles. " Thou didst set me at liberty when I was in trouble." What thou 
hast done once thou wilt do again, because thou art unchaogeable. 

n. The 8IN OF HIS enemies. 1. They attempt to injure his personal and Mngly 
honour (his glory). By false and evil reports, so as to promote his overthrow and 
downfall. Character and office are the two most precious things that a man has to lose. 

2. They had set their hearts upon an enterprise destined to fail. In love with vanity, 
they were in love with a vain, hollow appearance, such as this rebellious world turns 
out to be. Such is the nature of all unjust and sinful undertakings. 3. It was an 
attempt to overthrow one of God's appointments. (Yer. 3.) An attempt to set aside 
one of the Divine decrees j therefore — like trying to upset a Divine law — ^utterly vain 
and futile. 

III. Am AOHONinoM to bepentanoe. Not a cry for vengeance. The way of 
repentance is here pointed out. 1. The thought of Ood was to fill them with an awe of 
their sin. If they blasphemed God's anointed, they were to stand in awe of God. 2. 
They were to examine the thoughts of their hearts in solitude. On their bed, in the 
darkness of the night, and in the privacy of their chamber. " Shut to thy door," etc. 

3. They were to offer sincere and truthful " sacrifice" or service to Ood. Like Zacclueus, 
" The half of my goods," etc. Good works are the best evidence of repentance. 4. 
They were to trust in the righteous Ood, and not in their unrighteous aims and objects. 
We become like the persons or things we trust in. — S. 

Vers. 6 — 8. — The believer's ground of confidence. David now turns from admonish- 
ing his enemies to the case of his companions in trouble, who saw no ground of hope 
in the visible aspect of things. 

L The desfaib of unbelief. "Who will show us any good?" No one can. 1. 
The grandest revelations are made to the mind, and not to the senses. The question, 
therefore, is beside the mark. God, Christ, immortality, justice, love, holiness, cannot 
be shown in visible material form. Christ showed them for a season. 2. The good 
that can be shown can work no cure of Uf^i greatest evils. It is the inward deliver- 
ances, not the outward, that we most need. Talent, money, position, health, cannot 
work these. 

II. The highest good coveted bt the belibveb in God. " Lift thou up the light of 
thy countenance upon us." As the sun lights the world. 1. Then we become intensely 
conscious of Ood. The thought of him fills every faculty and solves every problem. 
"In his light we see light." 2. Then we know that he is our Helper and Saviour. 
For what is the light of the Divine face? — the light of Fatherhood and love? The 
light of the warrior's face is that of courage ; of the poet's and prophet's, inspiration; 
of the judge's, that of absolute justice ; but the light of God's fiwie is that of an infinite 
abundance of love for all his children. 

III. The supebiobitt of this good oteb the eiohest katebial plentt. (Ver. 7.) 
1. It creates a Divine joy and gladness. The excitement of the senses wears out th» 
body and corrupts the mind ; but the joys of the heart and mind impart the highest 
strength and the noblest impulses. Therefore " be not drunk with wine, ... but be filled 
with the Spirit." 2. It gives a deep inward peace, (Ver. 8, " I will both lay me down 
in peace, and sleep.'O An lintense consciousness of God and his favour has power to 
tranquillize the mind that is most disturbed by inward or outward trouble. It can 
calm the greatest storm, because we know the centre of rest, and are reposing upou it 



80 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. T. 1—12. 



3. It gives a lense of security. (Ver. 8, "For thou, Lord, only miffest me dwell in 
safety.") He needed no guards to ensure his safety during sleep, because God was nigh. 
" Who is he that can harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good ? " But 
" though he slay me, yet will I trust In him." If we perish by shipwreck, or in 
battle, or railway accident, we are still in God's hands, and ought to trust in him. 
This is faith in God — to trust him in the darkness as well as in the light. — 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM V. 



This psalm is assigned by some to the 
time of Manassel], but contains notliing 
that is really opposed to the Buperscription 
— ^"A Psalm of David" — since, before the 
temple was built, the tabernacle was called 
"the tsmple" (Josh. vi. 24; 1 Sam. i. 9; 
iii. 8; 2 Sam. xii. 20). It is thoroughly 
" Daridic in style, concise, vigorous ; with 
rapid transitions of thought and feeling" 
('Speaker's Commentary'). With respect 
to the time in David's life whereto it should 
be assigned, there are no very distinct indi- 
cations. It was not while he was in exile, 
for he had ready access to the house of God 
(ver. 7); nor was it in the later years of his 
life, when he had no open adversaries. 
Perhaps "a short time before the revolt of 
Absalom, when David was aware of the 
machinations of conspirators against him 
under a bloodthirsty and treacherous chief" 
is the most probable date. The psalm is 
not marked by any notes of division, but 
seems to consist of five parts : (1) a morning 
prayer (vers. 1 — 3) ; (2) a warning to the 
wicked (vers. 4 — 6) ; (3) a renewed prayer 
(vers. 7, 8); (4) a denunciation of woe on 
the wicked (vers. 9, 10); and (5) an antici- 
pation of blessings and favour for the right- 
eous (vers. II, 12). The superscription, 
" To the Chief Musician upon Nehiloth," is 
tliouglit to mean, either, continuously, " To 
the Chief Musician, for an accompaniment of 
wind instruments;" or, disoontinuously, 
" To the Chief Musician : a Psalm upon in- 
heritances." In the latter case, the respec- 
tive "inheritances" of the wicked (ver. 6) 
and the righteous (vers. 11, 12) are sup- 
posed to be meant 

Ver. 1.— Give ear to my words, lord 
(oomp. PsB. livi. 1 ; Ixxivi. 6). Cries of this 
kind are common with the psalmists, even 
when they do not express tlie purport of 
their prayer. Consider my meditation ; or, 



my sUent musing (Kay); comp. Ps. xxxix. 3, 
where the same word is used. 

Ver. 2. — Hearken unto the voice of my 
cry (comp. Pss. xxvii. 7; xxviii. 2; Ixiv. 1; 
oxix. 149; oxxx 2; cxl. 6). The Oriental 
iiabit of making requests in loud and shrill 
tones is the origin of these forms of speech. 
My King, David was " king " over Israel ; 
but Jehovah was " King" over David (comp. 
Pss. X. 16; xxix. 10; xliv. 4; xlvii. 6, etc.). 
And my God (see Ps. Ixxxiv. 3). Tor unto 
thee will I pray. To thee, i.e., and to no 
other. 

Ver. 3. — My voice shalt thon hear in the 
morning, Lord (compare "At evening, 
and (it mnrning,B,nda,t noonday will I pray, 
and he shall hear my voice," Ps. Iv. 17; 
and see also Pss. lix. 16; Ixxxviii. 13; cxix. 
147). The appointment of daily morning 
and evening sacrifice (Numb, xxviii. 4) 
pointed out morn and eve as times espe- 
cially appropriate for prayer. A natural 
instinct suggested the same idea (Job i. 5). 
In the morning will I direct my prayer unto 
thee. The repetition adds force to the im- 
plied injunction (comp. Ps. exxx. 6). The 
word translated "direct my prayer" means 
"arrange" or "set in order," as the priests 
did the altar before a sacrifice (Lev. i. 7, 
8, 12 ; vi. 5 ; Numb, xxviii. 4). Prayer is 
viewed as a sort of sacrificial act. And will 
look up ; or, look out — keep on the walch — 
in expectation of my prayer being granted 
(see the Bevised ^'ersion). 

Ver. 4. — ^For thou art not a God that hath 
pleasure in wickedness. Thou wilt listen 
to the prayer of a rijrhteous man (Ps. iv. 1), 
since thou dost not delight in wickeilness, 
but in goodness. Neither shall evil dwell 
with thee. Light has no fellowship with 
darkness. Evil men can obtain no support 
from thee, who art AU-holy. They will 
scarcely venture to ask thy aid. 

Ver. 5. — The foolish (or, the arrogant — 
" the boasters" ) shall not stand in thy sight. 
Bather shall they bo cast down and dis- 
mayed (Ps. Ixxiii. 3, 18). Thou hatest all 
workers of iniquity. David has in mind 
the wicked and presumptuous men who 
have banded themselves together against 
him, and ''take his contrary part" (Ps. oix. 
3, Prayer-book Version). These he is sure 
that God hates 



n. T. 1—12.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



31 



Ver. 6 — Thou shalt destroy them that 
■peak leasing (oomp. Ps. iv. 2). David's 
adversaries were ouniiing, treaoherous, and 
quite regardless of truth (see 2 Sam. iii. 
27 ; xiii. 28 ; xv. 7—9 ; xx. 10, eto.). God's 
vengeance was sure to fall upon them, either 
in this world or iu the next. The Lord will 
abhor the bloody and deoeitfal man. An 
individual Beems to be pointed at, who is 
probttlily Ahithophel. 

Ver. 7. — But . . . I will come into thy house ; 
rathpr, unto thy house. David, as a layman, 
would not be entitled to enter within the 
tabernacle. He would draw near to it, pro- 
bably bring his offering, and then worship 
toward it (see tlie following clause). In 
the multitude of thy mercy ; or, through the 
abundance of thy mercy (oomp. Ps. Ixix. 13, 
16). It was by God's mercy that David 
lived, that he was maintained in health and 
atrengtii, that he had a desire to go to God's 
house, and was permitted to worship there. 
Of all these mercies he is deeply senaible. 
And in thy fear wiU I worship. David's 
worship is never without fear — a reverent 
sense of God's greatness, power, and perfect 
holiness. Toward thy holy temple. " David 
would, according to the custom of the wor- 
ship then established, turn himself in the 
time of prayer to the place where the 
gracious presence of the Lord had its 
seat" (Hengstenberg ; oomp. Pss. xxviii. 2; 
oixxviii. 7; 1 Kings viii. 30, 83, 88, 42, 44, 
48 ; Dan. vi. 10 ; Jonah ii. 4). 

Ver 8. — Lead me, Lord, in thy right- 
eousness. Here at last we find what David 
prayed for. Previously, we have only heard 
him entreat that his prayer may be heard 
(vers. 1, 2), declare that he will pray early 
(ver. 3), and before the tabernacle (ver. 7) ; 
now we learn what his prayer is. It is that 
God will lead him in the path of his right- 
eousness — that righteousness of which he is 
the pattern, and whereof he approves ; and 
will "make his way plain for him," i.e. 
show it him clearly, so that he cannot 
mistake it. God is asked to do this, espe- 
cially because of David's enemies, or of 
"those that lie in wait for him" (Revised 
Version margin), lest, if he were to make a 
false step, they should triumph over him, 
and so he should bring discredit upon the 
cause of God and of his saints. Make thy 
way straight {plain. Revised Version) before 
my face. Not so much " smooth my way," 
or " make it level " or " easy," as " put it 
plainly before me" (oomp. Ps. xxv. 5; 
and Ps. xxvii. 11, "Teach me thy way, O 
Lord, and lead me in a plain ■path, because 
of mine enemies "). 
Ver. 9 —For there is no faithfulness in 



their month ; or, no tteadfaitness — " no sin- 
cerity ■'' (Kay, Oheyue) ; see the commen t on 
ver. 6. Their inward part is very wickedness ; 
literally, wickednesses; i.e. nothing but 
wickedness. Their throat is an open se- 
pulchre. "Emitting the noisome exhalations 
of a putrid heart" (Bishop Home). They flat- 
ter with their tongue ; literally, they make 
smooth their tongues, whioh may, perhaps, 
include flattery, but points rather to smooth 
arguments, specious reasonings, and the 
habit of making the worse appear the better 
cause (see the comment of Bishop Horsley, 
'Book of Psalms,' vol. i. pp. 154, 155). 
The last two clauses of this verse are quoted 
by St. Paul (Eom. iii. 13), and applied gene- 
rally to the character of the ungodly. 

Ver. 10. — Destroy thou them, God; 
rather, condemn them, or declare litem guilty 
(Kay) ; Kpivov avTois (LXX.). Let them fall 
by their own counsels. No conHemnation 
naturally follows punishment. David as- 
sumes that God will make his enemies fall ; 
he prayg that they may fall from the effect 
of tlieir own counsels. The fate of Ahitho- 
phel (2 Sam. xvii. 28) perhaps fulflUed 
this imprecation. Cast them out in the 
multitude of their transgressions ; Thrust 
them out (Revised Version) ; " Thrust them 
down " (Kay). Punish them at once, in the 
midst of their many transgressions. For 
they have rebelled against thee. They 
have sinned, not against me only, but 
equally — nay, far more — against thee. 

Ver. 11. — But let aU those that put theiz 
trust in thee rejoice. David is fond of con- 
trasts. Here he sets the lot of the righteous 
over against tliat of the wicked. While 
the wicked "fall," and are "cast out," or 
" thrust down " to hell, the righteous " re- 
joice " — nay, ever shout for joy, displaying 
their feelings in the true Oriental manner. 
Because thou defendest them. There is no 
" because " in the original. The passage 
runs on without any change of construction, 
" Let all those that put their trust in thee 
rejoice ; let them ever shout for joy, and do 
thou defend them ; and let them that love 
thy Name be joyful in thee." 

Ver. 12. — For thou. Lord, wilt bless the 
righteous. All the joy of the righteous 
springs from the fact that God's blessing 
is upon them. The sense of his favour fills 
their hearts with rejoicing. With favour 
wilt thou compass him as with a shield. 
Tsinnah (nax) is the large, long shield 
that protected the whole body (see 'Ancient 
Muuarchies,' vol. i. p. 445). God's favour, 
thus encompassing a man, effectually secuiad 
him against all dangers. 



Sa THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [». ▼. 1— 12. 



HOMILETICS. 

Veri. 1 — 3. — Prayer. "GiTe ear," etc. There are prayers, some of the most 
fervent and spiritual, which refuse words, and need not language (Rom. viii. 26). 
But God, who hath given speech as the glory of our nature and the principal instrument 
of human progress, will have us consecrate it to this highest use — converse with our 
Maker, the Father of our spirits. 

I. Pbatbb 18 PEEsoNAi CONVERSE WITH GoD. " My voicc shalt thou hear " (ver. 3). 
On this turns the whole reality, efficacy, spiritual benefit, of prayer. 1. Recdity. We 
are not speaking into the air ; or to an Infinite Impersonal Power that takes no heed ; 
but to the living God. " He that planted the ear," etc. (Ps. xciv. 9). To the Father 
of spirits (Luke xi. 13). 2. By efficaq/ of prayer we mean, not that prayer has a 
virtue or power of its own, not that God needs instructing what to give, or persuading 
to give. The very power to pray comes from him. But the earnest desire and plead- 
ing request of his children have real value in his sight ; as they must have, if " God is 
love." True, God knows what we need, better than we do ; but fervour of desire, per- 
severance and patient faith in asking, accompanied with childlike resignation to bis 
wiU, are often the very conditions of its being wise and right (and therefore possible) 
for God to grant what we ask. 3. The spiritual benefit of prayer is no doubt its chief 
blessing. Nothing else could bring the soul so near to God. But this benefit turns 
on its reality and efficacy. God might have given promises without inviting or per- 
mitting us to pray ; but faith claims and pleads his promises in prayer. 

n. Pratbb should have its set seasons, though it should not be confined to 
any. "In the morning," ».e. every morning. Our day should begin with God 
(comp. Ps. Iv. 17; Dan. vi. 10). 

IIL The habit of pbateb must be maintainbd by holt pubposb, steadfast 
BisoLYK. " Will I direct," etc. ; order and arrange it, gathering up all my powers to 
this great employment, this glorious privilege, as happy as holy. God's ear is not 
chained to a careless prayer, of which the offerer himself makes no account. 

Vers. 4, 5. — God's hatred of sin. "Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in 
wickedness," etc. It needs courage to preach the severe side of Bible truth. Time 
was when preaching could not be too severe. Men loved to hear the thunder and see 
the fire of Sinai. Now it cannot be too flattering and soothing. A view of Divine 
love is current, not to say fashionable, which tends to reduce it to an easy-going 
apathetic tolerance, taking little account of the difference between moral good and evil. 
We need reminding that in God's judgment the opposition is irreconcilable, infinite, 
eternal. These verses strongly set forth Ood's hatred of sin. 

I. God's hatred or sm is insbpaeablb fbom his holiness. Having no " pleasure 
in wickedness " stands here for abhorrence, unchangeable opposition. Were it possible 
to conceive " a God that hath pleasure in wickedness," this would be the most terrible, 
hateful, and hideous of all imaginations — an Omnipotent Fiend ! Even a wicked man 
must see that such a thought is monstrous. But if all sympathy with evil is thus 
abhorrent to the Divine character, the very thought revolting, it follows that sin 
must be infinitely hatefiil to God. Not to hate sin is characteristic of a bad man 
(Ps. xxxvi. 4); he finds in himself no standard by which to test and hate it. " Ye 
that love the Lord, hate evil I " (Ps. xcvii. 10). 

II. God's hatred of snf does not contradict his love, but is inseparable from 
it. Because " God is love," he must desire the happiness of his creatures. But men are 
created to be happy through holiness. Sin poisons the very source of human happiness ; 
fills the world with strife, injustice, cruelty, vice, disease, want, pain, tears, death. 
Where would Divine love be if our Maker calmly looked upon the destruction of all 
that is best in his creatures, and the wholesale wreck of human happiness ? Again, 
because " God is love," he must desire the love of his children. Love asks love. Sin 
robs God of his children's love; robs them of the very power of loving him, and of all 
the joy that can spring only from his love. Because " God is love," he must desire 
men to know him and converse with him; and in this communion grow up to their 
true spiritual stature (Eph. iv. 13). Sin tends to banish the knowledge of God from 



M.T. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. M 



earth ; to dry and choke the channel of communion with God (John xv.i. 3 ; Rom. i. 
20, 21, 28 ; Eph. iv. 18). 

in. How CAN HATRED OF EVIL BE BSOOKOILSS -^VIS L07B TO THE WBONO-DOEB ? 

How espErate s!2 frcTs eJEnsrs— tie einne? £oa kli i™? Tis gOspel is the answer. 
By tha atonement of the Sob 9i Ckid, and fe^ ^^ ^^ffiaf es^^ ^ tk9 Holy Ghost 
(Bom. V. 8 ; Titus iii. 5, 6 ; 1 Oor. Ti. 11). Tm Giu 'i.oBUi^eui Scriptures c^mtain 
abundant promises of pardon to the penitent ; and one wonderful example in King 
Manasseh (Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7 ; Ps. xxxii. ; 2 Chron. xxxiii. 12, 13). But Law, and fear 
of punishment, were necessarily predominant till "grace and truth came by Jesus 
Christ." On the other hand, never forget that if the sinner will not and cannot he 
separated from his sin, the New Testament is fully as severe as the Old (Matt. viL 
23 ; xiii. 49, 50 ; Kom. ii. 8, 9). The cross, which reveals God's love to sinners, is at 
the same time the most tremendous of all witnesses against sin (Bom. viii. 3, 4). 

Ver. 11. — The joy of faith. " Let all those . . . rejoice," etc. People who look on 
Bible religion as gloomy and joyless would do well to study the Book of Psalms. 
It is worth note that in this one book of Scripture the words "joy," " joyful," " glad," 
" gladness," " rejoice," occur more than ninety times. Truly the " river that maketh 
glad the city of God " is a full, pure, deep-fiowing stream. Idle mirth, empty-headed 
and hollow-hearted gaiety (Eccles. vii, 6), you do not, indeed, find characterizing the 
psalmists or prophets. But for full-hearted, clear-voiced joy — the joy that sings on its 
pilgrim-way because it sees the rainbow iu the cloud, and hears the Saviour's voice in 
the storm — there is no joy like that which the text speaks of — the joy of faith. 

I. It IS A OBEAT JOT TO TBUST GoD. Trust is an indispensable element of a 
happy life. A suspicious, distrustful soul is like one walking in a fog, chilling, per- 
plexing, distorting. One of a trustful nature who has no one to trust is like a lonely 
traveller, hungry and homeless. Mutual confidence is essential to love or friendship 
worthy the name. But the most faithful, loving friend may disappoint trust through 
weakness, ignorance, calamity, forgetfulness. Only the all-wise, all-loving, almighty, 
unchangeably faithful God is worthy of absolute trust — the perfect rest of the soul 
(Isa. xxvi. 3). 

II. Trust in God is full of joyful expectation. It lights up the future (else 
dim and dark) with the sunshine of certain hope. " We know," etc. (Bom. viii. 28). 
Care is the heaviest burden of life ; to-morrow weighs heavier to most men than 
to-day; and this burden faith rolls off on to God (1 Pet. v. 7 ; Isa. xliii. 2). 

III. Trust in God is full of jovful experience. If it is joy to trust God, it 
is double joy to find by experience that he accept* th* tmst ha invites; regards the 
faith that lays hold on his promise. Joshua's experience is the experience of faith in 
all ages (Josh. xxiv. 14). St. Paul could say at the end of his course, " I know whom 
I have believed," etc. (2 Tim. i. 12; iv. 7, 8). 

IV. The oospbl has opened a new and fuller fountain of jot, by supplying 
a firmer foundation of faith, and clearer knowledge of God, in the Person of Jesus 
Christ (1 Pet. i. 8). 

Conclusion. If you have no joy in God, it must be because you do not know him; 
and this is because you do not believe him as speaking to you in his Son. Yet let no 
Christian despond if his joy in God be not what he desires, what he hears or reads of, 
what it reasonably should be. If we have not sunshine, let us be thankful for day- 
light. If even daylight, for a while, fail, let us remember Isa. L 10, and "watch for 
the morning " (Ps. cxxx. 6). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — A morning prayer : for sanctuary service : in evil times. This psalm 
seems to have been written for, or handed to the leader of a special choir, that he might 
adapt music for its use in sanctuary worship; not necessarily that of the temple — for 
its composition was probably anterior to the erection of that building — but for use in 
the services of that temporary structure which preceded it, and which, though but 
temporary, and even fragile in a material sense, was nevertheless in a high and holy 
psalms. » 



S4 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pfc t. 1— 12 



sense the c welling-plaoe of God, yea, "the palace of the great Kiug."^ Note: No 
material splendours of gold, silver, and precious stones can make a temple without 
the Real Presence ; but however humble the structure, the Real Presence therein will 
make it a temple of God. Whether David was actually the penman of this psalm or 
no, matters not. It is evidently the composition of a true saint of God, and reflects in 
its several verses the spirit of the time and circumstances under which it was written. 
And not only go. But it shows us that the saints of olden time were wont to regard 
the house of God as a house of prayer, and to let their prayers be an unburdening of 
the heart to God on every matter of immediate and pressing concern. Note : In our 
prayers in God's house we have no need to include everything in one service. Nor are 
we bound to use the words of another's prayers, except as far as they suit our case at the 
time. Still less need we rack and tear such a psalm as this to find in it the whole gospel. 
That would not only be a strange anachronism,' but we should even lose very much 
by missing the historic setting and aim of the psalm. Who cannot find comfort in the 
obvious fact that the Old Testament saints, in their prayers, used to tell God everything, 
just as it seemed to them, and as they felt about it r There is no greater boon in life 
than to have a friend who will never misunderstand us, and to whom we can tell 
anything, knowing that he will hide all our folly in his loving forgetfulness, and 
sympathize with all our cares. Such perfection of friendship is found in God alone. 
And we have in this psalm a beautiful illustration of the use which the psalmist made 
thereof. 

I. The psalmist lays the entikk situation bbfokb God. (Vers. 8, 9, "mine 
enemies," equivalent to " those that lie in wait for me.") The whole of the ninth verse 
shows the treachery and hoUowness that mark the hostile bands, and the consequent peri! 
in which the people of God were on that account. (This verse is one of those quoted by 
the Apostle Paul in proof of human depravity. Nor is there any contrariety to reason 
in his so doing. For while the psalm speaks of all this wickedness in its relation to 
society, St. Paul speaks of similar wickedness in its relation to the Law of God and to 
the God of law. And it is because the psalmist knows how foreign to the nature of Gkid 
all this iniquity is, that he brings it before God in prayer, and asks him to put it to 
shame.) Note : Let us learn to pray minutely, and not to lose ourselves in generalities.^ 

IL In doinq this he becognizes an endearing hblation. (Ver. 2.) " My 
King," " my God." God was not a far-distant Being, only remotely related. The 
name "Jehovah" brought him near as Israel's redeeming God; and that very name, 
which removes us infinitely from anthropomorphism, was the one in which the siunts 
of old found tlieir joy and glory. They could call God their God. Under the New 
Testament our thoughts of God may be more sweet and endearing still. 

III. He observes a devout and wise method in his i-bayeb. " In the morning 
I will direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up." The meaning is — I will order it 
accurately," and then look out to see whether it has sped, and when the answer will 
come. (Many of the old divines are very felicitous in tlit-ir treatment ol these two 
words.) Sometimes, indeed, the veaming Godwnrd is too deep for outward expression 
(see ver. 1, " consider my meditation," i.e. understand my murmuring). " Lord,, 
read the desires of my heart by thine all-piercing eye — and interpret my petitions in 
thine own loving-kindness before they rise to my lips." Happy they who know that 
they have a God with whom they can thus plead, and who have learned the blessed 
art of thus pleading with God ! 

IV. He sets his application on substantial grounds. (Vers. 4 — 6.) Thfr 
psalmist knows the character of God, and the rigliteousness of his administration ; and 
in these verses he shows us how real was the revelation on these great themes which 
God had given in his Law (see Ps. ciii. 6, 7). All these glorious disclosures of the 
holiness of God are reiterated and confirmed in the teaching and redemption of the 
Son of God. (For the specific phrases, see the Exposition ; also Perowne and 
Cheyne.) It is because we know what God is, and the principles of his government^ 

' See Perowne and Cheyne on ver. 7. 

' Although for devotional sugi'estivenesB Spuro;eon's ' Treasury of David ' is priceless, 
yet anachronisms abound therein ; and the student must read the book very warily. 

' " One of the first duties of the priest at dawn was to lay the wood in order for the- 
morning sacrifice " (Perowne). 



r». T.l— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 85 

that we can under all circumstances commend ourselves, the Church, and the world 
to him. 

V. On such grounds the psalmist offers varied petitions. 1. For himself. 
(Ver. 8.) Beautiful! He wants (1) to go along God's way, not his own ; (2) to be 
shown clearly what that way is ; and then (3) to be led along that way. He who thus 
puts himself into God's hand, wanting only to be led aright, shall never be pat to 
shame. 2. For the people of God. (Ver. 11.) He prays that in the midst of the 
whirl and tumult which surround them, the righteous may ever ring out a peal of joy 
because of God's protecting care and love. 3. For evil ones. (Ver. 10.) He prays that 
they may be (1) held guilty and condemned for their transgressions. Yea (2), rejected 
by God, even as they had themselves rejected God. We are not bound to imitate the 
p.-'almist in such petitions. Jesus Christ tells us that the lenst in the kingdom oi 
heaven is greater than the greatest of Old Testament prophets. They could not rise 
above the level of their inspiration, nor advance in prayer beyond the point their 
understanding had reached in those days.' For us it would be far more appropriate 
to pray for the conversion of God's enemies by the power of his love and grace. 

VI. There is here a confident assurance expressed. (Ver. 12, " Thou, 
Lord, wilt bless the righteous ... as with a shield.") The word means, not a small 
shield which may be held out to ward off a dart, but a large buckler which can cover 
one around as with armour. So effective are the Divine protection and care with which 
he. guards his own. May such protection ever be ours I 

VII. It 18 WORTHY OP note at what hour of the day this prayer is offered. 
We are twice told in the third verse, " in the morning." The tarly morn, when the 
frame is freshest and the spirit freest, is the best time for devotion. The early hours, 
when sanctified by prayer, will help us to sanctify the whole day for God. Before ever 
we look upon the face of man, let us catch a morning smile from our Father in heaven ■ 
and we shall find how true it is that — 

" His morning smiles bleaa all the day." 

0. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — A morning prayer. Every new day the priests began anew the 
service of God in the temple. The altar was set in order, the lamb was made ready, 
and as soon as the sign of day was given the morning sacrifice was offered (Lev. vi. 5 ; 
Numb, ixviii. 4). In this there wss a lesson for all times. Every new day calls for 
a fresh consecration of ourselves to God. " When first thine eyes unveil, give thy soul 
leave to do the like " (Vaughan). In this morning prayer we find — 

I. Faith in God's Fatherly character. The cry, " Give ear," is that of a child 
to its father. The priests stood for others. They offered sacrifices not only for them- 
selves, but for the people. But for us there is but one Priest and one Sacrifice. Through 
Christ we have access to God as our Father, and can cry to him for help in every time 
of need (Eph. ii. 16 ; Heb. iv. 16). 

II. Confidence in God's holy rule. (Vers. 3 — 7.) The psalmist speaks of what 
he knows. God is just and holy. The more we think, the more will our confidence 
grow. We rise from the faith that God is our Father, to the grand belief that he is 
" King," and that he will defend the right. But let us keep in mind what sin is. Some 
in these days make light of sin. It is an inherited weakness, a necessary evil for which 
circumstances are to be blamed more than the sinner. These and such-like excuses are 
made, and, if this is not enough, it is said, " Somehow things will come right. If not 
here, yet in the future world all will be well." To such the " wrath " of God is but a 
figure of speech, and "hell" the invention of our slavish fears. Against all such 
dangerous teaching, let us place the wholesome doctrine of the psalmist and of 
our Lord. 

IIL Expectation of God's qraoioos interposition. (Vers. 8 — 10.) Help is 
needed, and earnestly implored. The cry is not for mere personal ease or comfort, 
but for such deliverance as shall be for God's glory. The soul is in sympathy with 

' See footnote to Pi. iii. 7. This u a case in which the application of the mlei of a 
natural psychology and of hiitorij setting avails to throw light on petitiou whiob are 
mysterious, and which for n* wonid not be jusliliable. 



3fl THE BOOK OP PS_LM8. [p8. ▼. 1—12. 

God, and can not only pray, but " look up " with the patience of hope. 1. Ouidance. 
(Ver. 9.) We confess our weakness ; but we cast ourselves on God for help. He is 
our Shepherd. We trust his love, and surrender ourselves to his leading. It is for 
him to go before ; it is for us as his sheep to hear hi.s voice and follow him. 2. De/enee. 
(Yer. 11.) When Luther was asked at Augsburg where he should find shelter if his 
patron, the Elector of Saxony, deserted him, his answer was, " Under the shield of 
Heaven." This shield is for all Other defences may fail ; but here we are safe from 
all the assaults of the enemy. 3. Blessedness. (Ver. 12.) God is pledged to hia 
people by his character as well as by his covenant. Trust in him awakens joif — pure, 
ardent, comforting, not like the joy of the fool (Eccles. vii. 6), but real and abiding, as 
God's Name. Trust also calls forth praise. What Jeremiah said in the pit, God's 
people say in the sunsliine, "0 Lord, there is none like unto thee." They are as 
Kaphtali, " satisfied with favour, and full with the blessing of the Lord " (Deut. xxziii. 
23). Therefore they sing, " There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth 
upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal Qoi is 
thy Eefuge" (Deut. xxxiii. 26, 27).— W. P. 

Vera. 1 — 7. — Prayer for ckliveranee from wicked men. The psalmist prays to be 
delivered from, not open persecution, but the scoff and scourge of the tongue at all 
goodness and service to God. When irreligion prevails, it b difficult to resist it and 
stand firm in our allegiance to God. 

L Thk obt fob help aoadist the PBEVAiLiNa IMPIETT. 1. Et prays Ood as th4 
Highest to hearken to his meditations, his words, and his cry. All true prayer begins 
in thought or meditation, goes on to express itself in uttered words, and rises at last 
into an earnest cry. Not till we muse on our own needs and difficulties does the fire of 
devotion bum ; then do we break into earnest pleading, and deep, if not loud, cries. 
2. The urgency and eagerness of his suit. In the morning, at the earliest opportunity, 
at the time of the morning sacrifice in the temple, do I wait upon thee with my 
prayer. Urgent matters take precedence of all others, and we cannot rest till we set 
about them. 3. JHe waited expectant for the answer to his prayer. (Ver. 3.) " Watched " 
—or looked out, not " up " — to see what came of it, and how it woiild be answered. 
This is both natural and reasonable ; for God has promised to answer true prayer. 

II. The obound of his pbateb. God is the righteous God, and as such : 1. He 
has no sympathy with the ways of the wicked. (Ver. 4.) Not when they seem to 
prosper — in trade, politics, or open irreligion. And they seem to prosper only for a 
time. 2. Ood has no fdUnvship with the irreligious. (Ver. 5.) " The foolish shall 
not stand in thy sight," or before thee, as favoured courtiers stand in the presence of a 
king. God has no gracious intercourse or communion with wicked men. Therefore I 
can ask for his help with confidence ; for he is gracious to the righteous. 3. The false 
and the cruel are doomed to perish. (Ver. 6.) Their own devices destroy them ; that 
is God's appointment. God's action is commonly by law, and not by personal inter- 
ference ; he abhors and destroys men by the opposition of his laws to all deceit and 
cruelty. 

III. The freedom amd awe of the psalmist m dbawino nigh to God. (Ver. 7, 
" 1 will come into thy house in the multitude of thy loving-kindness.") The wicked 
cannot stand in thy sight ; hut I can. Note : 1. The freedom and amfidenoe of true 
worship. He feels the infinite mercy and privilege of enjoying access to God. 2. The 
arm of Ood felt in all true worship. " In thy lear will I worship toward thy holy 
temple." When freedom and reverence are blended, then is our worship the truest 
and most acceptable. — S. 

Vers, 8 — 12. — The righteousness of Ood. This second strophe of the psalm is very 
much like the first in substance, the matter running parallel with vers. 3^—7. The 
fundamental thought on which all is based is that of the righteousness of God. The 
whole prayer is framed on that conception. 

I. A PBATEB FOB BIOHTEOnS DELIVEBANOB AKD aUIDANOE. 1. FoT rtghteOUS 

guidince. " Lead me in thy righteousness ; make thy way [the right way] plain to 
me." 2. For righteous deliverance. The unrighteous lay in wait for him — threatened 
his safety. There was "no faithfulness in their mouth;" they used slander and 



P8. VI. 1—10.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



31 



treachery when they dared not use open violence. Their inward part, their souls, 
were full of evil designs and purposes. "Their throat is like an open sepulchre,'' 
which yawns for his destruction. Their speech, fair and smooth, to flatter and put him 
o£f his guard and lure him on. With them, mouth, heart, throat, and tongue are all 
instruments of evil; and their malice was such that he needed the care and guidance 
of the righteous power above. 

n. A PBAYEB FOB BiOHTEOUB BGTBiBUTiOH. (Ver. 10.) Punish. " The word 
properly signifies such a decision and judgment as would show and manifest what 
sort of neighbours they are when their ungodly dispositions are disclosed and every 
one is made known." Show them guilty. Let them fall through or hecauae of their 
own counsels. Their counsels are of such an evil nature that they must iu the end 
ensure their destruction. By means of their transgressions thrust them away — the same 
thought in substance as the last. But the <;reat argument for retribution is— they have 
rebelled against thee. The enemies of the psalmist are the enemies of Qod. God's 
cause and that of his people are the same. " Whoso toucheth you, toucheth the apple 
of mine eye ; " " Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me ? " 

III. Pbayeb fob the BBALiZATioir OF A BI0HTE0U8 JOT. (Vers. H, 12.) This 
joy proceeds : 1. From the sense of refuge and defence we have in God. 2. iVom the 
Unit we have to Qod, for his goodness and righteousneit, 3. From the knowledge we 
have that Qod does assuredly bless the righteous. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM VL 



This is the first of what have been called 
•' the Penitential Psalms." It has been said 
that "there is much of grief in it, but 
nothing of penitence." The grief, however 
— euoh grief (see ver. 6)— can scarcely be 
supposed to have arisen from any other 
source than oonsoiousness of sin. And grief 
of this kind is a main element in penitence. 
The title ascribes the psalm to David, and 
declares it to be addressed, like Pb. iv., " to 
the Chief Musician on Neginotli," by which 
we are probably to understand that it is 
intended to be set to an accompaniment of 
stringed instruments (see introductory para- 
graph to Pa. iv.). The further statement, 
that it is to be "upon Sheminith," is very 
obscure, but perhaps refers to some form of 
musical time (see Hengstenberg). The 
psalm seems to divide into four stanzas — the 
first and last of three, the intermediate ones 
of two verses each. 

Ver 1. — Lord, rebuke me not in thine 
anger. The psalmist begins by deprecating 
God's wrath and displeasure. He is con- 
scious of some grievous sin, deserving rebuke 
and chastisement, and he does not ask to be 
spared his chastisement; but he would fain 
be chastised in love, not in anger (oomp. 
Jer. X. 24, " O Lord, correct me, but with 
iudgment; not in thine anger, lest tbou 
bring me to nothinj' "> Neither chasten 



me in thy hot displeasure; or, itt thy arath. 
In its primary sense, hamah (nnn) is no 
doubt " heat," " glow ; " but the secondary 
sense of " anger," " wratU," is quite as 
common. 

Ver. 2. — Have meroy upon me, Lord ; 
for I am weak ; rather, f am faint, or languid 
— withered away, like a faded plaut or 
flower. Lord, heal me ; for my bones are 
vexed. Bodily ailment seems certainly to 
be implied; but it is that sort of bodily 
ailment which is often produced by mental 
distress — a general languor, weariness, and 
distaste for exertion (comp. Pa. xxii. 11; 
xxxL 10 ; xxxviii. 3 ; cii. 3). 

Ver. 3. — My soul is also sore vexed. It 
is not, however, the body alone which 
suffers; the soul also is vexed, and vexed 
greatly (l^p). Clearly the main emphasis 
is intended tn be laid on the mental suffer- 
ing. But thou, Lord, bow longi We 
may fill up the ellipse in various ways: 
"How long wilt thou look on?" "How 
long wilt thou hide thyself?" " How long 
wilt thou be angry?" (see Pss. xxxv. 17; 
Ixxix. 5; Ixxxix. 46). Or again, "How 
long shall I cry, and thou wilt not hear ? " 
(Hah. i. 2). The cry is that of one wearied 
out with long sufferino; (comp. Ps. xc, 13). 

Ver. 4. — ^Beturn, Lord. God seemed to 
have withdrawn himself, to have forsaken 
the mourner, and gone far away (oomp. Ps. 
xxii. 1). Hence the cry, "Return" (comp. 
Pss. Ixxx. 14 ; xo. 13). Nothing is so hard 
to endure as the feeling of being deserted 
by God. Deliver my soul. " Tlie psalmist 
feels himself so wretched in soul and body, 
that he believes himself to be near death '* 



38 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. TI. 1—10. 



(Hengstenberg). His prayer here is, pri- 
marily, for deliverance from this impending 
danger, as appears clearly from the follow- 
ing Terse. Save me for thy mercies' sake. 
Either a repetition of the preceding prayer 
in other words, or an enlargement of it so as 
to include salvation of every kind. 

Ver. 5.— For in death there is no remem- 
brance of thee (com p. Pes. zxx. 9 ; Ixxxviii. 
11; CXT. 17; cxviii. 17; Isa. xxxviii. 18). 
The general view of the psalmists seems to 
have been that death was a cessation of the 
active service of Gud — whether for a time or 
permanently, thev do not make clear to us. 
So even Hezekiah, in the passage of Isaiah 
above quoted. Death is represented as a 
sleep (Pa. xiii. 3), but whether there is an 
awakening from it dues not appear. No 
doubt, as has been said (' Speaker's Com- 
mentary,' vol. iv. p. 182), " the cessation 
of active service, even of remembrance or 
devotion, does not affect the question of a 
future restoration," and the metaphor of 
sleep certainly suggests the idea of an 
awakening. But such a veil hung over the 
other world, under the old dispensation, and 
over the condition of the departed in it, that 
thought was scarcely exercised upon the 
subject. Men's duties in this life were what 
occupied them, and they did not realize that 
in another they would have employments — 
much less form any notion of what tliose 
employments would be. The grave seemed 
a place of silence, inaction, tranquillity. In 
the grave (Hebrew, in Sheot) who shall give 
thee thanks ? (comp. Ps. cxv. 17, 18). 

Ver. 6. — I am weary— or, worn out (Kay) 
— with my groaning. The Oriental habit of 
giving vent to grief in loud lamentations 
must be remembered. Herodotus says that 
at the funeral of Masistius, the Persians 
present "vented their grief in such loud 
cries that all Boeotia resounded with the 
clamour" (Herod., ix. 21). All the night 
make I my bed to swim (comp. Homer, ' Od.,' 
xviL 102, 103). The Eevised Version has, 
" every night," which is a possible meaning. 
Dr. Kay translates, " I drench my bed." I 
water my couch vrith my tears. One of the 
uaoal pleonastic second clauses. 



Ver. 7. — Mine eye is consumed because of 
grief ; or, mine eye it wasted away because of 
provocation. The eye falls in, becomei dull, 
and, as it were, "wastes away" through 
long-continued grief (comp. Ps. xxxi. 9). 
The kind of grief expressed by the word 
ha'as (Dj;3) is " that which arises from pro- 
vocation or spiteful treatment " (Kay). It 
waxeth old because of all mine enemies. It 
becomes dull and heavy and sunken, like 
the eye of an old man. How often has it 
not been noted that nothing so much agei a 
man as grief I 

Ver. 8. — Depart from me, all ye worker* 
of iniquity ! Note the sudden change of 
tone, very characteristic of the Davidical 
psalms. The psalmist, having offered his 
prayer. Is so certain of its acceptance that 
lie at once turns upon his adversaries with 
words of reproach, and almost of menace. 
" Depart from nie ! " he exclaims ; " get ye 
gone 1 do not dare any more to persecute 
me or plot against me I Your efforts are in 
vain." For the Lord hath heard the voice of 
my weeping. David speaks from an inward 
conviction. He knows that he has prayed 
sincerely am 1 fervently. He is certain, there- 
fore, tliat his prayer is heard and accepted. 

Ver. 9. — The Lord hath heard my suppli- 
cation ; the Lord will receive — rather, hath 
received; irpoireSe|aTo (LXX.) — my prayer. 
The threefold repetition marks the absolute- 
ness of the psalmist's conviction. 

Ver. 10. — Let all mine enemies be ashamed 
and sore vexed; rather, all mine enemie* 
thaU heashamedand sore vexed (Bosenmiiller^ 
Kay, and others). Shame will fall upon 
David's enemies when their plots have 
failed, and deep vexation when they find 
him restored to health (ver. 4) and in the 
full enjoyment of the Divine favour. Let 
them return ; rather, they shall return ; i.e. 
'* retire," " turn their backs," " take to flight." 
As Hengstenberg says, " David sees his 
enemies, who are gathered around him for 
the attack, all at once in alarm give way." 
And be ashamed suddenly. It is doubly 
shameful to have to ily when one has been 
the assailant. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ver. 9. — Uie school of adversity. "The Lord hath heard," etc. This outburst of 
triumphant gratitude is like a sunbeam out of a dark, stormy sky. A wail of profound 
sadness echoes through the earlier portion of the psalm. In his deep affliction the 
psalmist seems to lose sight of the light beyond ; he sees but the dark silence of the 
grave (ver. 5). Suddenly the clouds part ; faith revives ; the conviction that (Jod is th« 
Hearer of prayer fills his soul with joy, and with the certain hope that God will answer. 

L Tbouble is the school of pbateb. In trouble even prayerless loula are often 
taught to pray (Pss. Ixxviii. 34 ; cvii. 6). 

" Eyes that the preacher could not school 
By wayside graves are raised ; 



rs. Ti. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 39 

And lips Bay, ' God be merciful I ' 
That ne'er said, ' God be praised I ' " 

(Mrs. Browning.) 

But even prayerful Christians have to own that there is no prayer like that we ofler 
in trouble. In prosperity prayer is apt to be vague, like an arrow shot skyward from a 
slack string. Prayer in trouble is like an arrow shot from a full-bent bow — straight at 
the mark. David's prayer was intensely personal, " my supplication ; " urgent, " the 
voice of my weeping ; " persistent, " all the night " (ver. 6) ; seizing hold on God's 
mercy as its plea (ver. 4). Even our blessed Lord learned this lesson (Heb. v. 7). 

IL Therefore, one pkincipaIi blessino op AFFLioTioif and stbono consolation 
under it is this — that thus our Father is teaching his child to pray. Our Lord teaches 
this lesson (Luke xi. 5, etc. ; xviii. 1, etc.). Never lose hold of this truth in darkest 
trouble, for without this it will be dark indeed — meaningless, hopeless, oorcfortless. 
The Lord has heard your prayer in the way of taking note of it — knows more about it 
than you do yourself. Therefore he will hear in the way of sending an answer : if not 
the exact answer you wish and expect, then something better. So St. Paul's thrice 
earnestly repeated prayer was answered with a refusal richer in grace and love than if 
his petition had been granted (2 Cor. xii. 7 — 9). 

Observe; If we lived nearer to God, more in the spirit and habit of prayer, in 
peaceful prosperous days, we might perhaps the less need to be taught in this sharp 
school. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The moan of a saint, and the mercy of hit Ood. For the significance 
of the title of this psalm, see the Exposition. An expositor well remarks that the 
confessed uncertainty on the part of the best Hebrew scholars as to the meaning ol 
many of the titles is a striking proof of their antiquity, since it shows that the clue 
thereto is lost in oblivion. This psalm belongs to those specified under the first head of 
our introductory homily, as one of those in which we have the stragglings and wrestlings 
of a saint in devotional exercises ; not the words of God to man, but the words of n.an 
to God, and as such they must be studied. We must not fall into the anachronism to 
which in our last homily we referred, of interpreting a psalm like this as if it had been 
written in full New Testament light; for we shall see as we proceed abundant indica- 
tion of the contrary. Yet there is here a priceless record of an early believer's experi- 
ence, from which troubled souls through all time may draw an abundance of comfort.* 
Here are — a moan, a prayer, a plea, an issue. 

I. I'he moan. It is not that of an impenitent man; at the same time, it bears no 
very clear indication of being a penitential wail over sin. It is the plaint of one who is 
overwhelmed with sorrow — with sorrow that has come upon him through his enemies. 
So intense is his anguish that it haunts him by night and by day ; it exhausts his frame, 
consumes his spirit. Note the various expressions : " withered away," " bones vexed," 
"sore vexed," "weary with groaning," " make my bed to swim," " water niy couch 
with my tears," " eyes dim," " eyesight wasting away," etc. What caused such over- 
whelming sorrow, we cannot tell. But this is of no consequence. The point to be 
noted is this — there are not unfrequently times in the experience of God's people when 
some care, or trouble, or perplexity is felt, and that so severe that they are haunted 
by it night and day; they cannot shake it off; and they cannot, even when at prayer, 
forget it. What are they to do? Let them not try to forget it; let them turn 
their prayers in that direction, so that the perplexity and the prayer are concurrent 
and not contrary forces. This is what the psalmist did.' This is what we should do. 

" Give othen the sunshine ; tell Jesus the rest." 

II. The PBATER. It is twofold. 1. Deprecatory. (Ver. 1, " Rebuke me not," etc.; 
' Dr. Cheyne says of this psalm, " The speaker is either the pious Israelite personified, 

or a representative righteous man, who feels the sins and sufferings of his people as hia 
own." There is not a word in the psalm to indicate anything of the Mnd. All the 
phrases show a strictly personal sorrow. 

'An excellent book by Mr. Sheppard, entitled ' Thoughts on Private Devotion,' haa a 
most helpful chapter on this topic. It is a pity such books shonld get out of date. 



10 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. ti. 1— 10. 



" nor chasten me in thine hot displeasure.") Here is one of the trace* of the Old 
Testament saints' thinking about God : they regarded their afflictions as indications of 
God's anger. We are now taught rather to regard them as a part of the gracious 
truning which ovir Father sees that we need. The sharpest trials often force out the 
most fervid prayers ; yet, at the same time, we are permitted to cry to our Father t« 
ask him to deal gently with us, and to " throw aw ay his rod," since " love will do tht 
work." 2. Supplicatory. " Mercy," " healing," " deliverance," " salvation,"— for these 
he pleads. Probably his yearning is mainly for temporal relief* and deliverance from 
his foes. But we, under similar circumstances, as we know more than the psalmist 
did, should rise higher than he could. We should regard temporal deliverances as 
entirely subordinate to the higher spiritual improvement, which ought to be earnestly 
prayed for as the result of every trial. We should always be more anxious to have 
our trials sanctified than to have them removed. 

III. The plea. This also is twofold. 1. The psalmist feels that his burden is so 
great, it will soon bring him to the grave, if not removed. Hence he says, " In death 
there is no remembrance of thee ; and in Sheol who shall give thee thanks? " Here is 
another proof that, in dealing with this specimen of the devotion of an Old Testament 
saint, we have to do with one to whom, as yet, life and immort»lity had not been 
brouaht to light; to whom death was but the passage to a dim and gloomy state of 
being ; although, as we shall see in dealing with Pss. xvi., xvii., there was the hope of 
an awakening. Still, " Sheol," the all-demanding realm, was not as yet lit up with 
gospel light. The Greek word " Hades " and the Hebrew word " Sheol " both refer to 
the state after death, though under different symbolic expressions.' Historically, there 
are three conceptions of Hades, or Sheol. (1) The pagan : all gloom and no hope. (2) 
The Hebrew : gloom, with hope of a blest awaking in the morning. (3) The 
Christian : no gloom at all, so far as the godly are concerned. " Absent from the 
body ; at home with the Lord." Hence we cannot now adopt ver. 5 of this prayer, 
knowing that our Lord Jesus Christ died for us, that whether we wake or sleep we 
should live together with him ; that hence our death is the gateway to rest, and that 
the time of our departure may be peacefully left in wiser hands than ours. 2. Th* 
psalmist grounds a second plea on the loving-kindness of God. This is better, surer 
ground (ver. 4). Yery often is this plea used. It cannot be used too often. It takes 
hold of God's strength. 

IV. Thk issue. 1. Tfie psalmist receives an answer to his prayer. (See Ps. xxxiv. 6.) 
Thousands can say the same. "The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. 
2. Consequently, there is : (1) New confidence Godward (ver. 9). " The Lord will 
receive my prayer." As he has done in the past, so he will continue to do.' New 
courage manward (ver. 10, Revised Versi( n). Yea, by prayer the spirit is calmed. 
Trouble is turned to rest, fear to bravery, and despair to hope. Note : How much 
care and worry good people would save themselves if they did but take all their 
troubles to God at once, without waiting till they obtained such hold upon them 1 
(2) It is infinitely better to tell God everything, than to go about moaning and 
groaning to our fellows 1 God knows all. He never misunderstands us. He knows 
exactly how to help us. He will help us, at the right moment, in the best way, and 
to the full extent of our need ; yea, he will do " exceeding abundantly above all that 
we ask or think." — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — A cry to Ood, and its response. I. The obt or the fainting soul. 
Circumstances are ailverse. There is gloom without and within. Conscience accuses. 
God seems full of wrath. Death is regarded, not as a release, but as the minister of 
judgment ; and the grave, not as a quiet resting-place, but as a " pit," loathsome and 

' Though Babiger goes too far when he says that the supplication of the psalmist has 
not in view deliverance from sin : many petitions in the Psalms disprove such a strong 
statement. See ' Theological Eneyclopsedia,' vol. ii. p. 142 (Clark). 

^ See the writer's exposition of Eev. i. 18 (' Pulpit Commentary '). To the Hebrew the 
main thought of the after-world was that of " the all-demanding realm ; " hence the word 
" Sheol." To the Greek, it was " the unseen world ; " hence the word "Hades." 

" See a study on prayer, entitled, " Liberty and Prevalence in Prayer," in our homily on 
\ John V. 14, 15 ('Pulpit Commentary'). 



M. Ti.1-10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 4i 

terrible. Amidst the darkness, and with fears oa every side : 1. OocP$ indignatUm it 
deprecated. Affliction is hard to bear ; but with God's wrath it would be overwhelming. 

2. Qod'a pity in appealed to. Weakness is pleaded, and the hope expressed that in 
deserved wrath God will remember mercy. His smile will turn the darkness to light 

3. Qod's deliverance is entreated. It is craved on the ground of God's mercies (ver. 4). 
It is urged on account of the brevity of life, and because death will put an end to the 
power of serving God in this world (ver. 6). It is claimed as the only relief for thr 
helpless and miserable (ver. 7). 

n. The besfonsb of a aBAOions God. It is said the darkest hour is that before the- 
dawn. So here the psalmist, in his utter weakness and woe, turning from sin nntc 
Gh>d, finds help. A light surprises him like sunrise breaking in suddenly on a dark 
night (vers. 8, 9). The answer from God is not only quick and timely, but effectual. 
Thrice the glad neart says, " God has heard," thus confirming to itself the news which 
seems almost too good to be true, — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Night and morning in the toul. I, Nioht. There is darkness. God 
hides himself. There is dreariness. The soul is left alone with sad and distressing 
thoughts. There is depression. The ghosts of past misdeeds rise up. There are 
nameless terrors. But though perplexed, there need not be despair. God is near. He 
can help. He can even give songs in the night. 

XL MoBNiNO. Light comes, bringing hope and peace. God has heard the cry of 
his child. Such deliverances are comforting. They not only show God's mercy and 
truth, but they prophesy of complete redemption. If there be night, let us wait for 
the morning. The weary traveller, the tempest-tossed mariner, the city watch- 
man dreading the assault of the foe, comfort themselves with the thought that the 
morning cometh. So let us look up, for our redemption draweth nigh (Luke xxi. 28). 
— W. P, 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Great afflietionti greater consolation. The language in this psalm maj 
seem exaggerated and unreal. But it is not so. Want of imagination and sympathy 
in some, and want of experience in others, make them nnfit judges. We neither know 
our strength nor our weakness till we are tried. The man who may have stood up to 
help others in their troubles may be cast down and disconsolate when visited with 
trouble himself (Job iv. 3 — 5). Learn — 

L That thebe abe wobse afflictions tham we know of. We must not make 
our life the limit, nor our experience the standard. Besides what we see, there is what 
we only hear of, and besides all these, there are miseries beyond our wildest imaginings. 
Even as to ourselves, let our case be ever so bad, we can conceive of its becoming worse. 
What a glimpse have we of the dread possibilities of the future in that solemn word of 
our Lord to the man who had for thirty and eight years been a helpless cripple, " Sin 
no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee " (John v. 14) 1 

n. That there abe adeqttate consolations foe the sevbbbst tbials. Come 
what will, God is our Kefuge and our Strength. Let us therefore be patient and trust. 
Let us also be thankful. Things might be far worse than they are. Let us also bear 
ourselves gently and kindly to others who suffer. It is those who have themselves 
been sorely tried who can best sympathize, as it is those who have themselves been 
<r>mforted who can best comfort others (2 Cor. i. 3 — 5). — W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Deliverance from sore troMe. "In the malice of his enemies David 
sees the rod of God's chastisement, and therefore makes his prayer to God for deliver- 
ance. The struggle has lasted so long, the grief is so bitter, that his health has given 
way, and he has been brought to the gates of the grave. But ere long light and 
peace visit him, and he breaks forth into the joy of thanksgiving." 

L A PlOTDBB OF complicated DISTRESS. 1. Danger from outward foes. Producing 
constant fear and anxiety, and perhaps threatening his life. 2. A sense of ieing under 
the chastising hand of Ood. The malice of his enemies was regarded as the rod by 
which God in his anger was punishing him — an Old Testament view. " As many as 
1 love I rebuke and chasten " — the New Testament view. 3. 2%ese two things caused 
the prostration of both body and soul. Mental troubles are the causes of our severest 



42 



THE BOOK. 3P PSALMS. 



[w, TII. 1—17. 



ai&ictions and sufferings. Threatened by man, frowned upon by God, laid low by 
disease, — that is the picture here given. 

II. Arguments used in support of the ckt foe deliverance. "Let thine anger 
cease;" "Poigive my sins." 1. Because of the extremity of my sufferings. He 
" languished " (ver. 2). His " bones were terrified " (ver. k!). His " soul sore vexed " 
(ver. 3;. His bed swam with his tears (ver. 6). His eye wasted and grew dim with 
his grief (ver. 7). It is an appeal to the Divine pity. " He will not keep his anger for 
ever." 2. His power of endurance was exhausted. " Jehovah, how long ? " I cannot 
endure the severity of thy judgments. "How long?" was all Calvin said in his 
most intense grief. Here it means, " Do not quite destroy me, for I am well-nigh 
ipent." Still a cry for mercy. 3. Because his death would put an end to his power to 
praise Ood. " There is here the childlike confidence which fears not to adTance the 
plea that God's glory is concerned in granting his request." And that is the ground 
of all true prayer — the granting will honour thee. Those in Sheol lived a spectral, 
shadowy life, apart from the light of God's presence, and could not praise him. 
" The living, the living, he shall praise thee." The meaning here is — it is pleaiing to 
God to be praised, and pleasing to himself to praise. 

III. The triumph of relieving, penitentiai, prater. Salvation from his enemies 
had become a patent fact. God had forgiven, and he was safe, and could now 
rejoice. The psalm epitomizes his experience, and that accounts for the sudden change 
in the eighth verse. Our sins are our greatest foes, and when God, through Christ, 
forgives them, that is the hour of our greatest triumph. — 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM vn. 



Ths composition of this psalm by David, 
asserted in the title, is generally allowed. 
Internal evidence seems to indicate for its 
date the earlier portion of David's public 
life— that during which he suffered perse- 
oation at the hands of Saul. There are 
two considerable difficulties connected with 
the title : (1) the meaning of " Shiggaion 
of David ; " and (2) the determination of the 
Identity of " Cush the Benjamite." " Shig- 
gaion " is connected by some with the 
"Shigioneth" of Hab. iii. 1, which is com- 
monly explained to be a particular kind of 
tnne or tunes. But the identity of the two 
words is uncertain, and the identity of their 
meaning, at an interval of nearly six cen- 
turies, is still more open to question The 
meaning of "Shiggaion" has really to be 
guested from tlie context; and the most 
probable of the conjectures made would seem 
to be, either simply, " a poem of David," or 
"a lyrical composition of David" — a mean- 
ing which obtains a certain amount of sup- 
port from the Arabic With respect to 
" Cusn the Benjamite," it has been argued 
(1) that he was a person, otherwise un- 
known, whc held a high position among the 
courtiers of Saul (' Speaker's Commentary,' 
vol. iv. p. 183); (2) that he was Saul him- 



self (Hengstenberg) ; (3) that he was 
Shimei (2 Sam. xvi. 5 — 13), represented 
under a feigned name (Kay). This last 
conjecture brings the psalm down to too 
late a date; the two others are equally 
possible, and almost equally plausible. If 
a preference is to be given to either of them 
over the other, we should incline to the 
view of Hengstenberg, that Saul is meant, 
and that he is called " Gush," with allusion 
to his father's name being Kish. Suoh 
plays upon words have always found much 
favour in the East. 

The psalm has but one marked division, 
that between vers. 1 — 5 and vers. 6 — 17, 
where the term telah occurs. The re- 
mainder runs on continuously, without any 
marked break. 

Ver. 1.— Lord my God, in thee do I put 
my trust (compare the openings of Pss. 
xi., xzxi., and Ixxi.). When David is most 
sorely pressed by persecution and danger, 
then is his faith and trust in God most 
plainly apparent. Save me from all them 
that persecute me, and deliver me. The 
Bevised Version has, "from all them that 
pursue me ; " but " persecute " is better. 
Hengstenberg and Kay have, "from nil my 
persecutors." So also French and Skinner. 
The persecutors are such men as the Ziphites 
and others, who encouraged Saul in his 
attempts to take David's life (1 Sam. xxvi. 
1, 19). 



PS. VII. 1—17.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



43 



Ver. 2.— Lest he tear my sonl like a lion 
(oomp. Ps. y. 6, where there is a similar abrupt 
transition from the plural to the singular 
number). On both ocoasione David feara 
one special enemy — then prohably Ahitho- 
phel, now Saul. The simile of the lion is 
one frequent in the Psalms (see Pss. x. 9 ; 
xvii. 12 ; ixii. 13, 21 ; xxxv. 17 ; liv. 4, etc.). 
Bending it in pieces. As the lion does a 
sheep. While there is none to deliver. No 
human helper, at once willing and able to 
give deliverance. 

Ver. 3. — Lord my God, if I have done 
this ; t'.e. " this which is laid to my charge." 
The general charge against David in Saul's 
lifetime was that he " sought the king's 
hurt" (1 Sam. xxiv. 9). Afterwards he 
was accused of being "a bloody man" 
(2 Sam. xvi. 8) — the death of Ishbosheth, 
•nd perhaps of others, being regarded as his 
work. If there be iniquity in my hands. 
If, i.e., I have oommitted any criminal act, 
if any definite offence can be charged against 
me. Human weakness and imperfection 
David does not mean to deny, but, like Job, 
he maintains in a certain qualified sense his 
righteousness. 

Ver. 4. — If I have rewarded evil unto 
him that was at peace with me. This is 
probably the true meaning. David denies 
that he has wantonly attacked and injured 
any one with whom ho was on friendly and 
peaceable terms. No doubt he was accused 
of having estranged Saul by plotting to take 
the crown from Mm. (Yea, I have delivered 
him that without cause is mine enemy.) 
This translation, which is retained by our 
Bevisers, has the support also of Ewald, 
Hupfeld, Mr. Aglen, and the 'Speaker's 
Commentary.' If accepted, it must be con- 
■idered as a reference to 1 Sam xxiv. 7, or 
else to 1 Sam. xxvi. 9, or both, and as a 
sort of parenthetic protest, " Nay, not only 
have I not injured a friend, but 1 have gone 
go far as to let my enemy escape me." A 
different meaning is, however, given to the 
passage by many critics, as Bosenmuller, 
Hengstenberg, Bishop Horsley, Oheyne, etc., 
who regard the sense as running on witliout 
any parentiiesis, and translate, "If I have 
oppressed him who without cause is mine 
enemy." David, according to this view, 
denies that he has either injured a friend or 
requited evil to a foe. 

Ver. 5. — Let the enemy persecute my 
lOiU, and take it. " If I have been guilty 
of any of these acts, then let my enemy not 
only persecute my soul, as he is doing (vers. 
1, 2), but take it — ^make it his prey — obtain 
fill power over it." Tea, let him tread down 
my life npon the earth ; i.e. " utterly destroy 
me and bring me to min." And not only 
■o, but also lay mine honour in the dust ; i.e. 
" bring me down to th« grave with shame." 



Compare the imprecations of Job upon him. 
self (Jol> xxxi. 8, 10, 22, 40). 

Ver. 6. — Arise, Lord, in thina auger. 
To call on God to " arise " is to ask him to 
tali:e action, to lay aside tlie neutral attitude 
in which he most commonly slinwa himself 
to man, and to interfere openly in the con- 
cerns of earth. To call ou him to " arise in 
his anger" is to entreat him to vindicate 
our cause against those opposed to us, and 
to visit them with some open manifestation 
of his displeasure (comp. Pss. iii. 7 : ix. 
19; X. 12; xvii. 13; xliv. 26; Ixviii. 1). 
Lift up thyself. This is even a stronger 
expression than "arise" (Isa. xxxiii. 10) 
It is a call on God to appear in his full 
strength. Because of the rage of mine 
enemies ; or, against the rage of mine enemies 
(Kay, Bevised Version). Force must be 
met by force. David justifies his appeal for 
aid by alleging the violenee and fury of 
those whose attacks he has to meet. And 
awake for me to the judgment that thou 
hast commanded. The two clauses are not 
connected in the original, which runs, 
"Awake for me: thou hast commanded 
judgment." The meaning seems to be, 
" Arouse thyself on my behalf — judgment is 
a thing which thou hast ordained — surely 
now is the time for it." 

Ver. 7. — So shall the congregation of the 
people compass thee about. Tiien, if thou 
wilt show thyself in judgment, the congre- 
gation of ihe peoples — not, apparently, Israel 
only — will crowd around thee, in acknow- 
ledgment of thy majesty, and recognize in 
thee the righteous Judge of all the earth. 
For their sakes therefore return thou on high ; 
rather, and above it (or, above them ; i.e. 
above the congregation of the peoples) re- 
turn thou on high. After coming down to 
earth, and executing judgment, then go 
back to thy throne in heaven. 

Ver. 8. — The Lord shall judge the people. 
Hitherto judgment lias been prayed for, 
now it is announced, "The Lord shall 
judge" — shall decide between David and 
his enemies — shall judge them in his anger, 
and at the same time judge David, i.e. 
vindicate his cause. David has no desire 
to escape this judgment. Judge me, he 
says, Lord, according to my righteousness. 
Judge me, i.e., and, if thou findest me right- 
eous, acquit me and vindicate me. And 
according to mine integrity that is in me; 
literally, which is on me (comp. Job xxix. 
24, " I put on righteousness, and it clothed 
me; my judgment was as a robe and a 
diadem "). 

Ver. 9. — Oh let the wickedness of th« 
wicked come to an end. It is not the re- 
moval of the wicked, but the removal of 
their wickedness, that David desires (comp. 
Ps. z. 15). Bat establish the just ; t.e. pro- 



44 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. VII. 1 — 17, 



tect, strengthen, and sustain him. For the 
ligfhteons Ood trieth the hearts and reina 
(oomp. Jer. xi. 20 ; xvii. 10 ; xx. 12). " The 
heart, as the seat of the naderstanding and 
the will, the reins of natural impulses and 
affections " (' Speaker's Commentary '). 

Ver. 10.— My defence is of God ; literally, 
my shield U on Ood; i.e. "rests on him" 
(Kay)--is upheld by him. Which saveth 
the upright in heart (oomp. Ps. oxxv. 4). 

Ver. 11.— Sod judgeth the righteous; 
rather, Ood is a righteous Judge. So Bosen- 
miiller, Bishop Horsley, Dr. Kay, the 
' Speaker's Commentary,' and the Revised 
Version. And Ood is angry with the wicked 
every day. There is no need of inserting 
the words, "with the wicked," since, o/ 
course, it is with the wicked that God is 
angry. What the psalmist means to assert 
Qspeoially is that God's anger continues 
against the wicked as long as their wicked- 
ness continues. 

Yer. 12. — If he torn not, he (i.e. Otoi) 
will whet his sword (comp. Deut. xxxii. 
41 ; Isa. xxvii. 1 ; xxxiv. 5). " Every new 
transgression," says Bishop Home, " sets a 
fresh edge to God's sword." He hath bent 
his bow, and made it ready; rather, Ae Aatb 
hent hit bow, and fixed it; ie. held it in the 
position for taking aim. 

Ver. 13. — ^He hath prepared for him the 
instruments of death. These are probably 
not the swoid and the bow, but the " arrows " 
of the next clause. They are prepareil " for 
him," t.«. for the wicked man. He ordaineth 
his arrows against the persecutors ; rather, 
he maketh his arrows to he fiery ones. 
Hengstenberg notes that " in sieges it was 
customary to wrap inflammable matter 
round arrows, and to shoot them after it had 
been kindled" (compare the "fiery darts" 
of St. Paul, Eph. vi. 16). 

Yer. 14. — Behold, he trkTaileth with ini- 
quity, and hath conceived mischief, and 
brought forth falsehood (oomp. Job xv. 
aS; Isa. lix.4). The " falsehood " intended 
it proteibly the bringing of false charges 
against David (see vers. 8 — 5). 



Yer. 15. — He made a pit, and digged it| 
and is fallen into the ditoh whioh he made 
(comp. Fss. ix. 15, 16; xxx^. S; Ivii. 6; 
Proy. xxvi 27 ; xxviii. 10, etc.). There are 
several illustrations of this law of God's 
providence in Scripture, the most striking 
being that of Haman. Its existence as a 
law was noticed by some of the classical 
writers, as Ovid, who says — 

"Nee lex justior uUa est, 
Qnam neois artifices arte perire sua." 

Yer. 16. — His mischief shall return npoa 
hif own head, and his violent dealing upon 
his own pate. Some critics see in this a 
continuation of the metaphor, and suppose 
that, while the sinner is in the pit, the heap 
which his own hands have thrown out falls 
in upon him and crushes him. But it ii 
perhaps better to understand the words in a 
more general way. 

Yer. 17. — I will praise the Lord according 
to bis righteousness. Another abrupt tran- 
sition — a song of thankfulness to JehovE^ 
for giving the deliverance whioh the psalm- 
ist foresees, and considers as good as accom- 
plished. And will sing praise to the Name 
of the Lord most high (comp. Ps. viiL I, 
9, " How excellent is thy Name in all the 
earth 1 "). God is identified with his Name 
very commonly in Scripture, or, perhaps we 
should say, the Name of God is used as a 
periphrasis for God himself. Where God 
puts ids special presence, he is said to " pat 
his Name " (Deut. xli. 5, 21 : 1 Kings xiv. 
21; 2 Chron. xii. 13). His Name is "holy 
and reverend" (Ps. cxi. 19); "incense ia 
offered unto it" (Mai. i. 11); it is "magni- 
fied for ever" (1 Ohron. xvii. 24); for it 
the temple is built (1 Kings viii. 44); 
through it the godly "tread down their 
enemies " (Ps. xliv. 5) ; the " desire of men's 
souls is to it " (Isa. xxvi. 8). (See also Pas. 
xcii. 1 ; xcvi. 8 ; xcix. 3 ; ciii. 1 ; cv. 1 ; 
exiii. I ; cxv. 1 ; cxix. 55 ; oxlv. 1, 2, 21 ; 
oxlviii. 13 ; oxliz. &) 



HOMILETICS. 

Yer. 11. — OocP$ righteoui displeasure against tin is an (Aiding reality. "Ood is a 
righteous Judge," etc. (Revised Version). Confidence in Divine justice is one of the 
deepest roots of religion. On this faith Abraham based bis daring but humble inter- 
cession for the cities (Gen. xviii. 26). To this justice the psalmist, deeply wronged 
and falsely accused, makes impassioned appeal. This (and many other passages of) 
Scripture is grievously misjudged if read as the outpouring of persoi-al revenge. David 
is perfectly willing to suffer, if he deserves it (vers. 4, 6). The enemies against whom 
(here and elsewhere) he appeals are not merely his private foes, but (3od's enemiea 
public rebels against law and truth, "workers of iniquity." "God is angry . . . 
•very day." Q.d. : Ood's righteous displeasure against sin is an abiding realSy. 

1. CoKsoiKHOK FBOVEB THIS. Conscience is the echo within the soul of God s v ice, 
" accusing w else excusing " (Bom. iL 16), praising or blaming, saying always, " Thou 



P8. VII. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF PSALM3. 46 

shalt do right ; thou shalt not do wrong." Thii voice may be dulled and Bilenced by the 
practice ol sin (" conscience seared," 1 Tim. iv. 2), or perverted by false philosophy or 
false religiuus belief. But It is God's witness, for all that. Note that praise and blame 
imply one another. If God had no holy wrath against wrong, he could have no delight 
in and approval of goodness. 

II. God'b chakacteb pboveb this. The more benevolent any one is, the more 
3dious cruelty is to him ; the more truthful, the more lie hates and despises lying lips; 
the more generous, the more he scorns meanness; the more just, the more indignant he 
is at injustice. So, summing up every morally good quality under "holiness," every 
immoral quality under " sin," the more we think of God as perfectly holy, the more 
we must infer his hatred of sin. It is " that abominable thing " (Jer. xliv. 4). 

III. God's love pboves it. (See on Ps. v. 4, 5.) Suppose a mother sees her child 
ill used, tortured, murdered ; a son hears his parents foully slandered ; a loyal soldier 
sees insult offered to his sovereign ; a true patriot finds his country unjustly assailed; — 
just proportionate to the warmth of love is the flame of righteous indignation. We 
do but maim and caricature Divine love if we deny God's righteous anger against sin. 

IV. God's dealings prove it. In point of fact, every day brings new examples — 
new proof is needless — that •' it is a righteous thing with God " (2 Thess. i. 6) to 
punish sin. In some cases the connection is obvious (e.^. disease from intemperance, 
gluttony, licentiousness), the road to ruin short and open ; in others, it is slow and 
hidden (as the destruction of trust and respect by lying, of all that is noble and joyful 
in life by covetousness). We are all so bound up that the pure and innocent suffer 
through the vicious and unprincipled. But the main lessons of providence are plain. 
" Righteousness exalteth a nation ; " " The wages of sin is death." 

V. The gospel of salvation tbom ^in peoveb rr. The transcendent sufferings 
of the Son of God admit no rational explanation but that given in Scripture : " He 
bare our sins ; " gave " his life a ransom " (1 Pet. ii. 24 ; Matt. xx. 28 ; comp. Bom. 
iii. 25 ; 2 Cor. v. 21). Apart from this reason, the death of Jesus would be the darkest 
enigma in God's providence; the most inexplicable, discouraging, and melancholy event 
in human history. Never forget that in not sparing hu Son (Bom. viii. 32) the Father 
was, in truth, taking the burden of our sin on himself. 

Conclusion. To treat sin lightly is to set our judgment up against God's ; to show 
ourselves out of sympathy witli him and unlike him, and therefore incapable of 
communion with him here or of happiness in his presence hereafter. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — The slandered saint appealing to hit Ood.^ There is nothing like the 
trials of life to constrain to prayer ; and no prayers are so full of deep meaning as those 
forced out by such trials. There is no reason for doubting the Davidic authorship of 
this psalm. It well accords with some known episodes in his experience, and is just 
such an appeal to the great Judge of all the earth as he might be expected to make 
when unjustly accused ; specially when accused of evil in the very direction in which 
he had most strikingly restrained himself therefrom. But what a mercy that the true 
believer has such a God to whom he can flee, and that he can feel assured that, however 
unjust man may be, there is ever one tribunal high above all the people, at which 
absolute justice will be done I No believer can possibly find out all that God is to him 
till he has thus to flee to his throne for refuge from the storm. Let wronged and 
slandered Christians study the method and words of an Old Testament psalmist under 
circumstances to which their own are somewhat analogous. 

L The oircumstanobs hndeb which this psalm was wbittkh akk oucaklt indi- 
cated.' Four features mark them. 1. A Jierce enemy it raging again$t the writer. 
One fierce as the wild beasts against which, as a shepherd, he had had to defend his 
flock (ver. 2). 2. Oharget of evU-doing a/re made against Mm. The tone of the third 

' For general readers, the notes of the B.T.8. edition of the ' Book of Psahiu ■ will be 
kelpfnl with regard to the titles of the psalms. , , . „ , . i. 

' Dr. Cheyne says, "A national psalm it is, beyond donbt; we would rather •»/, " Its 
forms of expression show it to be a personal psalin, beyond donbt" 



46 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. vii. 1—17. 

verse indicates this, although we have no means of knowing who the " Gush " might 
be that brought forward these charges. It is no uncommon thing for good men to 
find tliemselves the victims of false accusations. Such accusations, however false, will 
do injury, siuce (1) some one or other will be sure to believe tliem,even in the absence 
of proof; and (2) no man can prove a negative, i.e. he cannot show what he has not 
done. This rule, that no one is expected to prove a negative, holds good in logic, and 
it ought to be regarded in other departments also ; but, unfortunately, people are not 
as careful as they should be about screening another's reputation. Unspeakable distress 
may thereby be occasioned to innocent men. 3. The psalmist kiwws these charges are 
false; and therefore, thnugh appeal to man is vain, he can and does appeal to God 
(vers. 3, 4). 4. Notwithstanding this, his enemy's rage is actually threatening his life. 
(See ver. 2.) It is bad to plot against life ; it is equally bad to poison a man's reputa- 
tion ; yea, worse. Let those who are slandered read such psalms as this over and over 
ajain, thiU they may see how the saints of old were tried in like manner, and what 
was the course they pursued. 

II. Undeb such circumstances, the bblieveb makes God his Refuge. (See 
ver. 1, Revised Version margin, " In thee do I take refuge.") While the storm is 
raging without, the believer is hidinu; in his God. "Thou wilt hide me in thy presence 
from the pride of man; thou wilt keep me secretly in thy jiavilion from the strife of 
tongues." The attributes of God, which are a terror to tlie wicked, are the shelter of 
the righteons. 1. Ood's righteousness. (Ver. II.) 2. His searching the reins and 
hearts. (Ver. 9.) 3. His commanding Judgment, either in the way of precept, by laws 
which may not be slighted, or in the way of administration, by chastisements which 
cannot be evaded. Even so these features of the Divine character and administration 
are the joy of injured innocence (ver. 10, " My shield is with God," Revised Version). 
And in a case like this, the saint can say, in faith, hope, and love, " Lord my God." 
To know this — that God is ours — and that sooner or later he will set us right, is of 
incalculable value in such sore distresses. 

III. It is well if in such cases the pleading one can assert before God 
HIS OWN integbitt. The third, fourth, and fifth verses ought not to be regarded 
either as assertion of perfect righteousness, nor yet as the utterances of conceit;' nor 
should we be warranted in regarding even the eighth verse as an indication of selt- 
righteousness. Not by any means. Let us take the psalm for what it manifestly is, 
and all is clear. It is the appeal of a slandered man to God ; it is the appeal of one 
who knows that, so far as the charges of his enemy are concerned, he is innocent 
(cf. 1 Sam. xxiv., xxvi.), and that therefore he may with confidence refer his case to 
the tribunal which is infinitely above those of earth (Ps. xviii. 18 — 24). Note : There 
is a very wide difference between the self-righteousness which regards itself as blame- 
less before God, and the conscious integrity which can look any man in the face without 
flinching. Of the former the psalmist had none (of. Pss. xxv. 7, 11 ; cxliii. 2). It 
would be wicked to pretend innocence before God; but, in a case like the psalmist's, 
it would be unnanly not to assert it before men. Cromwell said, " I know that God 
is above all ill reports, and that he will in his own time vindicate me." 

rV. Under such pbessuee from without the pkater is direct, pointed, and 
CLEAB. The psalmist does not deem it needful to cover the whole ground of possible. 
prayer on each occasion. He lays the burden of the moment before God, and leaves it 
there. His petitions are fivefold. 1. Arise, Lord I (Ver. 6.) 2. Save me I (Ver. 1.) 
Z. Vindicate me! (Ver. 8.) ^. Bring wickedness to an end I (Ver. 9.) &. Establish the 
jtuti (Ver. 9.) Note : When the heart is overweighted with sorrow and anxiety, let 
us always tell our God exactly the state of the case. We need not go over all points 
of religion or theology in every prayer ; let us just tell God the matter of immediate 
pressure (cf. Pss. cxlii. 2 ; x.Nxiv. 4, 6 ; Phil. iv. 6, 7). Such petitions as are forced out 
by sorrow may be sent up in all loving confidence to our Father in heaven. He will 
excuse all their mistakes, and answer them in the fulness of love. 

V. These is indicated a full assurance of God's appbabing for judgment. 

We do not now refer to " the last judgment," but to those judgments which are often 

manifest in the providence of God (cf. I.^a. xxvi. 9, latter part). And he who studil f 

history, and observes the times with a view to watching the movements of God in til 

' It ii itrangis that Dr. Cheyne should so entirely have missed the meaning here. 



«.Yii.l— 17.J THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 47 



svorld, will find abundant illustration of the two features of a perpetual judgment 
-which has long been, still is; and yet will be, going forward in the world ; and that in 
two diiections. 1. As regards the vncJced. (1) G-od is angry every day; his holy 
indignation ever goes forth against sin. There is no feature of human life more striking 
-than the sorrow and misery which follow on sin. (2) God sends forth his arrows, 
yea, fiery arrows (ver. 13). (3) The evil which bad men devise against others often 
•comes back on their owa head (vers. 15, 16). Many a Haman hangs on the gallows 
he had prepared for MorJecai.* 2. As regards the righteous. " Who saveth them that 
are upright of heart " (ver. 10). Even so. The whole of the thirty-seventh psalm ii 
an exposition of this fact, and the seventy-third psalm is an illustration of it. Obser- 
vation and experience will perpetually furnish new proofs of the same. " Whoso is 
-wise, and will observe these things, even he shall understand the loving-kindness of 
the Lord."— C. 

Ver. 3. — Purity of heart. " If I have done this." 

I. True innoobnob la habeed bt humility. David is bold before men, but 
jiumble before God. Why? There is the sense that innocence is limited and imper- 
4iect. We may be free from particular sins, and yet be guilty in others. Besides, 
'tanocence is but comparative. Measured by the standard of men, we may be without 
offence, but tried by the holy, spiritual Law of God, we are convicted of innumerable 
«ins, and behind all is a sinful heart. 

II. Associated with mbbot. "Tea, I have delivered him" (ver. 4). So David 
<lealt gently with Saul. His magnanimous sparing of him when he was in his power 
was no mere impulse, but the free outcome of his loving and generous heart. The 
merciful, whom our Lord has blessed, are placed between those who " hunger and 
thirst after righteousness " and " the pure in heart," who see God. 

III. Appeals with confidence to thb judqmbnt op God. The sense of right 
prophesies of the tiiumph of right. Having faith in the justice of God, we can leave 
all In his hands ; and, loving him and assured of his love toward us, we can patiently 
await the end, knowing that all things shall work together for our good. — ^W. F. 

Ver. 1. — Ood the true Eefuge of the soul. This psalm, like many others, refers to 
a time of trial. The key-note may, perhaps, be found in rer. 1, " In thee." When 
trouble comes we naturally look out from ourselves for help. Some lean upon friends ; 
■others cry for a favourable change of circumstances; while others again preach 
patience to themselves, in the hope that somehow deliverance will come. But only by 
-trusting in God can we find real help ; he is the Adullam, the true Refuge of the soul. 
^' In thee." Here is— 

I. Ebscitb teom sin. When the paralytic was let down in the midst of the people 
1)efore our Lord, his first word to him was, " Thy sins are forgiven thee." He needed 
bealing, but he more sorely needed deliverance from sin. And so it is with us. 
Troubles may press heavily on the soul, but the first and chief thing is to be made 
right with God. Let this be done, and then we can bear the ills of life with patience, 
and face the future without fear (Ps. cxliii. 9). 

II. Bbfuge fbom social oppeessioks. Foes may be many and fierce ; their 
tongues may be as sharp sworda, and their malice unrelenting. Much that they speak 
against us may be false and calumnious ; much more may be cruel perversions of the 
truth ; but so long as we are able to rest in God, we are safe. He is just ; he is the 
true Vindicator ; he will not only defend us, but deliver us. Like Job, we can say, 
"" I know that my Redeemer liveth " (Job xix. 25). 

in. Rest amidst the confusions and miseries of the world. Evil abounds. 
We often feel constrained to cry, with the gentle Oowper — 

" My ear is pain'd. 
My soul is sick with every day's report 
Of wrong and outrage with wliich earth is fiU'd." 

"What then? How little can we do in the way of remedy I We can feel grief; we 
«an express sympathy ; we can try, as we have opportunity, to lessen human woe ; 

■ See a striking Uluitration in Spurgeon's ' Treasury of David,' in los. 



i% 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. vm. 1 — ft. 



we can bear our part in the great business of confession, humbling ourselves before the 
Lord for the sini of others as well as our own. There may be no result. Things may 
even seem to grow worse; but in the darkest hour we can cry, " Our Father, . . . deliver 
ug from evil ; " and take comfort from the thought that not only is God " our Father," 
but that his are " the kingdom and the power and the glory." " In thee : " here is 
hope for the sinner, and comfort for the saint. " In thee : " here is defence for the 
weak, and inspiration for the worker, and a bright future for all who long and labour 
for the advancement of truth and righteousness (Isa. xxvi. 20, 21 ; Rev, xix. 6). — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Trust in God. An earnest appeal to God to save him from the 
wickedness of men who would requite him with evil for the good he had done in 
sparing Saul's life. The charge against him probably was that he still sought the 
life ot Saul ; and they plotted against his life. In the midst of this wrong and danger, 
what was his resource ? 

I. Trust in God. Not in counter-plotting against his enemies, nor neglecting the 
use of means for his own safety ; but faith in the all-controlling providence of God. 

II. A LOFTY coNsoiouBNESs OF iNNooENCE. (Vcrs. 3 — 5.) JTothing can give such 
confidence in a righteous God as the consciousness of righteousness in ourselves. We 
cannot pray for Divine help if we regard iniquity in our heart. 

III. In his blamblessnbss he appeals to God foe jtroaMBNT between hib 
AND HIS ENEMIES. (Vers. 6 — 9.) He calls upon God to " arise," " to lift himself up," 
"to awake," to exert his mightiest power in doing justice to both sides. 

IV. God's bighteottsnbss gives him hope that the overthrow of his enemies 
IS NEAR. (Vers. 10 — 13.) God's justice is a manifest present fact, not deferred. " He 
judgeth the righteous, and is angry with the wicked every day." The overthrow may 
come at any moment. 

V. The overthrow has already begun, and this gives him confidbnob ani> 
GRATITUDE. " Is fallen into the ditch which he made." Deliverance is come, there- 
fore " I will sing praise to the Name of the Lord most high." But he did not see this 
so clearly before. Experience opens our eyes. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PBALM VIII. 



Pi. Tin. is altogether a psalm of praise 
and thanksgiving. Its primary idea is the 
condesoendlng love and goodness of God 
towards man. That God, who had made 
the heavens, and set his glory ou them, 
shonld have a regard for man, and " visit 
him," and not only so, but give him so lofty 
•A position, BO exalted a destiny, is a thought 
that is well-nigh overwhelming. The 
psalmist, filled with the thought, can do no 
less than pour out his feelings of love and 
gratitude in song. The Davidical author- 
ship is generally allowed. Wliat "upon 
Gittith " means is very uncertain, but the 
most probable conjecture is that a melody, 
or musical style, which David had learnt at 
Gath, ii intended. 

Ver. 1. — lord our lord. In the original, 
Jehovah Adoneynu ; i.e. " Jehovah, who art 
our sovereign Lord and Master." As David 
is here the moutlipiece of humanity, praising 
God for mercies common to all men, he uses 



the plural pronoun instead of the singular 
one. How excellent is thy Name in all the 
earth ! or, " How glorious is thy Name I " 
(Kay, Cheyne). Who hast set thy glory 
above the heavens. It is diflicult to obtain 
this sense from the present Hebrew text; 
but some corruption of the text is suspected,. 
Ver. 2. — Out of the month of babes and 
sucklings hast thou ordained strength. By 
" babes and sucklings " are meant young 
children just able to lisp God's praises, and 
often doing so, either through pious teaching 
or by a sort of natural instinct, since 
" Heaven lies about us in our infancy " 
(Wordsworth). These scarce articulate 
mutterings form a foundation on which the 
glory of God in part rests. Because of thine 
enemies. To put them to shame, who, having 
attained to manhood, refuse to acknowledge 
God. That thou mightest still the enemy 
and the avenger. It scarcely seems as if any 
■ingle individual — either Absalom, or Ahi- 
thophel, or even Satan (Kay) — is intended. 
Kather the words are used generally of all 
those who are enemies of God, and desirou» 
of revenging themselves upon him. The 
existence of suoli persons is well shown by 
Hengstenberg. 



IPS. VIII. 1 — 9.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



49 



Vei. 3. — ^Whea I consider thy heavens 
<oom^. Pbs. xix. 1; xxziii.6; civ. 2). David, 
in his shepherd-life, had bad abundant 
opportunity of " considering the heavens," 
and liad evidently scanned them Trith the 
eye of a poet and an intense admirer of 
nature. It ia probably in remembrance of 
the nights when he watched bis father's 
flock, tliat he makes no mention of the sua, 
but only of " the moon and the stars," The 
work of thy fingers ; and therefore " thy 
■heavens." Often as the " hand of God" is 
mentioned in Scripture, it ia but very rarely 
that we hear of hia "finger" or "fingers."' 
So far as I am aware, the only places are 
Exod, viii. 19 ; zxxi. 18 ; Deut, ix. 10 ; and 
Luke xi. 20. The moon and the stars, which 
thou hast ordained (comp. Qen. i. 16). 

Yer, 4. — What is man, that thou art mind- 
ful of him? In comparison with the lofty 
heavens, the radiant moon, and the hosts 
of sparkling stars, man seems to the psalmist 
wholly unworthy of God's attention. He is 
mot, like Job, impatient of Ood's constant 
observation (Job vii, 17 — 20), but simply 
filled with wonder at his marvellous con- 
descension (comp. Ps. cxliv, 3). And the 
flou of man, that thou visitest him 1 The 
"eon of man" here is a mere variant for 
** man " in the preceding hemistich. The 
olause merely emphasizes the general idea. 

Yer. 5. — For thou hast made him a little 
lower than the angels; rather, thou hast 
made him hut a little lower than Ood (prhH). 
There is no place in the Old Testament 
where Elohim means "angels;" and, 
though the LXX. so translate in the 
present passage, and the rendering has 
passed from them into the New Testament 
(Heb. ii. 7), it cannot be regarded as criti- 
cally correct. The psalmist, in considering 
bow man has been favoured by God, goes 
back in thought to hia creation, and re- 
members the words of Gen. i. 26, 27, " Let 
as make man in our own image, after our 
likeness. . , . So God created man in M$ oum 
image, in the image of God created he him " 
^compare the still stronger expression in 
Ps, Ixxxii. 6, " I have said. Ye are gods "). 
And hast crowned him with glory and 
honour; i.e. "and, by so doing, by giving 
him a nature but a little short of the 
Divine, hast put on him a crown of glory 
<uch as thou hast given to no other 
oreatnre," There is a point of view from 
which the nature of man transcends that of 
angels, since (1) it is a direct transcript of 
the Divine (Gen, i. 27); and (2) it is the 
mature which the Son of Ood assumed (Heb, 
iil6). 

Ver. 6, — Thou madest him to have do- 
■linion OTar the worki of thy hands. An evi- 



dent reference to Gen. i. 28, " Have dominion 
over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of 
the air, and over every living thing that 
moveth upon the earth." By these words 
man's right of dominion was established. 
His actual dominion only came, and still 
comes, by degrees. Thou hast put all things 
under his feet (comp. 1 Cor. XT. 25 — 28; 
Heb, ii. 8). In their fulness, the words are 
only true of the God-Man, Jesus Christ 
(Matt, xxviii. 18). 

Yer, 7, — AH sheep and oxen; literally, 
floeks and oxen, all of them. The domesti- 
cated animals are placed first, as most com- 
pletely under man's actual dominion. Tea, 
and the beasts of the field; i.e. "and all 
other land animals" (comp. Gen, i. 28; 
ix, 2), If some were still unsubdued (2 
Kings xvii 25, 26 ; Job xl. 24 ; xlL I— 10), 
their subjugation was only a question of 
time (see Isa. li. 6 — 9; Ixv, 25), 

Yer. 8. — The fowl of the air, and the fish 
of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through 
the paths of the seas; literally, /otiiZ of the 
air, and fishes of the sea, the patser through 
the paths of the seas. Every passer through 
the paths of the seas, whether exactly a fish 
or no. The eetacea are thus included 
(comp. Gen. i. 21). 

Yer. 9. — Lord our Lord, how excellent ia 
thy Name in all the earth I The psalmist 
ends as he began, with excellent poetic 
effect, and in a spirit of intense piety. 
Some think that he saw in vision the com- 
plete subjugation of the whole earth to man 
in such sort as will only be accomplished in 
the "new heavens and new earth," in 
which Christ shall reign visibly over his 
people. But his words are not beyond those 
which are natural to one of warm poetie 
temperament and deep natural piety, looking 
out upon the world and upon man as they 
existed in his day. Inspiration, of which 
we know so little, may perhaps have guided 
him to the choice of words and phrases 
peculiarly applicable to " the Ideal of man's 
nature and true Bepresentative, Christ;" 
and hence the many references to this psalm 
in the New Testament (Matt, xxi. 16; 1 
Cor. XV. 25—28 ; Heb. ii. 6—8), and in this 
sense the psalm may be Messianic ; but it 
is certainly not one of those, like Ps. ii. and 
Ps. xxii., where the author oonscionsly 
spoke of another time than his own, and of 
a Personage whom he knew only by faith, 
(For other examples of the recurrence at 
the end of a psalm of the idea wherewith it 
commenced, see Pss. xx. 1 — 9 ; ilvi. 1 — 1 1 ; 
lix. 1—5; oiii. 1—22; oxviii. 1—29; and 
the " Hallijlujah psalms : " Pss. cvi. 1 — 48 ; 
cxiii. 1 — 8; cxvii. 1, 2; oxxv. 1—21 ; o\lvi. 
— cL) 



60 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. vin. 1— ». 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 4. — Man's Uttlenett and hit greatness, " What is man," etc. ? The littlenes* 
•nd greatness of man are set before us here in powerful contrast. In view of this vast 
magnificent universe, he seems a speck, an atom, a vapour that appears and vanishes 
(Jas. iv. 14). But the love, care, grace of his Maker lift him to a height where ho 
sees the world at his feet ; he is endowed with a life, heir to a glory, that shall endure 
when the earth and the heavens pass away. 

I. There is the earthly bide of hdman life. Its littleness, firailty, brevity. 
"What is man?" 1. Compare the actual littleness and bodily weakness of man witb 
the immensity of the material universe, the awful might of its never-wearying forces, 
the stability of its structure, the unswerving, undenying constancy of its laws. Illus- 
trate from the discoveries of astronomy, geology, etc. Compare a long human lif* 
with that of an oak of a thousand years. But a thousand years are but a day — a few 
minutes — compared with the mighty past, the eternal future (1 Chron. xxix. 15; Ps. 
xc. 3 — 6). 2. Consider the narrow limits of human life. Deduct from the effective 
force of even a well-spent life the time absorbed by infancy, sleep, sickness, trifles, out- 
ward hindrances, weakness, and decay. How great a proportion of the race is immersed 
in barbarism I How limited is man's knowledge, even with the vast accessions of thia 
century, compared with his illimitable ignorance ! How powerless is he in the grasp 
of circumstances ! If the Earth but stirs in her sleep, his cities fall. If the wind blow* 
in its strength, his navies are wrecked. If the invisible seeds of pestilence crowd the 
air, he must breathe or die — his science is baffled. If the clouds withhold rain or 
pour out too much, famine enters his home. If the earth refuses him gold, or yields' 
it too rapidly and easily, his commerce is deranged (Ps. xxxlx. 5, 6). 3. Consider, 
too, the perishing, vanishing nature of man's greatest achievements, richest posses- 
sions, sweetest earthly joys and hopes. It is no wonder that, with those who meditate 
deeply on human life, and observe largely, seeing only its earthly side, philosophy 
should turn sour and curdle into " [lessimisni." " Is life worth living ? " 

II. The Divine side. " Thou art mindful of him ; . . . thou viRitest him." The 
greatness and glory of man's nature are seen : 1. In its origin. (Ver. 5.) Man is 
the child of God (Gen. i. 26, 27; Acts xvii. 28, 29). 2. In the care of God's prmn- 
dence. In those unmeasured ages, before man arrived, which so oppress oui- imagina- 
tion, God was preparing the earth for man. For other creatures also, it is true, but 
not as for him. To each lower creature he gave its own haunt, its own food ; but 
they sow no harvests, plant no forests, quarry no hills, pasture no flocks, navigate no- 
seas; know nothing of nature as a whole — its beauty, mystery, wealth of enjoyment. 
For man was made the whole (vers. 6—8). It is God who has made the universe 
man's storehouse, and "ministoreth seed," etc. (2 Cor. ix. 10). 3. In what we may 
call spiritual providence; the grace and love which order the life of each one of God's 
children, making sorrow and trouble a gracious discipline (HeK xii. 6, 7; xiii. S). 
4. Above all, in God's unspeakable Gift. (1 John v. 11.) In the incarnate Son of 
God our humanity is exalted to the supreme height of glory (Phil. ii. 9 — 11 ; Heb. ii. 
6 — 9). To the image of his glory the humblest believer is to be raised (Bom. viii. 29;. 
1 John iii. 2). 

Lessons. 1. Humility. 2. Faith. 3. Adoration, 

Yer. 6.— Man— natwe— God. "Thou hast put . . . feet." This brief but majestic- 
psalm is remarkable for world-wide breadth ; it shines with liglit transcending human 
genius. The name by which the Almighty Maker is addressed is his covenant name 
with Israel — the name which speaks not of power, but of personal being, " Jehovah." 
But here is no reference to Israel ; nothing national, limited, ceremonial, local, tem- 
porary. This psalm is a sufficient relutation of the mean, narrow views of the Old 
Testament Scriptures, which lower the religion of Israel to the rank of one among the 
many national religions. Here we are concerned only with these three supreme 
ideas: man; nature; God. Jehovah is invoked as the Author of nature and 
God of all mankind. Consider this puMime declaration — first, as it stands here m 
the Old Testament Scriptures; secondly, as interpreted in the New Te-^tarnenr 
Scripturpa. 



PS. Till. 1—9,] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 51 

I. Read these words, first, by their own light, as they stand part of the Old 
Testament. 1. They are far from describing man's present actual position on this globe. 
He does not at present reign over nature, but wrestles with it; slowly grasps its secrets 
Bnd masters its forces ; has to keep watch and ward lest it destroy him. A few tribi s 
of lower animals attach themselves serviceably to him, but most fly from him or defy 
him. Wolves ravage his flocks; worms corrode his ships. The sight of a locust ot 
a beetle makes him tremble : he can crush it in an instant, but when countless millions 
of these minute rebels invade his fields and vineyards and orchards, they turn his 
wealth to poverty. Truly, " we see not yet all things put uuder hira." 2. Yet these 
words are no poetic exaggeration. The context shows that the psalmist is looking back 
to the record of man's oriainal dignity and heirship of the world (vers. 6 — 8 compared 
irith Gen. i. 27, 29). This original grant conveys the idea not of easy, effortless lordship 
)ver a passive creation, but of progressive conquest by toil, skill, reason. Such is and 
las been man's dominion over the earth. This biblical accountof the primitive dignity 
ind moral standing of man is widely rejected in these days, on the assumption that it 
conflicts with science. Conflict between religious truth and scientific truth is impos- 
sible, because all truth is one. All truth is God's truth. The confiict is between 
testimony and hypothesis — the testimony of the most venerable and ancient of all 
histories, and the newest hypotheses of scientific men — hypotheses very oonfidentlv 
affirmed; but yet only hypotheses. It may turn out that the testimony is more 
scientific than the hypotheses. At all events, it is no trifle to reject it. Man 
knows not, apart from the Bible, whence he cometh or whither he goeth. Reject it as 
a revelation of fact, and the human race is an apparition upon earth — a stupendcis 
exception to the laws which govern all other animals — of which the wildest conje'- 
tures of what passes for science can itive no rational account. Reject its revelation if 
law, and man is seen wandering out of the unknown past towards an unknown future, 
without guidance or government. Reject its revelation of prnmise, and that unknown 
future is without hope or intelligible meaning. Accept the Bible as God's message, 
and we know whence we come and whither we go. Human life, sorrowful and con- 
fused as it is, shows like a stormy day which had a splendid dawn and shall yet 
have a serene evening and glorious rising again. We need not, then, be frightened 
by the most confident assertions, from the glorious belief that man began his history 
on earth as the child of the Father of spirits; not crawling out of sentient slime 
through a series of inconceivable transformations, compared with which all the 
miracles of the Bible are commonplace incidents; but able to converse with God, and 
to render intelligent, loving obedience to him : " a little lower than Gk)d himself ; " 
" crowned with glory and honour." 

II. As interpbbted in the New Testament. Faith prizes the past, not for its 
own sake, but for the sake of the present and the future. When we look at these words 
in the light of New Testament interpretation, new glory breaks from them. They 
are not simply history or poetry, but prophecy (Heb. ii. 8, 9). We need not ask, and 
cannot say, whether this meaning was known to the psalmist. The prophets uttered 
more than they knew. God interprets by fulfilling ; and the fulfilment far outruns all 
our expectations. 1. In the Person, life, character, of our Lord Jesus, even " in the 
days of his flesh," our nature was raised to a pitch of glory and perfectness before 
inor>nceiTable. God's image was restored (John xiv. 9; 1 Cor. xv. 47). 2. In the 
exaltation of Jesus, human nature is invested with Divine glory. The " days of his 
flesh" are past; but he wears our nature still (1 Tim. ii. 5; Phil. ii. 7—11; Matt. 
xxviii. 18). 3. All who believe in him are already, by faith, partakers in some degree 
of his glory (Eph. i. 19 — 23 ; ii. 6). And they shall hereafter, in perfect union with 
him and likeness to him, partake fully and eternally (1 John iii. 1 — 3 ; John xvii. 
22—24). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTH0R& 

Yers. 1 9. "Lord what is mant" This is a song of praise equally adapted for 

men of every nation, country, colour, and clime. Its author was David,' who, as a 
> We accept the titles assigned, unlets reaton to the eontrary i* ihown. 



62 Trii' BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. viii. 1—9. 



shepherd-boy, had cast an observant eye on the works of God, both in the hetTeni 
above and the earth beneath ; and the habit of doin^ this reverently and devoutly 
grew with his growth ; so that, though we are entirely ignorant as to what period of 
his life it was in which he penned this psalm, it is manifestly an echo of the thoughts 
which, in his early shepherd-days, had filled his mind and inspired him to song. At 
that period in the world's history, only a Hebrew could have written such a psalm as 
this. Observant men in other nations might have written similar poetry, setting forth 
the glory of Nature's works ; only a Hebrew saint could have so gloried in the great 
Woreer whose majesty was " above the heavens," and of whom he could speak as " our 
Lord." Note : It is only as we know the Divine Worker that we can duly appreciate 
and fully enjoy the work. And as Science is, in her onward march, ever revealing 
more of the work, we have so much the more need to pray that the disclosures per- 
petually being made of the marvels of nature may be to us a book to reveal, and not 
a veil to conceal, the living and the true God. In dealing with this psalm we pro- 
pose to let our exposition turn upon the expression, "Lord, what is man?" Let 
us note — 

I. The insignifioancb of man when compabed with the stupendous toivbbse. 
The heavens, the earth, the moon, the stars : how much more do these terms convey to 
us than they did to the psalmist 1 His inspiration, it is probable, did not extend to the 
realm of physical science ; and his views of the wonders of the earth and of the heavens 
would be limited by the knowledge of his day. But since the telescope has shown us that 
our world is but as an atom, and the microscope that in every atom there is a world ; 
since millions on millions of stars have come into the astronomer's field of vision ; and 
since the conceptions of the time during which the orbs have been revolving and the 
euth has been preparing for man's use have so immeasurably grown, — the larger the 
universe seems, the more does man dwindle to a speck. And when we look at the 
slender frame of man, his weakness, and the momentary duration of his life, compared 
with the vast masses, the ceaseless energy, the incalculable duration to which the 
universe bears witness, — it is no wonder if at the greatness in which we are lost we stand 
appalled, and are ready to say, " In the midst of all this sublimity, what am I ? 
A shred of entity, a phantom, a breath, a passing form on this earthly stage. Here is 
this great machine, with a mighty Unknown behind it, rolling and grinding, grinding 
and rolling, raising up one and setting down another. Ever and anon a wave of liquid 
.fire will heave up mountains and overturn cities and hurl them into an abyss, and 
the cries of myriads will rend the air ; and never will nature spare one relenting sigh 
or drop one sympathizing tear. All is fixed. Law is everywhere. What I am, or 
do, or say, or think, can matter nothing to the Great Unknown. Prayer is but empty 
breath. Amid the vastness I am lost, and can be of no more consequence than a mote 
in the sunbeam, and were I and all this generation to be swept away in the twinkling 
of an eye, we should no more be missed than a grsun of dust when blown into the 
crater of a volcano I What is man ? " So men argue. Even good men are overwhelmed 
with such thoughts, and say, "Our way is hid from the Lord, and our judgment is 
passed over from our God." While the imbeliever declares that a being so insignificant 
can never be the subject of Divine care, still less of Divine love ; that man is no more 
to the Supreme than are the insects of a summer's day.' But this is only one side of 
a great question. Let us therefore note^ 

II. The dignity of man as disolosed bt the obaoious visitation of God. 1. 
Sis actual dignity. (1) In the structure and capacity of his nature. Mass howeyer 
great, force however persistent, can never equal t» quality the power of thinking, 
loving, worshipping, suffering, sinning. One soul outweighs in value myriads of 
worlds. Our estimate of things must be qualitative as well as quantitative. And 
a being who can measure the distance of a star is infinitely greater than the star 
whose distance he measures. Man is made in the image of God (o) mentally, — ^he thinks 
as God thinks ; (6) morally ; (c) spiritually ; (<^ regally, to have dominion. Man is 
made to see Ood in aU thingi. Babes and sucklings in this put to shame the rebellious 
atheist. (2) God has revealed his " Name " to man ; and this gracious visitation from 
the Father of our race has raised man in the scale of being. (3) When renewed by the 

' Dr. Ohalmers'i ' Astronomical Diaooarses ' are of permanent ralna in oonneotion witb 
f«oh % theme •■ this. 



P8.vni. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 63 



Holy Gbjst, he is elevated still higlier in the scale, for " after God he is treated in 
righteousness and true holiness." (4) When the Son of God became " the second Man, 
even the Lord from heaven," then, indeed, was our nature " crowned with glory and 
honour." Nothing so exalted our race as the Son of God inserting himself into it by 
his incarnation, and so becoming the Son of man. 2. Eis prospective dignity. The 
psalm includes the vision of the seer as well as the song of the saint. Its repeated 
quotation (1 Cor. xv. 27; Heb. ii. 6 — 9) in the New Testament shows us that its 
words await a grander fulfilment than ever.* The preacher may indefinitely expand 
and illustrate the following points : (1) The dominion of man over nature is vastly 
greater even now than it was in David's time, and is destined to be more complete 
than it even now is. David includes the sheep and oxen, beasts of the field, etc. 
Now fire, water, light, air, lightning, etc., are made to serve man. (2) ITie renewing 
j-rocess is going forward in the Christianized part of man. The image of God in man 
is to be perfected. (3) All things are now put under man's feet, in being put under 
Christ's feet as the Lord of all. But, as Bishop Perowne suggestively remarlss, St. 
Paul's " all things " are immeasurably more than David's " all things." Just so. This 
is a beautiful illustration of the progress of revelation. The later the date, the brighter 
the light. And words caught from men who were in the ancient time borne -along by 
the Holy Ghost, are shown to have a very much broader and deeper meaning than 
their human penmen could possibly have conceived. " The New Testament is latent 
in l^he Old. The Old Testament is patent in the New " (Augustine). 

Note : 1. The true greatness of man can only be manifested as ha is renewed by 
the Spirit of God; and comes to grow up into him in all things who is the Head, even 
Christ. 2. How incomplete would the plan have been of permitting man to have 
dominion over nature, without the corresponding purpose of God's love gaining 
dominion over man 1 Dominion is safe only where there is righteousness. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Ood the glorious Creator. It is midnight. The sky is bright with 
stars. As the psalmist muses, the fire burns, and he bursts into song. The psalm is 
not for Israel alone, but brings before the mind such a vision of the glory of God as 
the great Creator, as binds all people of every land and age in a brotherhood of 
worship. 

■ I. God's globt kbvealed in natukb. The heavens have a purpose. The outward 
glory images the inward and spiritual glory. The stars are silent witnesses for God. 
Their size, their order, their steadfastness, their splendour, and their mystery, which 
grow and deepen as investigation is prosecuted and Itnowledge increases, all proclaim 
the greatness of God. And the more the glory of God strikes our eye, the humbler 
do we feel in his awful presence. " When I have gazed into these stars," said Carlyle, 
"have they not looked down upon me, as if with pity, from their serene spaces, like 
eyes glistening with heavenly tears over the little lot of man ? " But while the glory 
of God in the heavens is fitted to bumble us, it also awakens aspiration. It is the 
same God who rules above and below. If God so cares for stars, will he not much 
more care for souls ? The argument of our Lord applies to the heavens as well as the 
earth — to the creation above and beneath. " Are ye not much better than they ? " 
(Matt. vi. 26). 

II. God's glokt moke fully bevealed in man. It may be said that in man 
mundane creation first of all became intelligent, self-conscious, endowed with conscience 
and will, able so far to understand its Maker. Man is the last and fullest expression of 
God's thought — a being like himself, and that can hold communication with himself. 
It is only through man, made in God's image, that God could rightly reveal himself. 
If the heavens stood alone, there would be silence. But when man was created, there 
was an eye made to see, and a heart to feel, and a voice to proclaim God's praise. 1. 
The greatness of man's being, 2. The dignity of his position. The last is fast. Man 
is put at the head of creation. The past has evidence of his lordship, and more and 
more his sway increases. It is his, not only to replenish, but to subdue the earth. 3. 
The grandeur of his destiny. He has not only a great past, but a great future. God 
has not only given man his being, but provided also for his well-being. He has visited 
and redeemed his people (Bph. i. 3 — 10> 

' See Bishop Perowne's notes on this psalm. 



54 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [P8. vm. 1— 9. 



m. God's globt most pebfectlt revealed in Christ. What is dimly seen in 
creation and in man awakens the desire for more light and a fuller knowledge of God. 
This yearning is met and satisfied in Jesus Christ. He is perfect God and perfect 
Man. We might conceive of a man simply, so enlightened and swayed by God as 
that he should in all things be in harmony with God. In so far he might perfectly 
express God's mind and will. But there is far more in Christ. He is perfect Man 
and perfect God. He is the true Immanuel — God with us (John xiv. 9, 10). Open, 
ye heavens, and let us see the Lord as Isaiah did (Isa. vi. 1 — 3)! Purge our eyes, 
Spirit of love and holiness, and let us behold Christ Jesitg as Stephen did I and then we 
shall cry, with wonder, love, and praise, " It is the same Lord, ' my Lord and my God ! ' " 
Having such a faith, there is no bound to our hopes. What Christ did, he did for 
us ; what Christ does, he does for us. We died with him and rose with him, and with 
him we shall be glorified (Eph. i. 17— 23).— W. F. 

Ver. 2 (of. Matt. ixi. 16). — Ood glorified in little children. Two pictures: David 
opi the housetop ; Christ Jesus, David's Son and Lord, in the temple. With the 
hosannas of the people blended sweetly the voices of children. The Pharisees were 
offended; but our Lord was pleased. The words of the old psalm find a new fulfil- 
ment. The question for us is — How God is glorified in little children. 

I. In the place which he has given them in creation. They form a part of the 
great whole. Necessary. Take them away, how difierent things would be ! But they 
have their place. They are weak, but out of their weakness comes strength. They 
are helpless, but from their helplessness come endless benefits. 

II. In theib capability of receiving Christian nurture. Children show from 
the first their powers of growth. Their bodies, their minds, their souls, are constantly 
developing. By proper care they are capable, under Goii, of growing up unto Christ, 
as true and living members of hii Church, Christ himself, and not fallen men like 
Augustine, or Luther, or Bunyan, is the true type and piittera of what children should 
be (Luke ii. 40). 

Hi. In their fitness to serve and praise God. There is not only simple wonder 
in children, but also intelligence. Their moral sense is very keen. Their delight in the 
beautiful and the good is not the result of education, but the instinct of their innocint 
and pure hearts. How often has Goil used little cliildreii to do his will and show 
forth his praise ! So in the sanctuary, so in life. Remember the infant Moses (Exod. ii. 
6), remember David's child (2 Sam. iv. 23), remember the young Josiah (1 Kings xiii. 
2); above all, remember the Child of Bethlehem — the Babe in the manger (Luke 
ii. 10, 11). 

IV. As THE OBJECTS OF HIS TENDER CARE. In manifold ways God has shown how 
dearly he loves little children. It is he who has established the paternal relationship. 
It is he who has provided for the holy upbringing of the young, by law and sacrament. 
It is he who has manifc^sted by his dear Sou, in what he taught and did when he wag 
in the world, his tender affection and care for the young (Mark x. 16; Matt, iviii. 
2—10). 

V. In taking so many op them to himself. The heathen had a saying, " Whom 
the gods love, die young." And in this there is a hidden truth. Death is always a 
strange and terrible thing; but in the very young it is altuost deprived of its terrors. 
Then it is but a sleep. It is the Lord calling his loved ones early to himself. Happy 
are we when we can say with unfeigned faith and lively hope, " The Lord gave, and the 
Lord hath taken away." If our little ones were left to grow up in this world of sin 
and sorrow, we know not what tht-ir future would be; hut we know and are sure that 
when Christ takes them to himself, it is " far better." They are away from our sight, 
but not from our hearts. " Love never faileth." They have been taken from our care, 
but it is to be under better teachers and to receive a nobler education. They have 
been parted from us, but it is only for a little while ; for Christ is gathering his own to 
himself, and when he cometh, lie will bring them all with him. In that day many a 
stricken heart shall be made glad. " Mother, behold thy son!" "Son, behold thy 
mother 1 " Have we the mind of Christ ? Are we carrying out worthily the high 
trust committed to us, of caring for the young? Will our dear children, whom we 
have lost a while, meet us with joy and welcome in the heavenly world ? 



M.VIU. 1-9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 55 



"O thou whose infant feet were fcund 
Within thy Fatlier's shrine, 
Whose years, with changeless virtue crowned. 
Were all alike Divine. 

" Dependent on thy bounteous breath. 
We seBlv thy grace alone. 
In cliildhood, manhood, age, and death, 
To kiep us still thine own." 

(Keble.) 

W. P. 

Ver. 9. — ITie greatness of Qod in redemption. " Lord our Lord, how excellent 
18 thy Name in all the earth ! " This may be applied to redemption — 

I. In choosing eabth as the scene of redemption. There are millions of other 
worlds, which we may reasonably belie I'e have their intelligent inhabitants. Out of 
these the earth was chosen lor the highest honours. 

II. In MAKiNa MAN THE SUBJECT OF REDEMPTION. We Cannot tell if sin extenils 
to other worlds, but we know th.it other beings besides man have fallen from their 
first estate. The angels sinned, but God was pleased to pass them by, and to show 
his exceeding kindness and love to man in Christ Jesus (Heb. ii. 16). 

III. In employing Chbist as the Author of redejiption. It was not an angel, 
but his eternal Son, whom God sent to be our Saviour (Gal. iv. 4, 5). And when he 
came, it was not in the fulness of his glory, but in fashion as a man, born of • 
woman, made under the Law, obedient unto death, even the death of the cross 
(Phil. ii. 6—10). 

IV. In proclaiming by the gospel the completeness of bedemption. All men 
as sinners needed salvatinn, and the salvation of Christ is suitable and sufBoient 
for all. He is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, and if the whole 
world should bow in penitence before God, their sins would that moment be all put 
away. 

V. In revealing the eternal glories of redemption through his Spirit. 
Already great things have been done. But we look for greater (Ee v. xxi. 1 — 7).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 9. OocPs glory revealed. "The great spiritual truth contained in the 

first passage of Scripture, that God made man in his own image, flashes forth in this 
psalm in true lyric grandeur, a ray of light across the dark mystery of creation." God 
is the most wonderful thought of the human mind, and this thought retains its hold 
upon us in spite of all atheistic influences. Here the thought is that God's glory is 
celebrated — 

I. By childhood. Patting to silence the clamour of the atheist. Christ uses the 
passage against the scribes and Pharisees, and in another place says that God reveals to 
babes°wbat he hides from the wise and prudent. We must be converted to little 
children ; " for of such is the kingdom of heaven." God reveals to babes unbounded 
trust, unbounded obedience to parents, the simple truthfulness, the guileless mind ; 
and they proclaim all this aloud, and it tells of their Divine origin and inspiration, 
and they thus praise God, and ought to abash the irreligious. " Heaven lies about 
us [and within us] in our infancy." 

II. By the starry worlds. The things which tell us most of God are : 1. Night 
The solemnity and impressiveness of the heavens are greater by night than by day. 
2. Thnr constancy and order. 3. ITieir immensity. We cannot compute their number 
and distances by any effort of thought. 4. Their silence. God's greatest works are 
ifll done in awful, impressive silence. Then we feel our physical insignificance.^ 

III. By man's spiritual greatness. (Gen. i. 26—28.) Compared with the 
material heavens, he is but an atom ; but God has " visited him," and made him great, 
by stamping him with his own image, and giving him the sovereignty of things. He 
is made a little lower than God, or little less than of Divine standing (Elohim). But 
he is to ascend up to sovereignty. In Heb. ii. S — 8 the words are applied to Christ 
in a mnch wider sense, and by St. Paul in 1 Cor. iv., because he is more perfected in 
his highest power, and is to have all rule and all authority. We have only begun to 



66 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. IX. 1—20. 



exercise lordship over the animal, the material, and the moral worlds, and over our- 
selves. It is only »s we rule ourselves that we learn the secret of rule over others. 
ObedienM ii the road to sovereignty. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM IX. 
This pi»Im, which, like the six preceding 
it, is declared by the title to be " a Psalm 
of David," is a song of thanksgiving for the 
defeat of some foreign enemy. It is the 
first of what are called "the alphabetic 
psalms;" but the law of alphabetic order is 
applied in it somewhat loosely and irregu- 
larly. All the four lines of the first stanza 
commence with aleph; but after this it is 
only the first line of each stanza that 
observes the law. And even this amonnt of 
observance is neglected in the last stanza. 
The poem is one of the most regular in its 
structure of all the psalms, consisting as it 
does of ten equal strophes of four lines 
each. The words in the title, " upon 
Muth-labben," have been variously ex- 
plained ; but no explanation hitherto given 
is satisfactory. 

Ver. 1.— I •will prftise thee, Lord, with 
my whole heart ; rather, 1 mill give thankt 
(Kay, Oheyne, Eevised Version). The thanks 
are special for a great deliverance — a deliver- 
ance from some heathen enemy (vers. 5, 15), 
who has been signally defeated and almost 
exterminated (vers. 5, 6). It has bpen con- 
jectured that the subjugation of Ammon 
(2 Sam. xii. 26 — 31) is the ocoasiou referred 
to ('Speaker's Oommentary ') ; but the ex- 
pectation of further attack (vers. 17 — 20) 
scarcely suits tliis period, when David's 
wars were well-nigli over. Perhaps the 
earlier victory over Ammon and Syria (2 
Bam. X. 6 — 14), which was followed by the 
renewed invasion of the same nations in 
conjunction with " the Syrians beyond the 
river" (2 Sam. x. 16), is more likely to have 
drawn forth the composition. I will show 
forth all thy marvellous works; rather, / 
viill tell fcnih, or I will recount all thy 
tBondrouB deeds. Not necessarily miracles, 
but any strange and unexpected deliver- 
ances, such as the recent one (comp. Pss. 
xL 5; Ixxviii. 4). 

Ver. 2. — I will be glad and rejoice in 
thee : I will sing praise to thy Name (see 
the comment on Ps. viii. 9). thou most 
High (comp. Ps. vii. 17; and see also 
Gen. xiv. 18, 19, 22). Elion (li'^r) was 
• recognized name of God among the Phoe- 
nicians (' Religions of the Aucient World,' 
p. 133). 



Yer. 8. — ^When mine enemies are tamed 
hack; or, because mine enemitt are turned 
hack ('Speaker's CJommentary ') ; i.e. made 
to retreat, repulsed, driven before me in 
hasty flight. They shall fall and perish at 
thy presence; or, they tfunible and perith, 
etc. The psalmist represents the enemy, 
poetically, "as if they had been thrown to 
tlie ground by the glance of God's fiery 
countenance " (Hengstenberg). 

Yer. 4. — ^For thou hast maintained my 
right and my cause. David uniformly as- 
cribes his military successes, not to his own 
ability, or even lo the valour of his soldiers, 
but to God's favour. God's favour, which 
is secured by the justice of his cause, gives 
him victory after victory. Xhon satest in 
the throne judging right. While the late 
battle raged, God sat upon his heavenly 
throne, administering jn:>tice, awarding de- 
feat and death to the wrong-doers who had 
wantonly attacked his people, giving victory 
and glory and honour to those who stood on 
their defence against the aggressors. 

Yer. 5. — Thou hast rebuked the heathen; 
rather, thou didst rebuke; LXX., eirerliiriiria : 
i.e. on the recent occasion. When God 
would rebuke, he punishes; when he 
punishes, by so doing he rebukes. Thou 
hast destroyed the wicked; rather, thou 
didst destroy. Thou hast put out their 
name for ever and ever. If taken literally, 
this should mean extermination, and so some 
explain (Hengstenberg, Kay, ' Speaker's" 
Commentary'); but some allowance must be 
made for the use of hyperbole by a poet. 
None of the nations with which David con- 
tended suffered extinction or extermination. 

Yer. 6. — thou enemy, destructions are 
come to a perpetual end. It is better to 
translate, with the Eevised Yersion, The 
enemy are come to an end ; they are desolate 
for ever — a continuance of the hyperbole 
already noticed in the preceding verse. 
And thou hast destroyed cities ; their me- 
morial is perished with them; rather, and 
as for the cities thou hast destroyed, their 
very memory has perished. This could only 
be an anticipation. It was fulfilled in the 
complete disappearance from history of the 
names of Zobn, Beth-rehub, and Tob, after 
the victory described in 2 Sam. x. 13, 14. 

Ver. 7. — But the lord shall endure for 
ever ; rather, hut the Lord is seated (i.e. upon 
his throne) for ever. Cities and nations 
perish, but Jehovah remains a Ring for 
evermore. While all is change and dis 
turbance upon earth, the unchanged and 



PS. nt. 1 — 20.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



67 



unchangeable Eternal One continneB con- 
stantly seated. In serene majesty, in heaven. 
He hath prepared (or latlier, establithed) hia 
throne for judgment (compare the second 
clause of ver. 4). 

Ver. 8.— And he shall judge the world, 
The " he " is emphatic — he liimself, and no 
other. From his throne of judgment he 
shall judge, not Israel's enemies ouly, whom 
he has just judged (vers. 3 — 6), but the whole 
world. In righteousness ; i.e. by a strict law 
of justice, rewarding to nil men " after their 
deserving." He shall minister judgment to 
the people (rather, (he peoples! i.e. all the 
people of all the earth) in 'uprightness ; 
literally, in uprightnesses — a plural of per- 
fection. 

Ver. 9. — The Lord also will be a Befuge 
for the oppressed. Misyub, translated 
"refuge," is literally "a hill-fort" (comp. 
Ps. cxliv. 2, where it is rendered " high 
tower"). David's use of the metaphor is 
reasonably ascribed to his having "often 
experienced safety in such places, when 
fleeing &om SaiU" (Hen^stenberg ; see 
1 Sam. zxiii. 14). A refuge in times of 
trouble; literally, tn times in trouble; 
Le. "in times that are steeped in trouble" 
(Kay). 

Ver, 10. — And they that know thy Name 
will put their trust in thee. " To know the 
Name of God is to know him according to 
his historical manifestation ; when one 
hears him named, to call to remembrance 
all that he has done. His name is the focus 
bi which all the rays of his actions meet " 
(Hengstenberg). All who "know God's 
Name " in this sense will be sure to " put 
their trust in him," since his historical 
manifestation shows that he is thoroughly 
to be depended on. For thou, Lord, hast 
not forsaken them that seek thee. Never 
in the past, so far as David knew, had God 
forsaken those who faithfully clung to him. 
They might be tried, like Job ; they might 
be "himted upon the mountains," like 
David himself; they might even have the 
sense of being forsaken (Ps. zxii. 1); but 
Ihey were not forsalten nevertheless. God 
" forsaketh not his saints ; they are pre- 
served for ever " (Ps. xxxvii. 28). 

Ver. 11. — Sing praises to the Lord. 
Having praised God himself (vera. 1, 2), 
and declared the grounds upon which his 
praises rest (vers. 3 — 10), David now calls 
npon all faithful Israelites to join him in 
hii song of thanksgiving. " Sing praises 
unto the Lord," he says, which dwelleth in 
Zion. Who is enthroned, i.e., on the meroy- 
■eat between the cherubim in tiie taber- 
nacle, now set up upon Mount Zion (2 Sam. 
ri. ] — 17). The date of the psalm ia thus 
to aoB-t extent limited, since it must have 
been composed suhseqaently to the transfer 



of the ark to Jerusalem. Declare among 
the people his doings. In the original 
"among the peoples" (o'ai»); i.e. not the 
people of Israel only, but all the surround- 
ing nations. David is possessed with the 
conviction that tlie revelation of God made 
to Israel is not to be confined to them, but 
through them to be communicated to " all 
the ends of the earth " — to the heathen at 
large, to all nations (comp. Pss. xviii. 49 ; 
Ixvi. 4; Ixxii 11, 19, etc.). 

Ver. 12. — When he maketh inquisition 
for blood, he remembereth them; rather, 
for he that maketh inquisition for blood (see 
Gen. ix. 5) remembereth them. God, i.e., the 
Eequirer of blood (Kay), remembers, when 
he makes his inquisition, those who are 
oppressed (ver. 9), and who seek him 
(ver. 10). He forgetteth not the cry of the 
humble ; or, the afflicted (Kay, Oheyne). He 
comes to tlie aid of such persona, and 
avenges them on their enemies. 

Ver. 13. — Have mercy upon me, Lord ! 
The consideration of God's mercies in the 
past, and especially in the recent deliver- 
ance, leads the psalmist to implore a con- 
tinuance of his mercies in the future. He 
is not yet free fioni troubles. There are 
still enemies who afflict and threaten him — 
"heathen" who seek to "prevail" against 
him (vers. 19, 20), and perhaps already 
domestic enemies, especially the " sons of 
Zeruiah," causing him anxiety. Consider 
my trouble which I suffer of them that 
hate me ; literally, my trouble (or, my afflic- 
tion') from my haters. Vers. 17, 19, 20 show 
that the heatlien are especially intended 
(see 2 Sam. x. 15—19). Thou that liftest 
me up from the gates of death ; i.e. " Thou 
that continually (or, habitually) art my 
Support in the extremity of peril," " lifting 
me up" even from the very "gates of 
death." (For other mentions of " the gates 
of death," see Job xxxviii. 17 ; Ps. evil. 18.) 
Classical writers speak of "the sates of 
darkness " {(tk6tou irvKas) in almost the 
same sense (Eurip., ' Hec.,' 1. i). 

Ver. 14. — That I may show forth all thy 
praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion. 
The " daughter of Zion " is, of course, Jeru- 
salem. Compare "daughter of Babylon" 
(Ps. cxxxvii. 8 ; Isa. xlvii. 1 ; Jer. 1. 42 ; 
Zeoh. ii. 7), " daughter of the Chaldeans " 
(Isa. xlvii. I, 5), "daughter of Edom " 
(Lam. iv. 21, 22), "daughter of Gallim" 
(Isa. X. 30). Hengstenberg is probably 
right in understanding " tn the gates " as 
''within the gates," since, as he observes, 
" God's praise is not to be celebrated in the 
gates, amid the throng of worldly business, 
but in the temple." The references in the 
'Speaker's Commentary' do not bear out the 
statement there made, that " public mourn- 
ings and public thanksgivings were pro 



58 



THE BX)K OF PSALMS, 



[pb. IX. 1— 2a 



claimed In the gatea." I will rejoioe in thy 
salvation ; or, that I may rejoice (Kay). 

Ver, 15. — The heathen are sunk down In 
the pit that they made. It is unoeitain 
whether the writer here reverts to the judg- 
ment already executed (vers. 3 — 6), or with 
the eye of faith sees as past the judgment 
which he confidently anticipates (vers. 19, 
20). Whichever he intends, there can be 
no donbt that he means it to be understood 
that the stratagems of the enemy brought 
about (or would bring about) their downfall. 
In the net which they hid is their own foot 
taken. A secnnd metaphor, expressing the 
same idea as the preceding (comp. Pi». Tii. 
15, 16; X. 2; xxxv. 8; oxli. 10). 

Ver. 16.— The Lord is known by the judg- 
ment which he execnteth; rather, the Lord 
hath made himself known; he executeth judg- 
ment (see the Bevised Version ; aud comp. 
Ezek. XX. 9). The two clauses are gram- 
matically distinct, though no doubt closely 
connected in their meaning. God makes 
himself known — manifests his character, 
by the judgments which he executes, shows 
himself just, perhaps severe, certainly One 
who " will not at all acquit the wicked " 
(Nah. i. 3). The wicked is snared in the 
work of MB own hands. Bome translate, 
"he snareth the wicked," or, "by snaring 
the wicked" — the special way in which God 
manifests himself (see Kay, p. 31 ; ' Speaker's 
Commentary,' vol. iv. p. 190). Higgaion. 
This word is found in three other places 
only, viz. PsB. xix. 14; xciL 3; andLam. iii. 
61. In the first it is translated "medita- 
tion," and has clearly that meaning ; in the 
second it is supposed to mean "a gentle 
strain ; " in the third it seems best rendered 
by " musing " or " reflection." Here it 
stands by itself, as a sort of rubrical direo- 
tion, like the following word, " Selah." 
Some suppose it a direction to the choir to 
play a gentle strain of instrumental mnsio 
as an interlude ; others regard it as enjoin- 
ing upon the congregation a space of quiet 
" meditation " (see Hengstenberg, ad loe. ; 
anil compare Professor Alexander's work, 
'The Psalms translated and explained,' 
p. 45). Selah (see the comment on Ps. 
iii. 2). 
Ver. 17. — The wicked shall be turned 



Into hell ; literally, ihall be turned baoJc- 
uarda to Sheol, or Badet ; i.e. shall be re- 
moved from earth to the place of departed 
spirits. There is no direct threat of Mtri- 
bution or punishment, beyond the poena 
damni, or loss of all that is pleasing and 
delightful in this Iif». And aU the nations 
that forget Ood ; rather, even all the people 
(Kay). "The wicked" and "the people 
that forget God" are identical. 

Ver. 18. — For the needy shall not alway 
be forgotten. The poor and needy, the op- 
pressed and down-trodden (vers. 9, 12\ 
seem for a time to be forgotten of Gk>d ; but 
even this seeming oblivion comes to an end 
when judgment falls on the oppressors 
(ver. 17). The expectation of the poor shall 
not perish for ever. " The expectation of 
the poor" is deliverance. It shall not 
" perish," or be disappointed, " for ever," 
t.e. always. There shall be a time when 
their expectation shall have its accomplish- 
ment. 

Ver. 19. — Arise, Lord (comp. Ps. riL 
6, and the comment ad loe."). Let not man 
prevail ; or, let not weak man prevail. The 
word used for " man," enosh, carries with it 
the idea of weakness. That "weak man" 
should prevail over God is preposterous. 
Let the heathen be judged in thy sight. If 
judged, then, as being wicked, comlemned; 
if condemned, then punished — deteated, 
ruined, brought to nongbt (see ver. S) 

Ver. 20. — Put them in fear, Lord; 
literally, tet fear to them ; i.e. " make 
them afraid," either by striking a panic 
terror into them, as into the Syrians when 
they had brought Samaria to the last gasp 
(2 Kings vii. 6, 7), or by causing them 
calmly to review the situation, and to see 
how dangerous it was to assail (jlod's people 
(2 Kings vi. 23). That the nations may know 
themselves to be but men. May recognize, 
i.e,, their weakness; may remember that 
they are endah — mere weak, frail, sickly, 
perishing mortals. Selah. Here this word 
occurs for the second time at the end of a 
psalm (see above, Ps. iii. 8) — a position which 
militates against the idea of its signifying 
" a pause," siuce there must always have 
been a pause at the end of every psalm. 



HOMILETIOS. 

Ver. 10. — An appeal to experience, and its record. " They that know thy Name," etc. 
Truth is given us in tScripture, not as bare doctrine, but clothed in living experience ; 
not as an anatomical preparation for intellect to dissect and anatomize, but as food to 
nourish ; nay, more — as a friend to talk with us. For the best reason — we are not 
merely to hold it intellectually, but to live by it. Hence the whole Bible, from end 
to end, is full of human life and history. But, above all, the Book of Psalms is a text- 
book and encyclopasdia of spiritual experience. The text is an appeal to experience, 
and a record of its testimony. 



w. ix,l-20.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 6S 



I. Wuo AKE THEY WHOSE EXPEBIENXE IS APPEALED TO? Tliose who know OodCs Name. 
Names are mure than bare signs of thought; they are instruments of thought; store- 
houses and treasuries of knowledge ; vessels frum which it can be poured ; current ooia, 
in which it passes from mind to mind. More than this. They are treasuries oi feeling ; 
talismans to call it forth ; ripe seeds from which its bloom and fragrance spring to new 
life. Our power of naming is the measure of our knowledge. Therefore in Scripture, 
the Name of God stands for all that we can know of him. It includes, not only know- 
ledge of the intellect, but of the heart (comp. John xvii. 3, 6 with 1 John iv. 8). 
■' Canst thou by searching," etc. ? (Job xi. 7, 8). Surely not. This is a depth we can- 
not fathom ; a breadth and height we cannot measure. But to say this is no conces 
sion to the mental indolence of agnosticism. Do not let us underrate what we can and 
do know of God. 1. We know him as the Source and Foundation of all being but his 
own. Therefore eternal and infinite. It is mere idle ring of verbal logic to say that 
" from a finite universe you cannot prove an infinite Creator." For, though the universt, 
is (we are compelled to think) in some sense finite, yet it is infinite in possibility, and 
in demand on knowledge, wisdom, power, love. 2. We know him as the Father of our 
spirits, in whom we live and have our being. As a Personal Being; i.e. one to vvhimi 
we can speak, and who speaks to us. We can say "Thou" to him, and he says 
'Thou" to each of us. 3. We know his character. Perfect righteousness, truth, 
holiness, love ; and his will, as revealed in his Word. 4. We know him as "the Ood 
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ " (John i. 18). Who, then, are " they that know 
God's Name " ? Those to whom all these truths are not words, but realities ; who 
study his will, and obey it ; study his Word, and believe it ; live in fellowship with 
God by prayer and praise; know the power of his love (1 John iv. 16, 19) ; and see 
his glory in Christ Jesus (2 Cor. iv. 6). In one word, " the Name " of God is matter 
of revelation ; but the knowledge of his Name is matter of experience. 

II. What is the testimony or thbib experience? This — that God may safely 
bs trusted — is infinitely worthy of unswerving absolute trust. Those who know him 
best trust him most ; and those who have trusted him most bear witness to his faith- 
fulness. We may say that the truth of the whole Bible is involved in the truth of this 
verse. For what is the Bible from end to end, but an invitation to tnist Ood — with 
the reasons for so doing? A revelation, not so much to intellect as to heart and con- 
science. With this it is very largely a record of the personal experience of those who 
have trusted (and also of those who have distrusted) God (Ps. xxxiv. 6). And, withal, 
it is a challenge to future experience. It invites practical personal test. "Taste and 
see" (Ps. xxxiv. 8). If the answer were ihsX, practically, faith in Ood is fownd to be 
a /a!7«re, then the Bible would have missed its mark. Then Christianity must be 
confessed a beautiful illusion. But the facts are the other way. Go to the Christian 
— learned or simple, poor or prosperous — who, through a busy life, has made the experi- 
ment of trusting God, and brin';iug everything to the Lord Jesus in prayer. Ask him, 
" Has it answered?" There is no doubt what his reply will be. If the evidence for 
the truth of Christianity were to be compressed into one word, that word is " experi- 
ence." The contemptuous disregard of this immense mass of human experience and testi- 
mony by unbelievers is neither rational nor just (see 'Basis uf Faith,' p. 359,3rd edit.). 

Vers. 19, 20. — An appeal to God. " Arise, Lord," etc. The mysteries of life are no 
modern discovery. They jierplexed and oppiessed the souls of ancient saints, often well- 
nigh to the overthrow of faith. They are a^cravated and emphasized by the fact, 
which we perhaps fail sufficiently to grasp, tliat Israel stood alone among nations as the 
witness to the unity, holiness, and truth of God. The host of surrounding peoples, 
soujc of them at the very summit of worldly greatness, worshipped " gods many and , 
lords many." Hence Israel's enemies could not but be regarded as God's enemies ; 
Israel's cause as God's cause. 

I. An appeal to God as the Lord of the whole world, to manifest his sove- 
reignty. The word for " man " expresses mortal weakness. Q.d. : " Let not weak 
mortals fancy themselves strong enough, or seem to others strong enough, to defy thy 
role, break thy Law, disregard thy displeasure." Ver. 8 shows that the world of man 
kind is in view, not merely Israel. The broad universal spirit of the Old Testament 
Scriptures is among the notes of inspiration. In the sacred enclosure of Israel the 



60 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [w. ix. 1—20. 

psalmist saw men sinning against light ; in the great outlying world of neathendom, 
he saw them sinning without the light of revelation (Rom. ii. 12—14). But in all, the 
root-mischief is the same — human self-will. If all men, instead of pleasing themselves, 
set them-elves to do OocPs will, a change would pass over all liie, private and public, 
like the breaking forth of spring out of winter. Faith does not dictate to God how or 
whe>i men are to be brought to their right senses ; to see that God is God, and men 
" but men " — weak, frail, ignorant, sinful. But faith longs ami pleads that it be done. 

II. There are times and oibcumstancbs which give to this appeal special urgency. 
In ancient Israel, when idolatry threatened tn suppress true religiin ; or heathoii 
invaders threatened the uational existence. For the Christians of the first three 
centuries, in the deadly persecutioas of the Roman emperors. For lovers of God's 
pure Word and of freedom, during the dark ye^rs before the Reformation, in the 
gigantic growth of superstition, corruption, and ecclesiastical tyranny. The blood 
of Albigenses, Lollards, Huguenots, and a great army of martyrs beside, seemed to cry 
for vengeance (Rev. vi. 10). In our own time the irightful prevalence of crime and vice, 
and of squalid misery in the midst of wasteful luxury ; the murderous war-preparations 
of Christian nations ; the slow progress of the frospel where it is matched against the 
mighty forces of heathenism, Buddhism, Mohammedanism; and the bold and subtle 
lorms of atheism or unbelief that fill the very atmosphere of our age; — all these 
awaken in our hearts this earnest, passionate longing; try our faith with this deep 
perplexity (Isa. Ixiv. 1). Multitudes of earnest Christians find no comfort but in the 
belief that the second coming; of the Lord is near at hand. They echo St. John's 
"come quickly" (Rev. xxii. '10). 

III. The gospel sheds a light on this mystery, which prophets and kings of old 
longed for, but could not see (see 2 Pet. iii. 9 ; 1 Tim. ii. 3). God could crush and 
stamp out sin, and destroy sinneis quickly enough, by his almighty power. But his 
amazing purpose has been and is to "overcome evil with good; " subdue unbelief and 
rebellion, not by vengeance, but love. Mercy rejoices against judgment. The cross — 
grace and truth by Jesus Christ — exerts a powei' impossible before. The prophets show 
the possibility of the penitent being pardoned (Isa. i. 18 ; Ezek. xxxiii. 11, etc.). Yet 
Manasseh's conversion is almost a solitary instance. The regeneration of a nation — as 
of nations of cannibal savages in our own day by the preaching of the gospel — was a 
thing impossible. Hence inspired psalmists saw no alternative but either the pros- 
perity of the wicked or their destruction (Luke ix. 54 — 56 ; xxiv. 46, 47). But powe 
will not always sleep, nor judgment tarry (2 Pet. iii. 7, 10 ; 2 Thess. L 7, 9). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^20. — Praise ftyr the destroyer's destruction. The title of this psalm is obscure. 
Its archaisms cannot now be satisfactorily explained. And even a reference to the most 
learned expositors may possibly only increase the confusion.' The title, indeed, is very 
suggestive. It reads, "Upon the death of Labben." Walford regards "Muth-labben" as 
the name of a musical instrument. For this we can find no warrant. The word muth, 
which is equivalent to " death," seems to put us on a line of thought which is, at any 
rate, in harmony with the entire psalm. If we grant (as appears Irom the whols 
tenor of the verses) that the reference is to the death of some enemy, by whose plots 
and snares the people of God were imperilled, the whole song reads naturally enough. 
Whether we read " Labben " as a proper name, or read it " of the Son," or regard the 
psalm as referring to the death of Goliath of Gath, is of no consequence as roLiards its 
general meaning or spiritual significance. Delitzsch, indeed, says, " This psalm is a 
thoroughly national song of thanksgiving for victory by David, belonging to the time 
when Jahve was already enthroned on Zion (ver. 14), and therefore to the time after the 

' Hengstenberg and Delitzsch may be consulted with advantage; and even Bames, 
though often inadequate and not always exact, is instructive on the title of this psalm 
(see also Calvin). Matthew Poole's 'Synopsis Criticorum' has a good summary of the 
different theories thereon. Keil's ' Introduction to the Old Testament' has a very helpful 
section on thr " Titles of the Psalms," vol. i. § 109. The introduction to Pss. ix. and x. ia 
the ' Cambridge Bible,' 1891, should be read, and its notes thereon, throngbout. 



mix. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 61 

ark was brought home." He asks, "Was it composed after the triumphant exterminatioii 
of the Syro-Ammonitish War ? " Hengstenberg remarks, " The relation which David 
had in view when he composed this psalm for public use wai that of the Church of 
God to its external enemies." Note : It is a fitting occasion for sanctuary-song when 
Ood's people are delivered from threatening perils. Many English hearts would send 
up Bucb a shout of praise as we find here, over England's deliverance from the Spanish 
Armada. The joy, however, was not in its destruction, but in Britain's safety. For 
a pulpit exposition of the psalm, we have five lines of thought presented to us. 

I. Wk have hbbk shown ns in what perii, God's feopiiE had been plaoed. 
Although we cannot be sure to what specific events this psalm refers, yet several 
phrases therein show us the land of peril to which the writer alludes, and thus put 
both expositor and preacher on the line for usefully and helpfully dealing therewith on 
any special occasion when unusual perils beset the Church of God. E.g. : 1. Enemies 
(ver. 3). 2. Oppression (ver. 12). 8. Murder (ver. 12). 4. Deceit (ver. 16). Pour 
formidable terras, surely — sufficiently typical of perils which have had to be con- 
fronted again and again in the history of God's Church, whether from paganism, or 
from the papacy, or from mere worldly hostility to goodness and truth. 

II. God had wbouoht a obeat delivebance fob his people. The psalm is, 
owing to this deliverance, one of triumph and joy. 1. It was so illustrious u to 
be altogether marvellous, yea, miraoulous (ver. 1). 2. God had manifested his Judg- 
ments (ver. 7). 3. He bad rebuked the nations (ver. 6). 4. Had brought guilty 
cities low, and even blotted them out (ver. 6). 5. Had shown himself as the Go8l, the 
Avenger of innocent blood (ver. 12). 6. Had manifested his remembrance of the poor 
and of the oppressed (ver. 12). 7. Had made the devices of the wicked to recoil upon 
themselves. These are but so many illustrative forms of the way in which Gh>d's pro- 
vidence is ever working in the world, even now, under the administration of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who is Head over all things to his Church. 

nL SnoH delivebances had thbown obeat light on Gh>D'B ohabaotkb, wobks, 
and WATS. They bad shown : 1. How truly there is a throne high above all the 
ficheming and plotting of men (ver. 7) I 2, That under the sway of that throne judg- 
ment is administered for all who are oppressed. 3. That this judgment is manifested in 
vindicating right and putting wrong to shame (vers. 7, 8). 4. That snch glorious and 
gracious government reveals the lustre of God s everlasting Name. All providential 
dealings are disclosers of Gbd. " Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even 
they shall understand the loving-kindness of the Lord." 

IV. A SONG OF obatitddv, TBinuPH, and tbubt is hebebt awakened. The very 
beginning of the psalm is an outburst of thankfulness (ver. 1). The psalmist gathers 
from deliverances already effected, a ground of trust in God for future days (vers. 9, 10). 
Judgments already brought to pass prove that God will not let evil deeds slumber in 
everlasting forgetfulness, and that he will not let the cry of the humble and down- 
trodden remain for ever unheard (ver. 12). Tea, more. They prove the glorious 
truth which is triumphantly proclaimed in ver. 17, "The wicked shall return to 
Sheo], and all the nations that forget God." Few verses, indeed, have been more 
violently twisted than this to make it suit the exigencies of medinval theology. It 
has been repeatedly dealt with as if it were a sentence on the wicked of everlasting 
woe. The question of future punishment is dealt with clearly enough in other parts 
of the Word of God. But it i$ not that which i$ intended here. The verse means — 
God will not suffer wicked people or nations perpetually to oppress the Church. In 
« little, in his own good time, they shall return to the dust whence they came, and 
enter the invisible realm of the dead.* That this is the meaning intended is ihowo 
by the verse which follows (ver. 18 ; of. also Ps. xxxvii. 10). Cheer nv, ye poor, dis- 
pised, and oppressed people of God 1 Tour Vindicator liveth. He will Iwing you forth 
to the light when your foes shall have vanished from the scene. 

V. Thk obateful song oveb icebcies past is followed bt a pbatbb that 
meboieb TXT needed hat be vouchsafed. 1. Although there had been a marked 
deliverance, yet the afiSiction from which the psalmist had suffered still left its scan 
npon him. Hence the prayer in vers. 13, 14. The oppression and the oppressor may 
be ipeedily removed, but the depression thereby caused lasts long after. JkaA only th« 

' Oalvin's ■triking words on this vene ahonld be pondered. 



62 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps, ix. 1—20. 

prolonged bestowal of grace to help in time of need will ever be sufficient to meet 
the CMe. 2. The future security of the world depends on the manifestation of the 
Divine presence and power ; in counteracting the base designs of men, in asserting the 
right, and avenging the wrong (ver. 19). 3. This can only be done, perhaps, by such 
judgments as will make the nations tremble, and so will canse them to feel their utter 
impotence in the grasp of the mighty God (ver. 20). 

Note : The remarks, applicable to so many psalms, should not be overlooked here. 
1. That we have here, not words of God to man, but words of man to God. Hence 
they may or may not be models for our imitation. Anyway, no inspiration in prayer 
can rise above the level of the revelation which had been granted where and when 
such prayer was offered. 2, Although, in every country and age, prayer from the 
heart must be limited by the measure of light in the conscience, yet a gracious God 
will answer it, not according to its limitation or imperfection, but according to his 
infinite wisdom, his boundless love, and his riclies in glory by Christ Jesus. 3. The 
Divine answers to snch prayers as we find in the psalm, although they brino; deliTer- 
ance to the righteous, will bring terror and confusion to the wicked. The destruction 
of Pharaoh's host is the salvation of the hosts of the Lord. — C. 

Vers. 13, 14. — " The gate$ of death" and "the gate* of Zion.^ L The gates of 

DEATH OPEN VnT OKCE ; THE OATES OF ZiOK OPEN CONTIKVALLT. (Heb. iz. 27; 

Isa. Ix. 11.) 

n. The oateb of death open to au. men wiTHonr distinction ; the oatbs of 
ZlOK open onlt to the good. (Bccles. ix. 5 ; John iii. 3.) 

in. The oateb of death open without oub will; the oateb op Zion onlt 
OPEN accobding to opb choice. (Bccles. viii. 8 ; Matt. vii. 13.) 

rV. The gates of death open to men as tbangbesbobs; the gates of Zion 
OPEN to the objects OF 6BA0E AND SALVATION. (Bom. T. 12 ; Isa. xxvi. 1, 2.) 

y. The oateb of death abe dabk with tebbobb ; the gates of Zion abb bbioht 
with hope. (Heb. ii. 15 ; Ps. cxviii. 20.) 

VI. The gates of death and the gates of Zion abe alike undeb the bdfbems 
oontbol of Ck)D. (Rom. xiv. 8, 9 ; Bev. i. 18.) 

VII. If wk hate bntebed bt the gates of Zion, and dwelt thebe with God, 

WE NEED NOT FEAB WHEN CALLED TO PASS THBOUGH THE GATES OF DEATH. Job 

asks (Job zzxTiii. 17), " Have the gates of death been opened to thee? " They have 
to others. They will be by-and-by to us. We are always near them and in sight of 
them, but we have no power over them. We cannot hinder them from opening when 
it is Gh)d's will, nor can we return when once we have passed through them. It cannot 
be long before our turn comes. Every setting sun, every passing hour, every beat of the 
pulse, is bringing the time nearer. Happy are we if we are foimd ready, so that the 
gates of death may be to us the entering into the city, where we may have right to the 
tree of life and the endless joys of God (Bev. sxii. 14) I — W. F, 

Ver. 14. — A song tf thanktgiving for salvation. I. SAiiTATtON n abobibid to 
God. All deliverances are of God. There may be human means and instruments. 
There may be judges and saviours, such as Joshua (Neh. iz. 27). But behind all is 
God. This holds true of all deliverances — national and individual— of the bndy, and of 
the soul. More especially is this true of the deliverance from our enemies, and of onr 
redemption by Jesus Christ. 

n. MAinFEBTS THE BioHTEODBNEBB OF OoD. QoA must act in agreement with hit 
character. He cannot deny himself. Therefore in whatsoever deliverances God effects, 
we may be sure that his righteousness will shine resplendent. So it is of the salvation 
by Christ (Bom. i. 16, 17). How vain to ask for help, if we are not willing to have 
It in God's way! How foolish to expect deliverance, save in the form that mil 
glorify God's Name — his righteousnesB as truly as his mercy, his justice at well m 
nis love I 

III. FoBEBBADowB THE futal jthdohent OF THE woBLD. Every judgment is ■ 
sign and pattern of the last judgment. There is no change with God. All throneht 
and in everything he does, he has acted like himself. His Law will stand. Hif 
rightconsncss will be vindicated in the end as in the beginning. The cress of Christ 



«. IX. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF P8ALM8. 66 

itself prophesies of the jnst judgments of God. " If they do these things in • green 
tree, what shall be done in the dry ? " (Luke zxiii. 31). God's people may await with 
confidence the result. 

rV. Calls fobth the ballelujahb of the good. There is the joy of trust (ver 
13), of gratitude (ver. 14), of hope (vers. 16 — 20). By faith we see the King in his 
beauty, and rejoice in his rejoicing. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Thanksgimng. This and the following psalm have been considered one 
poem, written by the same author. This one is in a continued strain of triumph 
throughout, and was composed, perhaps, by David at the conclusion of the Syro- 
Ammonite War, or after one of his victories over the Philistines. 

I. Nature of the psalmist's thahesgiviko. 1. All hit power* of mind and tout 
took part in it, " With my whole heart." He ascribed his deliverances to Qod, and 
not to himself; therefore he was not half-hearted in his praise. 2. He gathered up in 
hig mental vision the mercies of a lifetime. " All thy marvellous works." He was 
filled with a sense of wonder when he thought of the long succession of God's marvel- 
lous ways towards him. The last deliverance did not blot out the memory of those 
that had gone before. 3. God's condescension fiUed him with rejoicing gratitude. He 
felt that God was " most High," and that he had wonderfully stooped to regard him 
and his affairs — the same thought as in the previous psalm. 

II. The grounds of the psalmist's THANESGiTiNa. Speaking generally, it was 
for deliverance from his enemies. The language here suggests : 1. That the sense of 
God's presence with us nerves us against our greatest dangeri. (Yer. 3.) Perils and 
temptations lose their power over us when we know God to be with us. 2. GocFs 
deliverances from evil spring out of his regard for what is right, (Ver. 4.) God's 
righteousness is as much concerned for our salvation as his love and mercy. The 
rescue of a soul from sin satisfies the sense of infinite right, and is part of the eteinal 
administration of God. 3. The psalmist saw in prospect the certain destruction of <ttt 
wickedness, both individual and social. (Vers. 5, 6.) The prospect of the prevalence 
and reign of righteousness filled him with holy gladness and thanksgiving. Not 
only himself, but all righteous persons, would then enjoy peace and safety. One evil 
man can do much mischief, and work wide ruin ; but when cities and governments 
become corrupt, their power for evil sweeps all virtue out of its path. Therefore 
David rejoiced in their extirpation. Let us cultivate a thankful spirit for all the 
wonderful deliverances which God has made possible and actual to us. — S. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The cause of gratitude. To derive benefit from the stndy of any 
ancient writings, we must translate them into onr present forms of thought and ways 
of thinking. David as king sang these hymns to God for the nation and to the nation, 
and for himself; for he and the people were one. It is difficult for us to realize this, 
being, as we are, in lower stations and with an intenser feeling of our individuality. 

I. The pkelttde to this bono. He praises God for his marvellous works and for 
his supremacy. 1, They captivated and subdued his whole nature : " With my whole 
heart." 2. They filled him with/oy. 3. He published them to others. 

II. The special causes of his gratitude. God had judged his cause and main- 
tained the right by subduing his enemies. 1. We too have enemies to le subdued — 
difficulties and temptatious and hindiances which threaten our safety and destroy our 
peace. 2. David overlooks his own instrumentality in his victories iy thinking only 
•f the great First Cause of them. He saw God in everything. We lose right of the 
cause in the instrument, and are not so devout as he. We see law where he saw a 
person. The highest men see both — the law which prescribes the way of conquest, 
and him who imparts the needed strength to obey. 

III. David rejoiced over the complete debtbuotion of his xnemibb. 1. He 
thought it right to rejoice over the destruction of human life; for he thought God 
sanctioned and did it. 2. Our outward difficulties may vanish, while the inward may 
remain. 3. We shiJl fully rejoice only when all our enemies, inward and outward, 
are vanquished. — S. 

Ven. 7 12. — A righteous God, Experience is the great teacher ; and especially ai 



64 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [m. ix, 1— 20. 

to our knowledge of the Divine nature. From what God has done (vers. 3 — 6) we 
are able to learn what he is, viz. righteous, and a Helper of the oppressed. 

I. God'b eule is a continual exbbcibe of judgment. (Vers. 7 — 9.) 1. 2%i» 
seals the doom of the unrighteous. It will destroy tliem and their works (vers. 5, 6). 
2. Xhis secures the safety and the triumph of the righteous. Ultimately and really, 
if not immediately and in appearance. 3. This is a comfort and a refuge for those 
who suffer from injustice and oppression. (Ver. 9.) God is a strong Tower, into which 
they may run and find shelter from their troubles. 

II. The orounds of faith in God. 1. When we know how to name him. (Ver. 
10.) Jacob wanted to know the name of the Being who wrestled with him, because 
the true name indicates the true nature. In our ignorance of the nature of things, we 
give arbitrary names ; but if we have learnt anything of the nature of God, we shall 
know his true name, and then shall be able to trust in him without fear at all times. 
2. Ood reveals himself as the faithful Ood to those who earnestly seek him. (Ver. 10.) 
And to none else. We can never prove the fidelity of any one of whom we have 
never felt the need. And we never seek earnestly for any one unless he becomes in 
some way necessary to us. And it is only thus, by experience, we find that God 
does not forsake those who leek him. Knowledge, faith, and experience sre thus 
connected. 

III. Gbounds of the jotful wobbhip of God. 1. Ood tpeciaMy dwtih in th* 
Church. (Ver. 11.) The glory between the cherubim was in Zion. He gathers with 
his people where they gather, and specially manifests himself. " \Vhere two or three 
are gathered together," etc. 2. It it a high privilege to know and declare to others the 
Divine work, (Ver. 11.) To be able to expound God's work truly is to help to bring 
God nearer to men, and so to help to save them. 3. Qod always remembers the caum 
of the afflicted, (Ver. 12.) The meaning is — God will not let the murderer go 
unpunished, but will avenge the relatives of the murdered man, and so relieve and 
console their sufferings. But he hears the cry of all afflicted ones, whatever the cause 
of their sufferings, and comforts them by his Spirit. — S. 

Vers. 13 — ^20. — Prayer to Ood. Previous verses have celebrated the triumph of the 
Divine righteousness in punishing the wicked and defending the cause of the oppressed. 
Vers. 13 and 14 are a personal prayer, interrupting the flow of the general strain of 
the psalm. Luther lays, " In the same way do all feel and speak who hare already 
overcome some tribulation, and are once more oppressed and tormented. They cry 
and beg that they may be delivered." 

L The fsalkibt's pbateb to the biohteous God. (Vers. 13, 14.) 1. The appeal. 
" Graciously see or consider my trouble. I am unjustly suffering &om the hatred of 
men. If thou wilt only look upon the fact as it is, then I am confident thou wilt 
interpose and save me." For the Divine sympathy is always on the side of justice. 2. 
Uie arguments which enforce the appeal. Two. (1) Ee had had many deliverances 
from dangers nearly fatal. From the gates of death. Experience taught him faith 
and hope. (2) He would proclaim the Divine praise in the most public place. "In the 
gates," etc. (ver. 14). He felt that that would be acceptable to God. (But see the 
Exposition.) 

II. The Divine work ib a betelation of the Divine biohteousnehl ' (Vera. 
15 — 18.) 1. The plots of the wicked become the means of their own destruction. (Vers. 
15, 16.) Because the righteous Being overrules in the affairs of men. No wicked 
■cbemes can be so well laid but that in the end they ruin him who laid them. We 
have examples of this in the first and third Napoleons, and constantly recurring 
ones in more private life. 2. The premature end of the ungodly. (Ver. 17.) " The 
wicked must return to the unseen world " — sooner than others, is implied (not •' the 
wicked shall be turned into hell "). Wickedness and vice tend to shorten life. S, 2%« 
righteoui expectation of the afflicted shall be fulfilled. The poor and the afflicted hope 
in God, and their hope shall not be disappointed. " God is not unrighteous to forget 
four work of faith and labour of love." 

III. An uboent call upon God to give still mobb evident fboov or hu 
biohteous buIiE. (Vers. 19, 20.) " Arise, O Lord, let not man have the upper hand : 
let not weak man carry himself as if he were strong." What is needed to put men 



PS. X. 1—18.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



65 



in fear is some irresistible work of judgment among men, that shall put God's 
supreme rule beyond all doubt. There is something here of impatience — a wish to 
hasten God's slow l>ut sure methods of maintaining the cause of truth and righteous- 
ness in the world. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM X. 



This psalra is to some extent oonnected 
with the preceding one, but not very closely. 
It has turns of expression which are identi- 
cal, and not common elsewhere; e,g. "in 
times of trouble " (ver. 1 ; comp. Ps. ix. 
9), and much similarity in the thoughts 
(comp. ver. 2, "Let them be taken," etc., 
with Ps. ix. 15, " In the net which they hid 
is their foot taken ; " ver. 12, " Forget not 
the humble," with Ps. ix. 12, " He fnrgettetli 
not the cry of the humble ; " ver. 16, " The 
heathen are perished out of the land," with 
P«. ix. 5, 6 ; and ver. 4, " God is not in all liis 
thoughts," with Ps. ix. 17, " The nations that 
forget God"). Tiie metrical structure is 
tliought to be similar (' Speaker's Commen- 
tary '), and there is the same imperfect 
and irregular employment of alphabetic 
arrangement. Moreover, in the Septuagint 
Version the two psalms are run intn 
one; and the unusual absence of a title 
in the Hebrew raises the suspicion that 
they were once united there also. Yet in 
their subject they are markedly different. 
Ps. ix. is concerned almost wholly with the 
iieathen, Ps. x. with the wicked, by which 
we must understand wicked Israelites. 
The former is a psalm of praise and thanks- 
giving, the latter one of complaint and 
entreaty ; the former is triumphant and 
exulting, the latter menacing and mournful 
Possibly they were composed about the 
same time, and with some reference of the 
one to the other, Ps. ix. being ii review of 
Israel in its external relations, and Ps. z. 
a review of Israel in its iDternal relations 
and prospects. 

Ver. 1.— Why standest thou afar ofi^ 
lord 1 Here is the key-note struck at once. 
Why does God stand aloof? Why, after 
delivering his people from their foreign foes, 
does he not interfere to protect his true 
people from their domestic oppressors? 
" Throughout the reign of David," as it has 
been truly observed, " Palesline was infested 
by brigands, ami disturbed by a factious 
nobility " (' Speaker's Commentary,' vol. 

PSALMS 



It. p. 191). Why Mdest thou thyself in 
times of trouble ? " Verily thou art a God 
that hidest tliyself," says Isaiah (xlv. 
15). And so Job complains, " He hideth 
himself on the right hand, that I cannot 
see him" (xxiii. 9). He seems neither to 
see nor hear. The psalmist inquires — Why ? 
It can only be answered, "In his wisdom; 
for his own purposes ; because he knows it 
to be best." 

Ver. 2. — The wicked in his pride doth 
persecute the poor. Dr. Kay translates, 
"Through the pride of the wicked man 
the poor is set on fire ; " and our Revisers, 
"In the pride of the wicked, the poor is 
hotly pursued ; " and so (nearly) the LX X., 
the Vulgate, Aquila, Symmachus, Koliler, 
Hengstenberg, and others. The Authorized 
Version paraphrases rather than translates ; 
but it does not misrepresent the general 
sense, which is a complaint that the poor 
are persecuted by the wicked. Let them 
be taken in the devices that they have 
imagined (comp. Ps. xxxv. 8, "Let his 
net that he hath hid catch himself ; " and 
Pi. oxli. 10, "Let the wicked fall into 
their own nets; " see also Pss. vii. 15, 16; 
ix. 15; Prov. v. 22 ; xxvi. 27 : Ecoles. x. 8). 
Some, however, trauslate, "They (i.e. the 
poor) are ensnared in the devices which 
they (i.e. the wicked) have imagined ; " 
and this is certainly a possible rendering. 
Hengstenberg regards it as preferable to 
the other "on account of the parallelism 
and connection." 

Ver. 3. — For the wicked boasteth of his 
heart's desire ; rather, for the wicked sings 
praise over his own soul's greed. Instead of 
praising God, lie praises his own greed 
and its success (comp. Hor., ' Sat.,' i 
1. 66, "At mihi plaudo ipse domi, si- 
mul ao nummos contemplor in area." And 
blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhor- 
reth ; rather, and when he gets a gain blesses 
(but) despises the Lord (so Kay, AlexanUer, 
Chuyne, and Hengstenberg). Each time 
that he gets a gain, he says, " Thank God 1 " 
— but, in thanking God tor an unjust gain, 
he shows that he despises him. 

Ver. 4. — The wicked, through the pride 
of his oountenance, will not seek after God : 
God is not in all his thoughts. Tlie con- 
struction is concise to abruptness, and 
it is hard to determine the ellipses. The 
passage in the original runs thus: "I'lie 
wicked, in the height of his scorn — will 
not require — no God — all his thouglits." 



6« 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. X. 1-18. 



Of_ the Tarious attempts to aupply the 
ellipaea, and obtain a satisfactory sense, 
the following (that of the 'Speaker's 
Commentary') is probably the best: "As 
for the wicked in the height of his soom — 
'God will not require' — 'There is no 
God' — such are all his thoughts." (Com- 
pare the Beviaed Version, which is not 
very different.) The general sense is that 
his pride conducts the wicked man to 
absolute atheism, or at least to practical 
atheism (comp. vers. 11, 13). 

Ver. 5. — ^His ways are always grievous; 
rather, firm; i.e. steadfast and consistent, 
not wavering and uncertain. The thoroughly 
wicked person who " neither fears God nor 
regards man," pursues the course which he 
has set himself, without deviation, turning 
neither to the right hand nor to the left. 
There is nothing to hinder him— no qualm 
of conscience, no distrust of himself, no fear 
of other men's opiiosition. Thy judgments 
are far above out of his sight. They are 
held in reserve ; lie does not foresee them — 
he does not believe in them. As for all his 
enemies, he puffeth at them. His human 
adversaries he wholly despises, believing 
that a breath from his mouth will bring 
them to nothing. 

Ver. 6. — B.e hath said in his heart, I shall 
not be moved (comp. Fs, xxx. 6). The 
idea of continuance is instinctive in the 
human mind. "The thing that has been, 
it is that which shall be" (Ecoles. i. 9). 
We expect the sun to rise each day, solely 
because in the past it has always risen 
(see Butler's 'Analogy,' part i. ch. i.). 
The wicked man, who has always prospered, 
expects to prosper in the future ; he has no 
anticipation of coming change ; he supposes 
that his " house wUl continue for ever, and 
his dwelling-place to all generations " (Fs. 
xlix. 11); he thinks that "to-morrow will 
be as to-day, and much more abundant " 
(Isa. Ivi 12). For I shnll never be in 
adversity; rather, unfo generation and 
generation, 1 am he who will ie exempt from 
calamity. The wicked man has no thought 
of dying — lie will be prosperous, he thinks, 
age after age. 

Ver. 7. — His mouth is fall of cursing. 
(On the prevalence of this evil habit among 
the powerful in David's time, see Pss. lix. 
12; oix. 17, 18; 2 Sam. T.vi •■) And deceit 
and fraud; or, guile nTid extortion (Kay); 
comp. Fss. xxxvi. 3; Iv. 11. TTnder his 
tongue is mischief and vanity ; rather, as in 
the margin, misehief and iniquity. These 
are stored "under hii tongue," ready for 
utterance whenever he finds a fit occasion. 

Ver. 8 — He sitteth in the lurking-places 
•f the villages. These "lurking-places" 
must not be supposed to have been inside 
the villages, but oatside of them. Thev 



were retired spots at no great distance, 
where brigands or others might lie in 
ambush, ready to seize on such of the 
villagers as might show themselves. In 
the secret places doth he murder the innocent 
(comp. Job xxiv. 14). The usual object 
would be, not murder, but robbery. Still, 
there would be cases where it would be 
convenient to remove a man, as Jezebel 
removed Xaboth ; and moreover, in every 
case of robbery, there is a chance that the 
victim may resist, and a struggle ensue, in 
which he may lose his life. His eyes are 
privily set against the poor ; or, his eyes lay 
ambush for the helpless (Kay). The word 
translated " poor " (p^hn) is only found in this 
place and in ver. 10, where the antithesis 
of "strong ones" seems to imply that the 
weak and helpless are meant. 

Ver. 9. — He lieth in wait secretly as a 
lion in his den ; or, he lurhs in the covert as 
a lion in his lair (Kay) — a very striking 
image 1 He lieth in wait (or, lurks) to catch 
the poor : he doth catch the poor, when he 
draweth him into his net ; rather. In/ drawing 
him into his net. The mode of capture is 
intended. 

Ver. 10. — He eroucheth, and humbleth 
himself; rather, crushed, he sinks down. 
The subject is changed, and the poor man's 
condition spoken of. That the poor may fall 
by his strong ones; rather, and the helpless 
(comp. ver. 8) fall by his strong ones. The 
"strong ones" are the rufiSans whom the 
wicked man employs to effect his purposes. 

Ver. 11. — He hath said in his heart, God 
hath forgotten (comp. vers. 4, 13). "The 
wish is father to the thought." As Delitzsch 
says, "The true personal God would 
disturb his plans, so he denies him. ' There 
is naughty' he says, ' but destiny, and that 
is blind ; an absolute, and that has no 
eyes ; an idea, nnd that has no grasp.' " 
He hideth his face. He looks away; he 
does not wish to be troubled or disturbed 
by what occurs on earth. So the Epicureans 
in later times. He will never see it (comp. 
Job xxii. 12 ; Fss. Ixxiii. 11 ; xciv. 7). 

Ver. 12.— Arise, lord (comp. Fs. ix. 19). 
At this point the psalmist passes from de- 
scription to invocation. From ver. 2 to the 
end of ver. 11 he has described the conduct, 
the temper, and the very inmost thoughts of 
the wicked. Now he addresses himself to 
God — he summons God to arisa to vengeance. 
As Hengstenberg says, "Here the second 
part begins — prayer, spring! ug out of the 
lamentation which has preceded ; " prayer 
and invocation, beginning here, and termi- 
nating at the close of ver. 15. God, lift 
up thine hand; i.e. to strike, to take 
vengeance on the wicked. Forget not the 
humble; or, the afflicted. Do not justify 
the hidden thought of the wicked (ver. 



n. JL 1—18.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



67 



11), that thou forgettest — ihow that thon 
remembereit at once the snfieringg of the 
afflisted, and the guilt of their oppresaors. 

Ver. 13. — Wherefore doth the wicked 
contemn Godl God's long-suffering does 
but make the wicked despise him. Where- 
fore is this allowed to continue (comp. ver. 
1)? He hath said in his heart, Thou wilt 
not require it ; rather, as in the Prayer-book 
Version, while he doth say in his heart (see 
vers. 6, 11). 

Ter. 14. — Thon hast seen it. The most 
emphatic contradiction that was possible to 
the wicked man's "He will never see it" 
(ver. 11). God sees, notes, bean in miud, 
and never forgets, every act of wrong-dning 
that men commit, and especially acts of 
oppression. For thon beholdest mischief and 
spite; or, perhaps, mischief tmd grief (see 
Job tI. 2): i.a. the "mischief" of the 
oppressors, and the " grief" of the oppressed. 
(soHengstenberg, Cheyne, and the ' Speaker's 
Commentary '). Others refer both words to 
the feelings of the oppressed, aud translate, 
" travail and grief." To requite it with thy 
hand. Again the Prayer-book Version is 
preferable, "to take the matter into thy 
hand," both for reward and requital. The 
poor eommitteth himielf unto thee. He has 
no other possible refuge — therefore no other 
reliance. Thou art the Helper «f the father- 
leit. The word "thoo" is emphatic— 
" Thon, and no other (nijs)." 

Yer. 15. — Break thon the arm of the 
wicked and the evil man ; i.t. ** break thon 
hii strength ; take away his ability to work 
eril to otheri." Seek ont his wickedness 
till thou find none; rather, require hi$ 
wieltedneu. Tlie verb is the same as that 
nied in the last clause of ver. 13. The 
wicked man had said in his heart, "Thou 
wilt not require ; " the psalmist calls on God, 
not only to require, but to require to the 
nttermost. Seek ont, he says, require, and 
bring to judgment,aS his wickedness— every 
atom of it — until even thy searching eye can 
And no mon to require^ requite, and punish. 



Vers. 16 — 18. — ^Here begini the third part 
of the psalm. It is, as has been observed, 
"confident and triumphant." The psalmist 
has, in the first part, shown the wickedness 
of the ungodly; in the second, he has 
prayed for vengeance on them, and for the 
deliverance of their victims; in the third, 
he expresses bis certainty that his prayer 
is heard, and that the punishment and 
deliverance for which he has prayed are as 
good as accomplished. 

Ver. 16. — The Lord is King for ever and 
ever (comp. Psa. xxii. 10; oxlvi. 10). Thus 
God's kingdom is established, his authority 
vindicated, his absolute rule over all men 
made manifest. Internal and external foes 
are alike overcome. The heathen — ^whether 
uucircumoised in the flesh or in the heart 
(Jer. ix. 25, 26) — are perished out of his 
(Jehovah's) land. 

Ver. 17. — Lord, thou hast heard the desire 
of the humble (comp. Ps. ix. 12). It is not 
the psalmist's prayer alone that he regards 
a* heard and answered. The oppressed 
have cried to God against their oppressors, 
and their cry has "come before him, and 
entered into his ears." Thon wilt prepare 
their heart ; rather, thou dost establish 
(or, make Jtrm) their heart. Through their 
conviction that thon art on their side, and 
art about to help them. Thou wilt cause 
fhine ear to hear; or, thou eauiest. 

Ver. 18.— To judge the fatherless (see 
ver. 14) and the oppressed ; t.«. to vindicate 
them — to judge between them and their 
oppressors. That the man of the earth may 
no more oppress ; or, that terrene man may 
no longer terrify. There is a play upon the 
two words in the original, which might 
thus be rendered. But it has been said, 
with truth, that thii sort of rhetoricul 
ornament " does not aoit the genius of oni 
language" (Erie). 



HOMILETIC& 

Ver. 13. — Th* protttt ef faith against $in. "Wherefore doth the wicked eon- 
lemn God?" etc. This psalm is one of those which utter with burning fervour the 
protest of faith against unbelief, of righteousness against iniquity, of lojralty to God 
against rebellion. To understand these utterances, we must try to see sin as it is in 
itself, apart from the gracious light of forgiving mercy which the gospel sheds — as 
they saw it who had tolive the life of faith when no cross had been set up, no sacrifice 
offered "for the sins of the whole world," no gospel of forgiveness preached to the 
nations. If the prevalence of sin, and its consequent misery, is so heayy a burden to 
pious hearts to-day, what must it have been then f 

I. A TERRIBLE VIEW OF SIN : CONTEMPT OF (JoD. Wilful transgressors despite God. 
\, They are regardlest of his Law. (IJohniii. 4.) It is written on their conscience. Th« 
b,'«g8ing of obedience and the curie-of disobedience are inwoven in their very nature; 



68 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. x, 1— 18. 

for besides that some sins (drunkenness, gluttony, lust, and sloth) destroy even the 
body, the man himself is worse, mentally, in character, for every sin he commits. 
2. They are careless of Ooifs honour. Sin insults and dishonours God — a greater crime 
than all the Injury it does to man. 3. They depiae his call to repentance. (Isa. i. 18 ; 
Acts xvii. 30.) 4. Thev defi/ his displeasure and are reckless of his judgment (Luke 
xiii. 3, 5). 

II, A QUESTION ASKED AND ANBWBBED, " Wherefore," etc. ? Because " he hath 
said in his heart, Thou wilt not require it " (bo ver. 11). Men persuade themselves 
that, as they forget God, so he forgets them. That is all they desire. An ungodly 
man's notion of forgiveness is mere omission to punish ; neglect of justice ; indulgence, 
not because it is right not to punish, but merely because the thought of punishment is 
too dreadful and painful. " God," he says, " is too merciful to punish." He does not 
consider or understand that, as it is impossible for God to forget anything, so there 
would be no true mercy, but the reverse, in the neglect of justice. This is what is 
meant by " will by no means clear the guilty," even in the very proclamation of 
Divine mercy (Exod. xixiv. 6, 7). 

IIL The vatatj mistake. God has seen, does remember, will require and judge. 
To build hope for eternity on the supposed negligence and injustice of God, is to try to 
cross an abyss on s cloud. If God forgives sinners, he must do it justly, on good 
grounds (Bom. i. 17, 18 ; ii. 6 — 9 ; iii. 23 — 26). The gospel is the glorioui 
revelation of God's pardoning love and grace, not thrust at random on those who con- 
tinue to despise him, but freely given to each, even the worst, who seeks to " be 
reconciled to God " (2 Cor. ▼. 20), and lays hold on his promises in Christ (Heb, ii. 3 ; 
x.28,29). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver«.l — 18. — WTiyf or, Hard/acts and puzzling questions. Whetherorno this psalm 
was originally a part of the ninth is a question which, as may be seen, is discussed by 
many expositors. The mere absence of a title to it is, however, a very slight Indica* 
tion in that direction ; while the contrast, almost violent, between the- two psalms 
seems to be sufScient to show that they could scarcely have been penned by the 
same writer at the same time. The ninth psalm is a song of praise over the great 
deliverance God had wrought in bringing about the destroyer's destruction. This is 
a mournful wail over the ill designs and too successful plans of the wicked on the one 
hand, and over the long silence of God on the other. The ungodly are at the very 
height of their riotous and iniquitous revelling; and the Divine interposition is 
passionately and agonizingly implored. We have no clue whatever to the precis* 
period of disorder to which reference is here made. Perhaps it is well that we have 
not. There have been times in the history of the world and of the Church, again and 
again, when designing and godless men have been, as it were, let loose, and have been 
permitted to play havoc with God's people, while the righteous were mourning and the 
wicked were boasting that God did not interpose to check their cruelties and crimes. 
And it will be necessary for the student and expositor to throw himself mentally into 
the midst of such a state of things, ere he can appreciate all the words of a psalm like 
this. For it is one of those containing words of man to God, and not words of God to 
man. We have therein — terrific facts specified ; hard questions asked ; a permanent 
solace ; a forced-out prayer. 

I. Tbekifio facts. (Vers. 2 — 11.) Let every phrase in this indictment be weixjhed; 
It presents as fearful a picture of human wickedness as any contained in the Word of 
God. It sets before us pride, persecution, device, boasting, ridicule, denial of Provi- 
dence, hardness, scorn, evil-speaking, defying and denying of God, oppression and crush- 
ing of the poor, a glorying in deeds of shame, and expected impunity therein.* And 
what is more trying still ie, that God seems to let all this go on, and keeps silence, and 

• Interesting illustrations of some of the phrases here used will be found in Geikie's 
•Holy Land and the Bible,' vol. i. pp. 14 — 16 ; others from Dr. Thomson's 'Land and the 
Biok,' and J. Gadsby's ' Wanderings,' quoted in Spurgeou's ' Treasury of David,' vol. i. 
p. 135. 



PS. X. 1— 18.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 6<J 



stands afar off, and hides himself in times of trouble.* Such trials were felt by the 
Protestants in their early struggles ; by the Covenanters in times of perseoutioa in 
Scotland ; by faithful ones on the occasion of the St. Bartholomew Massacre ; by the 
Waldenses and Albigenses; by Puritans and Independents under Charles I.; by 
Churchmen under Cromwell ; and by the Malagasy in our own times ; and it is only 
by the terror of such times that psalms like this can be understood. 

II. Hard questions. Of these there are two. One is in the first verse. 1. Why 
it Ood silent t As we look at matters, we might be apt to say that if God has indeed a 
people in the world, he will never let them fall into the hands of the destroyer; or that, 
if they are oppressed by evil men, God will quickly deliver them out of their hands, and 
will show his disapproval of their ways. But very often is it otherwise — to sight, and 
then faith is tried ; and it is no wonder that Old Testament saints should ask " Why ? " 
when even New Testament saints often do the same I But we know that to his own, 
God gives an inward peace and strength that are better marks of his love and bettor 
proofs of his timely aid than any outward distinction could possibly be. Take, e.g., 
the case of Blandina in the times of early persecution ; and the cases of hundreds of 
others. And besides this, it is by the Christ-like bearing of believers under hardships 
such as these, that God reveals the reality and j^lory of his redeeming grace (see 1 
Pet.iv. 12 — 14), 2. A second question is : Why doth the wicked contemn Ood f Ali I 
why does he ? He does contemn God in many ways. (1) His inward thought is, 
" There is no God " (ver. 4). (2) He denies that God will call him to account (ver. 13). 
(3) He denies that God watches his actions (ver. 11). (4) He lulls himself in imagined 
perpetual security (ver. 6). Thus the life of such a one is a perpetual denial or 
defiance of God. And all this is attributed (a) to " pride " (ver. 4) ; (6) to love of evil 
as evil (ver. 3). And yet the psalmist, seeing through the vain boast of the ungodly, 
may well peal out again and again the question, " Why does he do this ? " for the implied 
meaning of the writer is, " Why does he do this, when, in spite of all his proud glory- 
ing in ill, he knows that God will bring his toickednese to an end, and will call him to 
accmtnt/or it 1 This is the thought which connects our present division with the next. 

III. Pebuanbnt solaob. However hard it may be to interpret the ways of God 
at any one crisis, yet the believer knows that he must not judge God by what he sees 
of his ways, but ought to estimate his ways by what he knows of God, And there 
are four great truths known about God by the revelation of himself to man. 1. Jehovah 
is the eternal King (ver. 14). 2. God is the Helper of the fatherless (ver. 14). 3. God 
is known as the Judge of the oppressed (ver. 18 ; cf. Pss. ciii. 6 ; xciv. 8 — 23). 4. God 
hears his people's cry (ver. 17). When believers know all this, they have a perpetual 
source of relief even under the heaviest cares. God's plan for the world, in his govern- 
ment thereof by Jesus Christ, is to redress every wrong of man, and to bring about 
peace, by righteousness (Ps. Izxii. 2 — 4). 

IV. Fbevid PEATEB. (Vcrs. 12, 15.) Times ofseverest pressure are those which force 
out the mightiest prayer (Acts iv. 33 — 30). Luther, etc. ; Daniel (ii. 16 — 18 ; ii, 1 — 19). 
The true method of praj'er is thus indicated, viz. to ascertain from God's revelation 
of himself, what he is and what are his promises, and then to approach him in humble 
supplication, pleading with him to reveal the glory of his Name, by fulfilling the 
promises he has made ; and when our prayers move in the direct line of God's promises, 
we are absolutely sure of an answer (but see Ps. Ixv. 5 ; Rev. viii. 4, 5 ; Deut. xxxiii. 
26 — 29). To-day is a day of God's concealing himself; but his day of self-revealing 
is drawing nigh. — C. 

Vers, 1 — 18. — Times of darkness and fear. The experiences of the psalmist may differ 
from ours, but by faith and sympathy we can enter into his feelings. Besides, there is 
always more or less of trouble. Life is full of vicissitudes. Times of darkness and of 
fear come to all. Not from one, but from many, the cry goes up to Heaven, " Why 
standest thou afar off? " 

I. Thk COMPLAINT. (Vers. 1 — 11.) Why? Perplexity and fear are natural because of 
the silence of God. What makes his silence the more awful is that it is in sight of the 
lufferings of the good (ver. 2). On every side evil abounds. Truth, justice, benevolence, 

• See homily by the writer in 'Pulpit Commentary: Eevelation,' viii. 1, "Silence in 
heaven." 



70 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [p8. x. 1— 18 

are set at naught. Might prevails against right. Righteousness is fallen in the dust. 
Oppression has reached such a height that it seems as if it would finally triumph. The 
mystery deepens, when we mark that God's silence is in the hearing of the vauntinga 
of the wicked (vers. 3 — 11). The proud not only boast of their strength, but exult in 
their success. They have accomplished their evil desires. They parade their insolence 
and scorn in the very hearing of Heaven. Seeing there is no judgment executed, they 
harden their hearts, and hold on their way with reckless hardihood. 

IL Thb appeal. (Vers. 12 — 18.) The cry is impassioned and urgent. God's truth 
and honour are concerned. Redress mu-t be given, else things will soon be beyond 
remedy. 1. The experience of the past is urged. (Ver. 14.) God is just. What he 
has done is earnest of what he will do. His deeds bind him as well as his promises. 
2. The present also bears witness. (Ver. 5.) There is requital even now. As surely as 
the good is blessed in his deed, the wicked is cursed in his wickedness. 3. The future 
is therefore anticipated with confidence. (Ver. 6.) As the singer muses on the cliaracter 
and ways of God, he rises to a bolder strain. Faith sees the vision of coming judg- 
ment. There are sore trials, there are groat perplexities, but God is just. He is not 
indifferent. He is not helpless. He is not slack concerning his promise. But he waits 
in long-suffering mercy for the fit — the appointed time. A prepared heart will always 
find a prepared God (vers. 16 — 18) : " Thou wilt cause thine ears to hear." Men may 
give their ears, and no more. Not so God. He not only hears, but acts. There is the 
teuderest pity ; but there is also the most tremendous power. " It is a fearful thing 
to fall into the hands of the living God."— W. F. 

Ver. ^.—Man'e thoughti, L Man has thouohts. He can direct his mind to the 
past, the present, the future. He can speculate as to the manifold things that come 
before him and affect his interests. It is his glory that he can think ; it is his shame 
that he so often thinks foolishly. 

II. Man's thoughts depend dpon his hobal condition. We are creatures of 
feeling. What is uppermost in our hearts will be uppermost in our thoughts. The 
good man has good thoughts, the evil man evil thoughts. Change the character of the 
heart, and you change the character of the thoughts (Prov. xii. 5; xv. 26; Matt, 
xii. 33). 

III, When the mobal disposition is ooebupt, the tendency is to exclude 
God from the thoughts. The plan, the labours, the enjoyments of life are too often 
without God (Luke xii. 19, 20 ; Jas. iv. 13). This is irrational, criminal, and ruinous 
(Fs. cxlvi. 4).— W. P. 

Vers. 17, 18. — Trial in three aspects. L Tbial a* a painful inflictiok. " For 
the present . . . grievous" (Heb. xii 11). 

II. As A holt dibciplini:. There is • "needs be." God means us good, to make us 
partakers of his holiness. 

III. As A SALUTABT EXPERIENCE. David says, " It was good for me that I was 
afilicted," and he gives reasoMS lor this. Looking back, humbled and awed, but 
grateful, we can praise God for his judgments as well as for his mercies. We hare the 
witness in ourselves that God is love, and that when he chastens us it is for our good. 
Thus we learn to suffer and to wait. The future is bright with hope. In the heavenly 
world to which we aspire there shall be no more pain, no more sorrow, nor crying, nor 
tears. Christ wiU make all things new. — ^W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — The righteous Ood. The one g-rand throught which runs through 
this psalm and most of the Old Testament literature is that God, notwithstanding all 
appearances to the contrary, is a Righteous Being, and that all wickedness must be 
punished and overthrown. In this psalm two principal thoughts are vividly pictured 
forth, and a prayer. 

I. A COMPLAINT TO GoD OF THB DARING ATHEISM OF THE WICKED. (Vers. 1 11.) 

1. He imagines liimself to he above all restraint, human or Divine. (Vers. 2 — 4.) Proud, 
Tnoastlul, blessing the robber, despising God, hlind. " He requireth not ; there is no God." 

2. He feeU safe and prosperous. (Vers. 5, 6.) 3. His ways are full of deceit and 
violence. (Veis. 7, 8.) This is a description of the wicked man in the very fulness 



re. XL 1 — 7.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



71 



and monstrosity of his evil power. 4. The cruelty of his ways. (Vers. 9 — 11.) He ig 
compared to a ravenous lion. His ferocity is entirely unrestrained, because eitlier there 
is no God or he will not concern himself with the fate of the oppressed and afflicted. 

II. A PRAYER FOR God's INTERPOSITION. (Vcrs. 12 — 15.) 1. Founded upon the 
contrastbetween the thoughts of the wicked and the actual conduct of Qod. (Vers. 12 — 14.) 
2. And upon the expectations of the helpless and the forlorn. (Ver. 14.) " The helpless 
leaveth it to thee, and thou wilt not disappoint him." 3. Wickedness can be destroyed 
and made to disappear from amongst men. (Ver. 15.) 

III. The triumph of faith. The psalmist looks upon God's work of comfort and 
salvation as being quite as certain in the future as if they had been works done in the 
past. 1. Jehovah is King for ever and ever. (Ver. 16.) Nothing can overturn his 
eternal will. 2. The future triumph of Ood!s righteousness is regarded as already com- 
pleted. (Vers. 17, 18.) The bi-ginning of the work which he has seen gives him faith 
that it will be perfected. " Perfect that which concerneth us." " He which hath 
begun • good work in you will perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ." — 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XI. 



AiOBiBKD to David in the "title," this 
pialm is almost universally allowed to be 
his. It " has all the characteristics of the 
earlier Davidic psalms." No allusion en- 
ables nt to assign it to any particular 
occasion; but, on the whole, it would leem 
to belong most probably to the period of 
David's residence at the court of Saul, when 
he had provoked the jealousy of the coor- 
tiers, and calumnious accusations were being 
continually brought against him. At such 
a time his friends and companions may well 
have lost heart, and advised him to "flee 
away to the mountains." But David flees 
to God (ver. 1), and trusts in him for deli ver- 
■noe from his persecutors (vers. 4 — 1). 

Yer. 1. — ^Xh the Lord put I my trust ; or, t'n 
the Lord have 1 taken refuge (Kay, Oheyne). 
Before his friends address him on the subject 
of his danger, David has himself recognized 
it, and has fled to God for succour. How 
say ye to my sool, Flee as a bird to your 
mountain 1 rather, fiee ye, birds, to your 
mountain. Probably a proverbial expression, 
used when it was necessary to warn a man 
that in flight lay his only safety. The 
singular (lis?) is used collectively. 

Yer. 2. — For, lo, the wicked bend their 
bow. The words are stiU those of the timid 
friends. " Lo," they say, " the ungodly are 
already bending the bow against thee" — 
preparing, i.e., to attempt thy life. They 
make ready their arrow upon the string; 
or,^i their arrovo to the string. The last 
thing before discharging it. That they may 
privUy shoot at the upright in heart; lite- 
rally, that they may shoot amid darkness at 
the upright in heart (comp. I Sam. xiz. 
1, 8, where, Saul having given orders to 



"all his servants, that they should kill 
David," Jonathan persuades him to hide 
himself " until the morning "). 

Yer. 3. — If the foundations be destroyed, 
what can the righteous do? The word 
translated " foundations " is a rare one, only 
occurring here and in Isa. xiz. 10. The 
meaning of " foundations," first given to it 
by Aquila, is now generally adopted. We 
must suppose the timid friends to be still 
speaking, and to mean that, under the law- 
less rule of Saul, the very foundations of 
society and of moral order were swept away ; 
the righteous (p'^x, a collective) had done 
and oould do nothing tu prevent it. Wliat 
remained for David, but to withdraw from 
a community where there was neither law 
nor order, where tbe first magistrate com- 
manded (1 Sam. xix. 1) and attempted 
(1 Sam. xix. 10) assassination? 

Yer. 4. — The Lord is in his holy temple. 
David's reply to his timid advisers is an 
expression of absolute faith and trust Ib 
God. Saul may reign upon earth; but 
Jehovah is in his holy temple (or rather, 
"palace," ^3<n) on high — ^his thione is in 
heaven, where he sits and reigns. What 
need, then, to fear an earthly king? Dspe- 
oially when God is not inattentive to human 
affairs, but bis eyes behold, his eyelids try, 
the children of men (comp. Pss. vii. 9; 
ivii. 3; oxxxix. 1). His "eyelids" are 
said to try men, because, when we closely 
scrutinize a thing, we drop our eyelids and 
half close our eyes. 

Yer. 5.— The Lord trieth the righteooa. 
God tries the righteous, scrntiniEing them 
with his penetrating glance, but a glance 
wherein there is protection and love. When 
he tries (or closely scrutinizes) tbe \Yicked, 
the result is different — the wicked and him 
that loveth violence his soul hateth. 

Yer. 6. — ^Upon the wicked he shall rain 
snares. On Divine displeasure foUowi 



72 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XI. 1 — 7. 



Divine punishment — not always speedy, 
but sure. Those who have plotted against 
David will have " snares rained " upon them. 
God is said to " rain " on men both his 
blessings and his curses, wbeii be gives 
them abundantly (oomp Job xx. 23 ; Hos. 
X. 12: Ezek. xxxiv. 26). By "snares" 
are meant any difficulties or troubles in 
which men are entangled by the action of 
Divine providence. Fire and brimstone. 
The punishment of Sodom and Gomorrah 
was the typical example of God's vengeance 
to the Israelites generally. And an horrible 
tempest ; literally, a breath of horrors 
(comp. Ps. cxix. 53 ; Lam. v. 10). It is 
thought that the simoom may be intended. 
But none of the threats are to be taken 
literally. All that the psalmist means is 
that God's vengeance, in some shape or 
ether, will overtake his persecutors. This 



shall be the portion of their onp. This is 
probably the earliest place where the meta- 
phor of a " cup " for man's lot in life is 
employed. Otiier instances are Ps6. xvi. 5 ; 
xxiii. 5; Ixxiii. 10; Ixxv. 8; oxvi. 23; Isa. 
li. 17, 22; Jer. xxv. 15; Ezek. xxiii. 31, 
32; Matt. xx. 22, 23; xxvi. 39; John 
xviii. 11. 

Ver. 7. — ^For the righteous lord loveth 
righteousness ; rather, for the Lord is right- 
eous ; he loveth righteousness (see the Revised 
Versii m) ; literally, righteousnesses ; i.e. good 
aud righteous deeds. His countenance doth 
behold the upright. So the LXX., the 
Vulgate, Hengstenberg, Bishop Horsley, 
and others; but the bulk of modern com- 
mentators prefer to render, "The upright 
will behold his countenance," Either trans- 
lation yields a good sense. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 3, 4. — The question of fear and the answer of faith. " If the foundations," etc. 
The Bible is God's gift to a world such as its pages describe. Not a world of sinless 
holiness and painless peai e, but a world of sin, sorrow, strife. A book for pilgrims, 
toilers, warriors, mourners, sinners. The " sword of the Spirit," forged in the fire of 
affliction, tempered in tears. Light in darkness ; songs in the night-time ; manna 
in the wilderness ; water from the flinty rock ; an anchor for the tempest-tossed soul. 
It leads us along the path beaten by the feet of scores of generations ; across ancient 
battle-fields ; shows us the monuments of heroes and conquerors ; and fills our daily 
life with the echoes of the mighty past. Whether or no this psalm belongs to some 
particular occasion in David's life — a question of no practical moment — it reflects the 
stormy experience he and many another saint have had oftentimes to face ; and it doe* 
this for all time. In these verses we have (1) the question of fear; and (2) the answer 
of faith. 

I. The question or peak. "If . . . what shall the righteous do?" Ths founda- 
tions, namely, of society; the pillars or supports of public order, peace, prosperity. 
These main pillars are four : authority, Justice, policy, weaUh. If these are shaken, the 
fabric totters. If they utterly fail, anarchy or tyranny ensues. When war threatens 
or assails, a weak distrusted government, an unrighteous cause, incapacity, an empty 
treasury, are more dangerous than any foreign foe. And though there were profound 
peace tts regarded other nations, a nation afflicted with these four evils, one in which 
these main pillars break, would be on the verge of ruin. Yet underneath all these lies 
a deeper foundation — national character (Prov. xiv. 34). The particular form in which 
public life rested on religion has never been possible for any other nation than Israel. 
None other has had a covenant like that of Sinai — an inspired code of laws ; a perfect 
identity of Church and .state. The relations of Church and state differ in different 
lands ; are matter of controversy. This does not change the fact that public as much 
as private life — that of the nation no less than of the individual — is healthful, safe, 
prosperous, truly free, only as it conforms to God's law : is just, truthful, temperate, 
pure, peaceable, benevolent. 

II. Thk answer op faith. God reigns ; God rules. 1. " In his temple,'' q.d., " in 
heaven." " His throne " — his supreme omnipotent dominion — is the reign, not of 
arbitrary power or mere mechanical law, but of holiness; perfect righteousness, 
wisdom, love. Therefore it is the "throne of grace" (Heb. iv. 6). 2. "His eyee 
behold," etc. In all this wild confusion, as it seems, nothing is overlooked ; nothing 
unjudgedox uncontrolled. God rules as well as reigns. Never for a moment is his hand 
off the helm (Rom. viii. 28 ; Ps. Ixxvi. 10). Example : The beneficial results of the 
Babylonish captivity, in which the ruin of the nation had appeared total and final. 



1—7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 78 



Pbaotioal lessons (especially in times of political strife and danger). 1. Cottrag^. 
" How say ye," etc. ? It is no part of a Christian's duty to flee, either in terror or dis- 
sjust, from public duty. Public service— as citizen, official, or ruler— rprogresses under the 
great Christian law of love to our neighbour (comp. Gal. vHO; 1 Pet. iv. 10). Who 
should be fearless and faithful, if not he who seeks in all to glorify God, and knows 
that all earthly as well as heavenly power is in Christ's hands (Matt, xxviii. 18) ? 
2. Prayer. (1 Tim. ii. 1—3 ; comp. 1 Sam. viii. 7—10.) Prayer for our country is a 
great Christian duty. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Veri. 1—7. — TOe victory of faith ; or, rest amid storm. In each one of those psalms 
which represent some historic experience, there is its own differential feature. This 
feature it is the work of the student and expositor to seize and to utilize. We do not 
know and have no means of knowing the specific incidents in the writer's life to which 
reference is here made,* although, since David was the writer, we should find but 
little difficulty in fixing on some passages of his history to which the psalm might 
possibly apply. But although that might furnish some interesting points of history, it 
would add little or nothing to the value of the psalm. It is one which is far tuo much 
overlooked ; since it yields us a powerful illustration of a faith which overcomes the 
world. Let us set to work and see if it be not so. 

I. HeBB IB A BELDCVBB IN GoD EXPOSED TO FEBII. FBOK DEBIONINa FOES. (Ver, 2.) 

Those who are upright in heart are hated by the wicked (cf. 1 John iii. 12, 13). This 
is not to be wondered at, for righteous men by their righteousness are a standing con- 
demnation of the ungodly (Heb. xi. 7). The Lord Jesus was pre-eminently the object of 
hatred by the world (John viL 7 ; xv. 18 — 24). In the time of the psalmist this hatred 
was expressed by plots for the destruction of God's servants (ver. 2).' But, as if con- 
scious of wrong and of the meanness and wickedness of their aims, men sought the 
cover of darkness for their designs (see ver. 2, Revised Version). What a mercy there 
is One to whom the darkness and the light are both alike I 

II. Hebe abk well-meanino fbiendb oitino theib adyioe. (Ver. 1, " Flee as a 
bird," etc.) This is the counsel of timidity. There may possibly be circumstances in 
which it may be right to take flight (see Matt. x. 23). Although our Lord expected 
his disciples to be prepared, (^ need be, to lay down their lives for him, yet he did not 
wish them unnecessarily to expose themselves to danger. So that at times, flight 
may be wise. But in the case of the psalmist, the whole tenor of his psalm indicates 
that it would not have been right, and that the counsels of his friends were those of 
timidity and even of cowardice. Note : 1. We may any of us be exposed at some time 
or other to this temptation (1) to flee from the spot where we are placed ; (2) to quit the 
duty we have in hand, because of peril ; or (3) to resort to some safe nook, and thus 
consult our own ease and safety, regardless of the work in hand. 2. Such temptation 
may be even harder to resist when it comes from friends than if it came from foes. So 
our Lord Jesus found it ; he felt Peter's efibrt to dissuade him from the cross far more 
acutely than he did Satan's (cf. Matt. xvi. 22, 23). 

III. This iLii-jUDGBD advice may be bnpobobd with flausiblb abgdments. 
(Vers. 1, 3.) The advice begins with the word " flee " (ver. 1), and ends with the close of 
the third verse. The arguments for flight are: 1. The secrecy of the designs of the 
wicked ; since they work under cover of the darkness, it is best to be entirely out of 
their reach. 2. The grievous consequences of their success (ver 8). If the men who 
are the strength and gloty of a state are removed, the righteous therein will be dis- 
mayed.* This is a more specious argument than the former : it is equivalent to, " If 
you care not to flee for your own sake, you owe it to others to guard yourself; for if 

' The introduction to this psalm in < The Cambridge Bible ' is wise and helpfnl ; so also 
are the notes on the psalm in both ' The Cambridge Bible ' and the edition of the < Psalter ' 
by the E T.8. 

* Bevised Version, "in darkness;" LXX., "in a moonless night" See Fanssefi 
' Studies in the Psalms,' leot. iv. p. 28. 

• See Fueret. $ub verb. nt. 



74 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. xi. 1— 7. 

you, as one of the supports of the state, are overthrown, what will the righteous 
people do?" The wicked would rejoice, and would seize the occasion for the purposes 
of rapine and murder; but the righteous would be in sore dismay, 

rV. To SUCH ADVIOE, FAITH HAS A BEADY ANBWEB. (VetS. 4 6.) The variouS 

features of this aaswer may be summed up in one sentence, " The Lord reigneth I " 
This is faith's rest and refuge in all times of trouble. Things are not left to the cross- 
purposes of man. There is a throne above all, and One sitting thereon. This fact has 
a manifold bearing : 1. On men generally. (1) GtoA sees all (ver. 4). (2) God tests 
all (ver. 4). 2. On the righteous. (1) God tries his people. He proves them to 
improve them (ver. 6). (2) He loves the righteous ; i.». he approves them, and, in the 
midst of all confusion, he smiles upon them. (3) He will crown them with honour at 
last (ver. 7, Bevised Version). 3. On the wicked. (1) He hates them ; i.e. he dis- 
approves their ways (ver. 5 ; Fs. L 6). (2) The time will come when that disapproval 
unll be manifest (ver. 6). The terrible figures used in this verse are probably drawn 
from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. What the dread reality may be, ot 
which these words are symbols, God grant that we may never know ! More fearfiil 
than any physical judgments is the advene verdict of the Oreat Supreme (John iiL 19). 
Note : It is all-important for a believer in God, in the midst of the greatest calamities, 
and of the most serious public disorder, so to maintair his calm serenity of soul, as to 
enable him thus to rest in what he knows of God and of his revealed mind and will. 

v. Knowiko all this conoebning God, the psalmist had actually anticipatbd 
THE ADVIOE OF HIS ADVISEES, though in another and a better way (ver. 1) : "In the 
Lord put I my trust ; " rather, " To the Lord I have fled for refuge." I need no other. 
He is mine. He will guard me. I am at rest in him. I will therefore stay where 
I am, and keep in the path of duty. I can calmly look on the raging storm, and wait 
tiU it hau passed by. " Weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." 
Kote : 1, The man who trusts in God has already a Befuge of which the imgodly man 
knows nothing. 2. That trust in God gives him the victory over his foes. 3. The 
God whom he trusts will be his Shield now, and his exceeding great Beward hereafter 
and for ever I 

How much broader, deeper, and firmer should be our trust, now that we know God's 
love as revealed in Christ ! " Who is he that overcometh the world, but he iSoKt 
believeth that Jesus is the Son of OtoA ? " " This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith " (1 John v. 4, 5). — C. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — A battle in the soul. Faith and fear are in conflict. Plausible reasons 
are suggested why the fight should be given up, but nobler thoughts prevail. 

I. Feas confronting faith. (Vers. 1 — 3.) The outlook is discouraging. Our 
foes are many and strong; more, they are inveterate in malice; more still, they have 
already gained ground, and amidst the overturn of all right principles and the confusion 
worse confounded, it seems as if they were to prevail all along the line. In such a 
state of things selfish fear suggests — Why fight longer? Our best efibrts are fruitless; 
we are spending our strength and labouring in vain. Better bow to the inevitable; 
better look to ourselves ere it be too late. The temptation is subtle and dangerous ; 
even the best of us have felt its force. It was Jeremiah who said, " I will not speak 
any more in his Name" (Jer. xx. 9); it was the great Elijah who cried out, as if in 
despair, "I only am left, and they seek my life" (1 Kings xii. 10). Then there are 
not wanting lalse and mistaken friends, who say, as St. Peter to our Lord, "This shall 
not be unto thee " (Matt. zvi. 22), or as the disciples said to St. Paul, " Go not up to 
Jerusalem " (Acts ixi. 11 — 13 ; Neh. vi. 10, 11). So it has been in all great enter- 
prises. There are lions in the way ; difficulties arise that seem to the fearful impos- 
sibilities. So it is specially in the Christian life. " The fear of man bringeth a 
snare," but so also does the fear that rises in our own hearts. 

II. Faith conquering fear. (Vers. 4 — 7.) God's truth is like Constan tine's banner: 
" By this we conquer." 1. Realizing God's presence. God is not afar off, but near; 
he is not an indifferent spectator, but pledged to defend the right. The end is in his 
hands. He will save his people. The presence of an earthly chief gives courage to his 
soldiers : how much more should we take heart when we know that God is with us \ 
2. Confiding in God's protection. It is not chance, nor caprice, nor arbitrary rule, 



PB. M,l— 7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 76 



iKat settles things, but the will of God. He " trieth the righteous." There is a holy, 
loving discipline. The furnace may be hot, but it is for the purifying of the gold 
(Job xxiii. 10). Let us have patience (Jas. v. 10, 11 ; 1 Pet. i. 3—7). 3. Antici- 
pating God's deliverance. Faith looks beyond the seen. When the vision of God's 
power is revealed, our fears give place to confidence, our tremblings to tranquillity 
(2 Kings vi. 17). What God loves must live. What God has promised he will 
certainly perform (2 Pet. ii. 9). 

" Put we our quarrel to the will of Heaven, 
Who, when he sees the hour ii ripe on earth. 
Will lain hot Tengeuoe on th' offendera' headi." 

(Shakespeare.) 

W. F. 

Ver. 7. — " The righteous Lord loveth righteousness." This is true for ever. 

I. RiOHTEOosNBBS IS coHOBUOUS TO God's natukb. if li^^lu is pleabant to the 
eye, and music to the ear, and beauty to the soul, it is because they are in the line of 
rightness. "No man ever yet hated his own flesh" (Eph. v. 29): how much more 
must God love that which is akin to himself — which is of the very essence of his 
character I 

II. BioHTEousNESs FULFILS God'b pubfoseb. What God seeks is righteousness. 
This is the end of the Law ; this is the purpose of all good government ; this is the 
teaching of the prophets and the great object of Christ (Isa. xlii. 1 — 14 ; Matt. iii. 15 ; 
Rom. V. 21). Christ is the " Righteous One ; " and of him the Father said, " This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." " Christ suffered once the Just for the 
unjust ; " and we see how dear righteousness was to God when " he made him to be sin 
for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." 
The cross is the measure of God's love of righteousness. 

IJL RlOHTEOUSNESS SECUBEB THE BLESSEDNESS OF God's OBEATUBES. SiU brought 

dfath into the world, and all our woe. It is by the taking away of sin and the 
re-establishment of the rule of God in the heart, that happiness is restored 
(Kom. xiv. 17). The prophets tell witl. rupture of the good time coming; and note it 
as the peculiar glory of the new heavens and the new earth, that in them " dwelleth 
righteousness" (Isa. Ixv. 17—25 ; 2 Pet. iii. 13, 14). 

Here is a test : Do we love as God loves ? " Whosoever doeth not rightoonsness is 
not of God " (1 John iii. 5— 10).— W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Faith's antidote to fear. This psalm is referred by some to the 
early struggles of David against the unrelenting jealousy of Saul ; by others to the 
rebellion of Absalom ; by others to the general conflict ever waging between the good 
and the evil powers. The subject of it is " Confidence in the Lord, and big protection 
even against the mightiest force of the wicked." The two leading ideas are the 
doctrine of David's friends, and David's own doctrine. 

I. Safety in danoeb could be found only in flioht. (Vers. 1 — 3.) This was 
the temptation with which bis friends assailed him — to abandon the righteous cause 
by flight. The temptation was plausible : 1. Because his very life was in danger. If 
anything less had been threatened — reputation or property — it might have been 
prudent to remain ; but " skin for skin," etc. 2. TJie attack upon his life was secret, 
and not open. (Ver. 2.) He might resist and conquer an open attack ; but what can 
defend us against cunning plots hatched in secret? 3. The greatest social disorder 
prevailed. (Ver. 3.) " What shall the righteous do ? " was their plea with him. " You 
are powerless if you remain." They were in despair, and thought that flight was his 
only desperate resource. But David's doctrine was — 

II. That safety was found by tbusting to God's fbotecptivb cabe. (Vers. 4 — 7.) 
1. Trust in Qod enabled him to stand by the righteous cause ; by flight he would abandon 
it to the wicked. Faith in God gives an unconqu'vable devotion to the right ; flight is 
unbelief and cowardice. Indolent trust — a trust that does not work and fight in the 
good cause — ^is no better than cowardly flight. 2. Se trusted in God's overruling 
power. (Vers. 4, 5.) That somehow he would uphold the righteous cause and 
righteous men ; that as long as his throne was in the heavens, they could not be in any 



7S 



THE BOOK OP PSALM3. 



[P8. xn. i — a 



lasting peril, whatever appearances might be. 3. He trusted in the retributive providenct 
of God. (Vers. 5, 6.) A. providence that dealt with the righteous and the wicked ; 
an inward and an outward retributive providence, which rewards and punishes in both 
spheres, i. Whatever his outward lot, he trusted that he should one day see God's/ace. 
(Ver. 7.) That is safety ; that is salvation from all danger and all trouble. The highest 
salvation is of a spiritual kind, not outward and temporal. To see God's face is to 
stand firmer than the mountains, and to be richer than all the outward universe. — 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XII. 
AjrOTHSB Daridical psalm, both according 
to the title and to the general opinion of 
eritics; said (like Ps. vi.) to be "upon 
Sheminith" — an expression of uncertain 
meaning. It consists of a complaint (vers. 
1, 2), a menace (vers. 3, 4), and a promise 
(vers. 5 — 8). Metrically, it seems to divide 
itself into four stanzas — the first, second, and 
fourth, of four lines each ; the third, of six 
lines. There is nothing to mark definitely 
the time of the composition ; but its position 
in the Psalter, and its general resemblance 
to the psalms which precede, point to the 
period of David's residence at the court 
of Saul. 

Ver. 1. — Help, Lord ; rather, Save, Lord, 
as in the margin (oomp. Pss. xx. 9 ; xxviii. 
9 ; Iz. 5, etc.). For the godly man ceaseth. 
"Ceaseth," i.e., "out of the land"— either 
slain or driven into exile. We must make 
allowance for poetic hyperbole. For the 
faithful fail from among the children of 
men (compare, for the sentiment, Micah vii. 
2). The writer, for the moment, loses sight 
of the " remnant " — ^the little flock "—which 
assuredly remained, and of which he speaks 
in vers. 5 and 7. 

Ver. 2. — ^They speak vanity eyery one 
with his neighbour ; rather, they speak 
falsehood (Kay, Cheyne). Contrast the in- 
junction of the apostle (Eph. iv. 25). With 
flattering lips and with a double heart do 
they speak ; literally, with lips of smoothness, 
and with a heart and a heart do they speak. 
The Authorized Version gives the true 
meaning (comp. 1 Ohron. xii. 33). 

Ver. 3. — ^The loid shall cut off all flatter- 
ing lips. The complaint having been made, 
a threat follows (comp. Pes. x. 15; xi. 6; 
xvii. 13, etc.). The men who flatter with 
their lips, beguiling and cozening their 
victims to get them completely into their 
power, shall be " out off" from the congre- 
gation (see Gen. xviL 14 ; Kxod. xii. 15, 19 ; 
Lev. vii. 20, 27; xvii. 10, etc.). And the 
tongue that speaketh proud things ; literally, 
great things ; but proud and lofty boastings 
are intended (comp. Dan. vii. 8, 20). The 



same man sometimes cozens with smooth 
words, sometimes blusters and talks big. 

Ver. 4. — Who have said, With our tonj^na 
will we prevail ; or, through our tonguts are 
we powerful; i.e. whatever we desire we 
can accomplish through our tongues — by 
persuasion, or by menaces, or by skill in 
argument. Success in pleading before courts 
of law is, perhaps, included. Our lips are 
our own ; literally, are with us ; i.e. are on 
our side, are our helpers (" Nobis auxilio 
et priasto sunt," Michaelis). Who is lord 
over usi Who, i.e., can interfere with us 
and impede our action? They do not 
believe in any rigliteous Judge and Con- 
troller of the world, who can step in to 
frustrate their plans, upset their designs, 
and bring them to ruin (see Pss. x. 4, 11 ; 
xiv. 1). 

Ver. 5. — For the oppression of the poor, 
for the sighing of the needy, now will I 
arise, saith the lord. The ungodly having 
been threatened, a promise of assistance is 
made to the righteous whom they oppress. 
Ood declares that, in response to the many 
calls made upon him (Pss. iii 7; vii. 6; 
ix. 19; X. 12), he will "now," at last, 
"arise" — interpose on behalf of the op- 

?res8ed, and deliver them (comp. Exod. iii. 
, 8). I will set him in safety from him 
that pnffeth at him. This is a possible 
meaning; but it is perhaps better to ren- 
der, with Hengstenberg and Cheyne, "I 
will place him in the safety for which he 
sighs," or " pants." 

Ver. 6. — The words of the lord are pure 
words. There is no base alloy in them: 
therefore they may be trusted. What God 
promises, he will perform. As silver tried 
in a furnace of earth ; rather, perhaps, 
silver assayed in a crucible on earth (Kay). 
Purified seven times (comp. Pss. xviii. 30 
xix. 8 ; cxix. 140 ; Prov. xxx. 5). 

Ver. 7. — Thou shalt keep them, Lord. 
God havin°; promised to set the righteous 
who are oppressed, in a place of safety (ver. 
5), the psalmist is sure that he will keep 
them and preserve them from the wicked 
" generation," which has possession of the 
earth, and bears role in it, always. It is, 
no doubt, for the greater consolation and 
encouragement of these nnfortunates thai 
he dwells on the subject, and adds his on 



PS. XII. 1 — 8.J 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



17 



assurances to the Divine promise which he 
has recorded. Man's faith is so weak that, 
umess promises and assurances are reite- 
Fited, they make little impression. Thou 
Shalt preserve them (Hebrew, him) from 
this generation for ever. Tlie " generation " 
is that of the worldly men in power af. the 
time, of whom we have heard in Pss. iii. 1, 
2, 6, 7; iv. 2 ; v. 4—6, 9, 10 ; vl 8 ; vii. 1, 
2, 9, 13—16; X. 2—11, 15; xi. 2, 3, 6. 
"For ever" means "so long as they live." 
The substitution of " him " for " them " in 
this clause is an instance of that generali- 
zation by which a whole class is summed 
up in k lingle individual — ^"all men" in 



" man," " all good men " in " the righteous " 
(pns), and the like. 

Ver. 8. — The wicked walk on every side. 
This can soiircely have been intended as an 
independent clause, though grammatically 
it stands alone. It is best to supply "while" 
or " though " before " the wicked," as Dr. 
Kay does, and to translate. Though (or, 
while) wieked men mareh to and fro on all 
aides; i.e. while they have their way, and 
control all other men's incomings and out- 
goings, being free themselves. When the 
vilest men are exalted ; rather, and though 
villainy (rm^ exalteth itself among the sons 
of men. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 4,—Unhridled «pe«cft. " Our lips are our own," etc. If It be true, as we often 
say, that " actions speak louder than words," it is also true that speech is a kind of 
action, and that words often speak more than the speaker means to utter. Light, 
thoughtless words, void of serious meaning, sometimes flash a light into the inmost 
chamber of the heart ; they could not have teen spoken if kindness, good sense, justice, 
humility, dwelt and ruled there. Profuse professions are often interpreted by the rule 
of contrary. When Judaa said, "Hail, Master 1" he branded himself as a traitor, 
hypocrite, murderer. The text may not mean that these words are audibly uttered. The 
Bible speaks often of what men say in their heart. The temper and spirit which go 
with an unbridled tongue are expressed thus : " Our lips are our own." 

I. This is a great mistake. Responsibility is not annihilated or lessened by our 
refusing to acknowledge it. We are responsible for our words as much as for the rest 
of our life. Our lips are not our own, because we ourselves are not our own (1 Cor. 
vL 19, 20 ; Ps. c. 3, Revised Version). God " giveth richly all things to enjoy ; " but 
he can give nothing away ; all is his stiU, and cannot cease to be his (1 Chron. xxix. 
14 ; Bom. xii. 1). Responsibility to use God's gifts in a way pleasing to him and to 
his glory increases with the preciousness of the gift. Who can reckon the_ value of 
speech? That without which reason would be not only dumb, but blind, deaf, 
paralyzed — ^the chief bond of human society, the instrument of truth, instruction, 
command, persuasion, comfort, converse. All life is "in the power of the tongue" 
(Prov. xvili. 21). For good or for evil, even a short speech often long outlives the lips 
that uttered it. Not only " what is written remains." Books and writings decay and 
perish, while " winged words " fly from land to land, and live on through ages. A 
great trust is man's gift of speech. 

II. A MOEE COMMON MISTAKE THAN MAT BE THOUOHT. ThuS boldly, COarsely 

spoken, it is indeed the language of atheism. But think of the enormous amount of 
idle, unprofitable, unkind, unjust, insincere talk poured forth every day ; not to speak 
of what is wilfully false, impnre, or malignant. What does all this mean but utter 
forgetfulness of responsibility to God for our use of this great gift ? Passing sad, too, 
it is to think how it runs to waste; of all the words of counsel, comfort, kindness, 
prayer, praise, that might be spoken, but are not. The dulness of conscience on this 
point is astonishing. You may meet often with Christians who positively pride 
themselves on " speaking their mind," no matter at what cost to others. People who 
would think it unpardonably wicked to strike a hard blow with the fist, think nothing 
of giving a stab with the tongue, which perhaps years will not heal (Jas. iii. 6). 

IIL It is not enough that we see the sin of unbridled speech, the reckless impiety 
of supposing " our lips are our own." Let us take to heart cue ebsponsibilitt to 
our brother man, above all, to our Saviour, for our use of this noble faculty and price- 
less gift. " The fruit of our lips " (Heb. xiii. 15) may be a " sacrifice " in other ways 
as well as praise. Remember our Lord's warning (Matt. xii. 36, 37). Meditate on 
what we owe to the words of those who have taught, counselled, cheered, and helped 



78 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xn. 1— 8. 

; to the words of inspired men ; above all, to the words of the Lord Jesus. " A word 
ken in season, how good is it ! " A kind word, a faithful rebuke, an honest 
avowal of faith and conviction, a manly protest against impure or ill-natured speech, 
may be the turning-point for good of some young life. " Let your speech be alway 
with grace " (Col. iv. 6 ; Eph, iv. 29, 30, where note the remarkable reference to the 
Holy Spirit; Ps. six. 14). 

Ver. 6. — The preoiotisness of the Word. " The words of the Lord," etc. Thus the Bible 
bears witness to itself. We read often in Scripture of " the word of the Lord " — not 
so often of " the words '' of the Lord. By " the Word of the Lord " is meant sometimes 
a particular command, promise, or prediction ; but frequently — and usually in the 
New Testament — the substance or sum-total of Divine truth (Ps. cxix. 9, e.g.). But 
this phrase, " the words of the Lord," calls attention to the actual utterances in which 
this truth is recorded for us. So our Lord distinguishes (John viii. 43) between his 
" speech," the particular form or method of his teaching, and his " Word," his doctrine. 

I. ThK INSPIBATIOIf ASD AUTHOEITT OF THE SoBIPTDEEg. " The WOrds of the 

Lord." We must guard against such narrow, mechanical views of inspiraiion as would 
confine it to the Hebrew and Greek words in which it was written, so that one who 
reads a good translation would not have " the words of the Lord." " The meaning of 
Scripture," sayg Tyndale, " is Scripture." Inspiration is the Holy Spirit working t» 
men and hy men — ^not as machines, but as living, reasonable beings. We ought not to 
speak of " the human element" and " the Divine element " as separable or hostile. A 
great picture is but paint and canvas, informed, vivified by the thought and genius of 
the artist. Tou cannot say, " This part is paint, and that part is genius." So in the 
Bible. " Men of God spake " — there is the human element — " as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost" — ^there is the Divine (oomp. 2 Tim. iii. 16, where, had the 
Bevisers followed the analogy of their own rendering in 2 Tim. Iv. 4, they would have 
retained the rendering they have transferred to the margin). 

II. Its tbisd and fboved tbuth. The similitude is drawn from precious metal, 
whose worth and purity have been proved in the furnace, which separated the dross 
from the pure ore. Tlie idea is not that we are to distinguish, in Scripture, dross from 
gold and silver, but that God has done so. He gives us not rongh ore, but pure metaL 
But we may apply the image to the tests to which the Bible has ijeen and daily is 
submitted. 1. The experience of those who have trusted it and gone by it. Those 
who have done this longest, most practically, with fullest faith, are the very persons 
most convinced of the truth and worth of the Bible. 2. Hostile critiaism. For the 
last hundred years this has been especially fierce, learned, elaborate, determined, skilful. 
Had the Word not been pure gold, it must have perished in this fierce furnace. The 
result has been to shed a flood of light on the letter of Scripture, and to bring to light 
a mass of new and powerful evidence, bearing witness to its truth and genuineness. 
It stands both tests (1 Pet. i. 23—25). 

III. Its peeoiousness. It is worth all the care and trouble God has bestowed, by 
his providence and inspiration, on its composition and preservation ; all the help and 
illumination which the Holy Spirit continually grants to those who read it with 
faith and earnest prayer ; all the study given to it by friends and foes (Pss. cxix. 72 ; 
xix. 20). 

Conclusion. Is it precious to you.' Is this the witness of your own experience? 
If not, it must be because you have not really tried it. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Hard times. This psalm has no indication of the time in which it wag 
written.* At whatever time, however, it may have been penaed, there is no doubt about 
the general features of the age here represented. It was one in which good men were 
becoming more and more rare, in which the wicked abounded, and took occasion from 
the numerical inferiority of the riiihteous to indulge in haughty and vain talk against 
them and against God. The psalmist looks with concern and distress upon this state 
' See the introduction hereto in ' The Cambridge Bible.' 



P8. XII. 1—8.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 79 

of things, and sends up a piercing cry to God to arise and make his glory known. We 
have in the psalm three lines of thought — fierce trials ; fervent prayer; faithful promise. 
I. FiEROB TRIALS. They are not personal ones merely ; they are such as would he 
felt mainly by those of God's people who, possessed of a holy yearning for the pros- 
perity of his cause and the houour of his Name, grieved more acutely over the degeneracy 
of their age than over any private or family sorrow. There were six features of society 
at the time when this psalm was written. 1. The paucity of good and faithful men' 
(ver. 2). 2. Wicked men being in power (ver. 8). 3. The righteous being oppressed 
(ver. 6). 4. Falsehood, i.e. faithlessness.' 5. Pride. 6. Vain-glorious boasting and 
self-assertion. When wickedness gets the upper hand in these ways, times are hard 
indeed for good and laithful men. In such times Elijah, Jeremiah, and others lived, 
and wept, and moaned, and prayed. Many a prophet of the Lord has had to look upon 
such a state of things, when all day long he stretched out his hands to a disobedient 
and gainsaying people. Note : 1. This description of the degeneracy of the writer's 
age is not a Divine record of the state of the world as a whole. The psalm is made up 
of words of man to God, not of words of God to man. 2. Still less is the psalm to be 
regarded as stating or implying that the world as a whole is always getting worse 
and worse. Let the student take the psalm simply for what it professes to be — a 
believer's moan over the corruptions of his age — and he will find it far more richly 
helpful and suggestive than on any forced hypothesis. 3. The special ills of any age 
may well press on the heart of a believer ; yea, they will do so, if a becoming Christian 
public spirit is cherished by him. 4. There are times when Christian men have to 
sigh and cry, owing to the abominations of the social life around them; fmd when 
Fiber's touching words are true — 

"He hides himself so wondrously, 
As if there were no God ; 
He is least seen when all the poweia 
Of ill are most abroad." 

6. And trials not less severe are felt when there is a widespread defection from the 
&ith once delivered to the saints, and when men are calling for a " religion without 
God ; " and are even, in some cases, forsaking Christianity for Mohammedanism or 
Buddhism. Through such trials believers are passing now (a.d. 1894). At such times 
they must resort to — 

n. Fbbvent fbateb. The psalmist gives expression to the conviction that nothing 
but the immediate and powerful interposition of God will meet the crisis' (cf. Isa. 
Ixiv. 1). In what way this Divine aid shall be vouchsafed it is not for the praying man 
to say. He must leave that with God, content to have laid the case before him. The 
answer may come in the form of terrible providential judgments, or in the sending 
forth of a new band of powerful witnesses to contend with the adversaries, or in a 
widespread work of grace and of spiritual quickening power. All these methods are 
hinted at in Scripture, and witnessed to by the history of the Church. Note : Such 
prayers as this agonizing " Help, Lord ! " while they are the outcome of intense con- 
cern, are yet not cries of hopeless despair. True, our help is only in God ; but it is 
there, and an all-sufficient help it will prove to be — as to time, method, measure, 
and effect. In every age the saints of God have thus betaken themselves to him, and 
never in vain. For ever have they proved the — 

III. Faithful pbomisb. 1. The contents of the promise are given in ver. 5. 2. 
The value of the promise, as proved and tried, is specified in ver. 6. There is not an 
atom of dross in any of the promises of God — all are pure gold. 3. Having these 
promises, the believer can calmly declare the issue in the full assurance of faith. 
(1) The false men and proud boasters shall be cut off (ver. 3). (2) The Divine pre- 
serving guard will keep the righteous from being sucked into the vortex of corruption 
(ver. 7). Note : The Christian teacher will feel bound to remember that in the work 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the gift of the Spirit, and in all the resulting activities 
of the Christian Church, the Lord has put forces in operation for the rectification of 

' Cheyne has some helpful words on the precise meaning of the terms in this first verse. 

• See Fausset's ' Studies on the Psalms,' leot. viii. p. 63. 

• Sep a powerful serrnnn by the late Dr. Enoch Mellor. on Ps. cxix. 126 



80 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xn. 1—8 

social wrongs, more effective than any of which the psalmist dreamt, and that these 
forces have only to be given time to work, and "all things will become new." Th« 
disclosures to this effect in the Book of the Apocalypse are an abiding source of com- 
fort to God's people in the worst of times. — C. 

Vew. 1 — 8.— Christian growth. I. Trouble moves men to pbater. (Ver. 1.) As 
the child instinctively cries to its father, so we cry to God. Society may wax worse 
and worse. The righteous may fail out of the land. It is hard to serve alone. False- 
hood and lust prevail. There are fears on every side. In God alone is our help found. 

II. Pbayer strengthens faith. (Vers. 3, 4.) There is some relief in telling out 
griefs. Further, we are cheered by the assurance of God's love. He must ever be on 
the side of truth and right. More particularly we are encouraged by the record of 
God's mighty works, and his promises to stand by his people. In communing with 
God, and casting our cares upon him who careth for us, our faith gains force and grows 
in ardour and activity. 

IIL Faith inspibbb hope. (Vers. 5, 6.) We remember God's word, on which he 
lath caused us to place our hope. God's promises are good, for he is love ; they are 
certain, for he is faithful ; they are sure of accomplishment, for he is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all we can ask or think. Thus our hearts are revived. There may 
be delay, but not denial. There may be silence long, but never refusal. God has bis 
own time and his own way. 

rV. Hope culminates in assubanob. (Vers. 7, 8.) Light arises. The sky becomes 
brighter and brighter. "If God be for us, who can be against us?" All things are 
working to a perfect end. The prosperity of the wicked is vanity, and his triumph 
endures but for a little while. The end of the righteous is peace. " Thou shalt pre- 
serve them for ever." — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — Lamentation over the growing corruption of the nation. " The psalmist 
is appalled by the rottenness of society around him ; unscrupulous ambition appears to 
rule supreme ; truth is scorned as folly, and the god of lies is enthroned in the national 
heart. But God had not left himself without a witness." Prophets and seers had 
already declared the Divine word of promise, that the righteous cause should be upheld 
and vindicated. 

I. A DARE FioTUBE ov DEPBAVED BooiETT. L There Were few conspicuous for 
righteousness. (Ver. 1.) Not that they had entirely ceased, but that they were fewer 
4han they used to be. " Say not that the former times were better than these." 
Guard against this natural tendency — ^natural especially to men who are growing old. 
2. The prevalence of wisorupulous falsehood. (Ver. 2.) Lies and flattery and deceit. 
A disregard tor truth was widely spread, one of the sins most destructive of social life. 
This spirit of falsehood infested their most intimate relations — " every one with his 
neighbour" — and would corrupt at last even the family relations. 3. They worshipped 
that which won for them their evil success. (Vers. 3, i.) Lying and deceit — the evil 
power of the tongue — prevailing for the time, made them leel that they were their own 
lords, that there was no higher power above them. 

II. The psalmist consoles himself with the Divine promise of protection. 
(Ver. 5.) 1. That promise inspires him to pray for its fulfilment. (Vers. 1 — 3.) All 
true prayer bases itself on the Divine promise. " If we ask according to his will, we 
know that God heareth us." 2. The Divine promise is pure from the alloy that 
corrupts the words of men. (Ver. 6.) It has no admixture of flattery and deceit as the 
words of men have. " God cannot lie." 3. ITiat promise guarantees them protection, 
even whew wickedness walks in high places. (Vers. 7, 8.) Wickedness is most alluring 
when in high places ; but if God helps us to see that it is wickedness, and keeps our 
consciences clear and active, we are effectually protected from it. The defence against 
wickedness must be a Divine work within us as well as without us. — S. 



P8. xm. 1 — 6.J 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



81 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XIIL 

The writer — again, according to the title, 
David — ^is reduced almost to utter despair. 
He has undergone lengthened persecution — 
the Divine countenance has been turned 
away firom him (ver. 1); it seems to him 
that God has altogether forgotten him ; he 
is in extreme perplexity and distress (ver. 2), 
and raises the cry — so often raised by suflferers 
(Job xix. 2 : Pss. Ti. 3 ; xxxv. 7 ; Ixxix. 5 ; 
xciv. 3, 4; Hab. i. 2; Eev. vi. 10)— "How 
long?" This cry he repeats four times 
(vers. 1, 2). He does not, however, quite 
despair. In ver. 3 he passes from protest to 
prayer; and in vers. 5, 6 he proceeds from 
prayer to praise, having (apparently) through 
his prayer received an internal assurance of 
God's help. The tone suits the time when 
he was " bunted in the mountains " by Saul 
(1 Sam. xxTi. 20). 

"Ver. 1. — How long wilt thou forget me, 
Lord! for ever? God cannot forget, but 
man often feels as if he were forgotten of 
him (comp. Pss. xlii. 9 ; xliv. 24 ; Lam. v. 
20). David seems to have feared that God 
had forgotten him " for ever." How long 
wilt thou hide thy face from me 1 (comp. 
Pa. XXX. 7 ; Isa. i. 15 ; Ezek. xxxlx. 29). 
The " light of God's countenance " shining 
on us is the greatest blessing that we know 
(see PsB. iv. 6 ; xxxi. 18 ; xliv. 4 ; Ixvii. 1 ; 
Ixxx. 3, 7, etc). When it is withdrawn, 
and he " hides his face," wo naturally sink 
into despair. 

Yer. 2. — How long shall I take cennsal 
in my soul? or. How long shall I arrange 
plans t (Kay). Tossing on a sea of doubt 
and perplexity, David forms plan after plan, 
but to uo purpose. He seeks to find a way 
of escape from his difficulties, but cannot dis- 
cover one. Having sorrow in my heart 
daily ; or, all the day. It is, perhaps, implied 
that the plans are formed and thought over 
at night. How long shall mine enemy he 
exalted over me f A special enemy is 
once more glanced at. The allusion seems 
to be to Saul (comp. Pss. vii. 2, 5, 11 — 16 ; 
viii. 2; is. 6, 16; x. 2—11, 15; xi. 5). 

Ver. 3. — Consider and hear me, Lord 
my Qod (comp. Pss. t. 1 ; ix. 13 ; cxli. 1, etc.). 



David will not allow himself to be "for- 
gotten ; " he will recall himself to God's 
remembrance. "Consider — liear me," he 
says, " O Lord my God ; " still " my God," 
although thou bast forgotten me, and there- 
fore bound to "hear me." lighten mine 
eyes. Not so much "enlighten me spiri- 
tually," as "cheer me up; put briglit- 
ness into my eyes ; revive me " (comp. Ezra 
ix. 8, " Grace hath been showed from the 
Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to 
escape , . . that our God may lighten our 
eyes, and give us a little reviving "). Lest I 
sleep the sleep of death; literally, lest I 
sleep death. Death is compared to a 
sleep by Job (xiv. 12), Jeremiah (li. 39, 
57), Daniel (xii. 2), and here by David, 
in the Old Testament; and by our Lord 
(John xi. 11 — 13 1 and St. Paul in the 
New (1 Cor. xi. 30 ; xv. 51 ; 1 Theas. iv. 14, 
15). The external resemblance of a corpse 
to a sleeping person was the root of the 
metaphor, and we shall do wrong to conclude 
from its employment anything with respect 
to the psalmist's views concerning the real 
nature of death. 

Ver. 4. — Lest mine enemy say, I have 
prevailed against him. The triumph of 
David's enemy over him, whether he were 
Saul or any one else, even the ideal wicked 
man, would be the triumpli of evil over 
good, of those who had cast God behind 
their back over those who faithfully served 
him, of irreligion over piety. He could there- 
fore appeal to God — not in his own personal 
interest, but in the interest of trutii and 
right, and the general good of mankind — to 
prevent his enemy's triumph. And those 
that trouble me rejoice when I am moved. 
There would be a general rejoicing on the 
part of all his foes, if his arch-enemy suc- 
ceeded in seriously injuring liim. 

Ver. 5.— But I have trusted (or, I trust) 
in thy mercy. I know, i.e., that thou wilt 
not suffer me to be overcome by my enemy. 
Thou wilt save me ; and therefore my heart 
shall rejoice in thy salvation, whereef I 
entertain no doubt. 

Ver. 6. — I will sing unto the lord. I will 
exchange my cry of despair, " How long?" 
(vers. 1, 2), for a joyful song of thanksgiving ; 
because already I am cheered, I am revived 
— he (i.e. the Lord) hath dealt bountifully 
with me. And this mental revival is an 
assurance of deliveranoe to come. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1, 6. — Despair turned to thanhfulness. " How long," etc. ? " I will sing," etc. 
The last verse of this tender and beautiful little psalm contains the reply to the first. 

F8ALM3. * 



82 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xii, I— «. 

Despondency is turned into thankfulness ; the prayer of anguish into the song of 
praise. Its music, beginning with a plaintive, pathetic minor, passes through a solemn 
strain of pleading prayer into the triumphant major of full-voiced faith and joy. This 
is the music to which many a Christian life is set. It is not a strictly prophetic 
psalm; but we may well suppose that it is one of those in which the "Man of 
sorrows " read his own experience. 

I. David's pathetic appeal. *'How long," etc.? Two ({uestions run into one. 
It had endured so long, he felt as if it must go on for ever. The flame of hope flickered 
in the socket. Total darkness seemed at hand. Did David realty think God had 
forgotten him ? No; but he felt as if it were so. " Not that faith in God's promises 
was dead in his soul, or that he no longer relied on his grace; but that, when troubles 
long press ujjon us, and no token of Divine help appears, this thought cannot fail to 
thrust itself into our mind, ' God has forgotten me ' " (Calvin). Causes of his de«poxi- 
dency. 1. The long continuance of his trouble. 2. Prayer seeming to lemain 
unanswered. 3. His foes' exaltation. 4. Fear lest he should die before deliverance 
came (see 1 Sam. xxvii. 1). 

II. David's JOTruL thanksoivino. " I will sing," etc. Light suddenly breaks out 
of darkness. What is the secret of this surprising change ? Have his troubles ceased ? 
Not at all. But that which made their worst bitterness is gone — his doubt of God'i 
goodness and truth. In the very act of prayer, his mind is led out of himself, and 
faith rekindled. " The grace of God, which is hid from carnal apprehension, is grasped 
by faith " (Calvin). Despair said, " Faith is an illusion. I have trusted and am for- 
saken." Faith answers, " God is faithful. I have trusted ; therefore I cannot b« 
forsaken." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Sorrow and trust ; sighing and song. This is one of those numerous 
psalms which come under the flrit division specified in our introductory homily. It 
belongs to those which give us an insight into the religious experiences of an Old 
Testament saint — probably David — but it matters not whose they were. For they 
are a precise reflection of the alternations of spiritual mood through which many a 
sorrowful believer since then has passed ; yea, through the like of which many of our 
readers may be passing now. We can never be too thankful for such psalms as these, 
showing us, as they do, not so much the objectivities of Divine revelation, as the 
subjectivities of inward experience. Not that we are bound, in our experience, to 
find that which corresponds to every phase. By no means. Experienced nurses say 
that no two babes ever cried exactly alike ; and certainly no two children of God ever 
went through precisely the same experience. Still, the course pursued by the early 
believers is a fine lesson-book for modem ones. We shall find our study of this psalm 
suggestive of much in the experience of believers and in the dealings of God with them. 

I. Herb are remarkable alternations of mood and emotion.* There are 
seven notes in music ; there are seven colours in light. If there are seven stages in 
religious emotion, surely this psalm notes them all. We have a believer: 1. Thinking 
himself shut off from Ood. " How long wilt thou forget me . . . hide thy £\ce from 
me ? " It does not follow that God had hidden his face ; and assuredly he had not for- 
gotten the troubled one. Had it been so, the afiSicted one had not survived to offti thi» 
prayer. Note : It is not in the midst of sore anguish that we can rightly gauge the mind 
of God towards us. We may be the objects of tenderest compassion even when our sun 
seems to be eclipsed. 2. Fearing his adversaries. (See ver. 4.) He was evidently 
surrounded by those who lay in wait for him. He could have faced them boldly had 
it not been for the hiding of God's lace. But that made him tremble, and no wonder. 
3. Sorrovfully musing. (Ver. 2.) What a tumult of agitation was he now passing 
through! And what a bewildered and bewildering host of troublous thoughts and 
queries seize the mind at such times as these ! 4. Sinking under the pressure. (Ver. 3.) 
The phrase indicates that the psalmist was at the very verge of despair. " Courage 

' Bishop Perowne has a most helpful note on this psalm The Bev. B. A. Fausse^s 
study thereon is very valuable (lect. v. p. 84). 



M. XIII. 1—6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 83 



almost gone." So that his spirit is failing or his bodily frame is giving way. The 
writer may mean either or both.^ 5. Trusting. (Ver. 5.) " The daikest hour is 
jiist before the dawn." The woe reaches its deepest, and bitterest ; and then — trust pre- 
vents absolute despair. The renewed heart clings to G-od, even in the dark. And he 
to whom our spirit thus clings will appear for us at the right time, and in his own 
wonder-working way. 6. Trust leads to prayer. The whole psalm is a prayer. One 
of the greatest blessings in life is to have a friend who will never misunderstand us; 
and by whom all our unintelligible and contradictory words will be pitied, and not 
blamed; who will bury our follies in his own love. But there is only One in whom 
all this exists to perfection — even our God. He never misinterprets the language of 
broken hearts and bewildered souls — never 1 We may always tell him exactly what 
we feel, as we feel it; or, if words will not come, then "our groaning" is not hid from 
him. He will answer us, not according to our imperfection, but will do exceeding 
abundantly for us " above all that we can ask or think." The fourth verse may not 
and does not give us the highest style of pleading. But it indicates the burden on 
the heart. And whatsoever is a burden on a child's heart is to the Father an object of 
loving concern, and may be rolled over on to God (Pss. Iv. 22 ; cxlii. 1 — 7). 7. Deliver- 
ance comes in answer to prayer. And thus it ever will be. So that he who moans 
at the beginning of prayer may sing at the end of it. " I will sing unto the Lord, 
because he hath dealt bountifully with me." Thus does this psalm run through the 
various shades or stages of emotion. Having gone down to the depths of the valley 
of anguish, the writer comes at length to stand on the heights of the mount of praise 1 
II. Such a rehearsal of experience throws much light on the secret dbal- 
IN<M OF God with his people. " The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him," 
says the psalmist elsewhere (Ps. xxv. 14). And this thirteenth psalm lets us into it. 
It teaches us : 1. 2%a< the child of God it the object of the Father's tenderest pity and 
love, even at the moment of tumiiltuous anguish and deep darkness of soul. The sun 
shines just as brightly on us, even when a film over the eyes obscures our eight of it. 
Saints are never nearer or dearer to the heart of God than when they are in trouble. 
2. Qod graciously sanctifies the anguish, and makes it the means of quickening to 
intenser devotion. It is not when all is calm that prayer is at its best. Ah, no ! It 
is when we are stunned, startled, half-paralyzed by some dreadful and unexpected trial, 
that we pray the most earnestly. It is quite possible that at such times words may 
fail ; but God reads deep meaning in the tear, and hears heavenly eloquence in the 
sighs of those that seek him. 3. The anguish will be removed in God's own time. 
When the trial sent us has secured its needed end in the quickening of devotion, the 
strengthening of faith, and the improvement of the whole life, then will the pressure 
be taken off. Nor ought we to desire it otherwise. It is far more important to have 
our afflictions sanctified than to have them removed. 4. By the very trials through 
which we have passed we shall have learnt to be comforters of others. If the | 'salmist 
had known that the written experience of his sorrows and his songs would have gone 
down to hundreds of generations, to comfort sorrowing souls in all time, he would have 
been thankful for his trouble, sharp as it was. Note : (1) It is only those who have 
gone through trouble that can effectually be comforters of others (2 Cor. i. 6 ; cf. Heb. 
ii. 18). (2) It is not to be supposed that merely because we have sorrow at one 
moment we shall have joy in the future. Only God's mourners can expect God's com- 
forts. Matt. V. 4 is for those named in Matt. v. 3. The vast difference pointed out 
in Isa. 1. 10, 11 should be reverently and anxiously pondered. (3)_ It is only the 
renewed soul that can possibly thus trust, pray, and plead, when in the midst of 
anguish. The supreme concern of each is to accept peace with God through the Lord 
Jesus Christ ; to have sin forgiven, and the soul renewed. He who has first cast hi 
burden of sin and guilt on an atoning Saviour, and who is being renewed by the Holy 
Ghost, may come every day and cast any care, and all his care, upon his Father, God. 
(4) It is infinitely better to be in the depth of the valley of sorrow, as a good man, 
and to let our God lead us up to the height of joy, than, as a godless man, to beat the 
height of merriment and laughter for a while, only to sink to the depths of despair. — 0. 

' We cannot at all accept Dr. Cheyne's view of the phrase — " Lest I sleep the sleep of 
death." Bishop Perowne is much more to the point. 



84 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xiii. 1— 6. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — From despondency to peace. The soul may pass quickly from one 
emotion to another — ^from fear to hope, from the gloom of despondency to the bright- 
ness of peace. Such a change finds expression in this psalm. 

L The obt. (Vers. 1, 2.) Under the pressure of affliction, hard thoughts of God 
•rise. But if there he complaint of God, it is to be observed that the complaint is 
carried to God. Instead of sullen murmuring, there is meek confession. Instead of 
bitter resentment, there is affectionate remonstrance. There is not only the "taking 
counsel with his own soul," which left him in deeper " sorrow," but there is the going 
out of himself, to cast his cares upon God, whereby he finds relief. 

II. The appeal. (Vers. 3, 4.) Led by the Spirit, the child of God quickly turns 
his cry of paiu into a prayer for spiritual help. The shadows were deepening ; night, 
with its sleep of death, seemed near ; but God was able to bring deliverance. Hence 
the urgent and passionate appeal. So when we are in peril let ui cry to Gk)d. Our 
extremity is his opportunity. Our time of need is his time of mercy. 

III. The testimont. (Vers. 5, 6.) Help seems to have^come to the psalmist as 
to Daniel; while he was yet "speaking in prayer" (Dan. ix. 20, 21). So it often is. 
God is more ready to hear than we are to ask. "He waiteth to be gracious." 1. The 
peace given is real. There may still he storm without, but there is calm within. 
2. The confidence is comforting. Imagination no longer works by fear, but by hope, 
and brightens all the future. The soul that seemed about to enter the dark valley 
of the shadow of death, with the terrible fear that God was departed, now rejoices in 
the lunshine of God's presence (Micah viL 9 ; Zech. xiv. 7). — W. P. 

Ver. 1. — QodHs averted face. The hiding of God's face is a sore trial to his people. 
If they did not love bim, they could bear it ; but as they love him so much, it is a 
great affliction. It may be said of such trials, that they are still harder to bear under 
the gospel. For the very fact that God once dwelt with men — going in and out 
among them as one of themselves, loving them, and doing them good— mattes the 
mystery of his silence now the deeper, and our distress the greater. " Thou didst hide 
thy face, and I was troubled " (Ps. xxx. 7 ; cf. Job xiiL 24). 1. This conduct on 
the part of opr Lord seems cHien to his nature. We expect a friend to show himself 
friendly. We blame a physician if he comes not at once when urgently summoned. We 
would call a father or mother unfeeling and unnatural who shut their ears to the cries 
of their own child. 2. Then this silence of our Lord seems contrary to his action 
when he was in the world. He was then easy of access, and ready to help. True, he 
at first refused the Syro-phoenician ; but he gave her all she asked in the end. True, 
he delayed coming to Bethany; but he did come, in his own time, and turned the 
house of mourning into a home of joy. 3. Then, again, we have our Lord's teaching 
and promises. We remember what is said, that we should " not hide ourselves from 
our own flesh " (Isa. Iviii. 7) ; how we are taught to show kindness to our enemies, 
and even to have pity on the very brutes (Deut. xxii. 1 — 4 ; Matt. xii. 12) ; and " how 
much is a man better than a sheep ! " We think also of the parables of Lazarus, and 
of the man who fell among thieves, and our hearts are in perplexity. " I weep • . . 
because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me" (Lam. i. 16). 
Besides, we remember our Lord's promises. It cannot be that he does not know ; or 
that he lacks the power ; or that his love is waxed cold. Why, then, does he let us 
lie at his gate ; or leave us half-dead by the wayside ; or fail to come to us when we are 
" comfortless "? These and such-like thoughts rise and trouble us. Our hearts are like 
a tree, with its many branches, tossed and torn by the storm. But in the multitude 
of our thoughts within us, there are comforts still left to us. First, Christ is not 
changed. Next, he knows all that has come to us, and has pity. Then, he has his 
own gracious purposes in our afflictions. They are necessary for our good (Isa. lix. 2 ; 
Hob. v. 15). Then we should not count such trials as strange, as we are under a 
spiritual dispensation, Christ is really with us still, in his Word and Spirit and the 
ministry of his people. He even comes at times to us, when we know him not (Matt. 
XXV. 38). Then we should remember that he has, for a season, put a restraint upon 
himself. We may say, like Martha, " If thou hadst been here, my brother had not 
died." And this is true. But our Lord could not be here with us, as in the days of 
his flesh, and at the same time carry out his plans of discipline and training under the 



PS. XIV. 1 — 7.] 



THE BOOK OF PSAl MS. 



85 



Spirit. Last of all, let us remember that these trials are temporary. They may end 
here. They will certainly end hereafter (Isa. liv. 7 ; Ezra xxxix. 23 — 29). Our Lord 
knew himself the pain of desertion ; and he longs to have us with him, where there 
shall be no rnore hidings of his face, or crying, or tears. Let us, therefore, take the 
counsel of Elihu, "Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment ia 
before him ; therefore trust thou in him" (Job xxxv. 14 ; cf. Isa. viii. 17). — W. F. 

Vers. ] — 6. — I%e a^ony of desertion. Probably a psalm of Datid, composed at the 
time of Saul's persecution. It expresses the agony of a mind that thinks itself deseits-d 
of God, in danger of death, and threatened by a formidable enemy. It is a long and 
weary struggle ; and, wrestling with his despair, he breaks into a pitiful prayer, which 
is succeeded by the exercise of a returning faith. 

I. Despair. (Vers. 1, 2.) 1. Ee thinks he it for ever forsahen of Ood. The 
emphasis lies on the " for ever." How much this implies of delight in the former 
friendship of God I Compare Christ's cry on the cross. 2. Fruitless efforts of the mind 
to escape from its position. " Taking counsel," etc. These issue only in continued 
sorrow of heart. One plan after another is revolved and rejected ; one solution after 
another of his difficulties is thought of, and then dismissed ; and he is left in despair. 
He is helpless and hopeless. 3. Personal danger from same enemy. (Ver. 2.) Pro- 
bably Saul. Internal and external causes combined to make him profoundly miserable. 

II. But even in his despair he pbats. 1. Look upon me (equivalent to " con- 
sider"). And do not continue to hide thy face. 2. Hear and succour (equivalent to 
"answer me"). And do not forget me for ever. This is hope out of despair — the 
single ray of light that shot into his deep darkness. There is something left for each 
of us. 3. fftVe a renewed ^oi«ero/Zi/e (equivalent to "lighten mine eyes"). Anxiety 
and sorrow had induced physical depression, and he apprehended that he would sink 
into the sleep of death. " Lighten mine eyes " here means, " Send back the tide of life, 
that my eyes may again be lit with life, and the deathlike dvowsiness dispelled." 

III. Prayer leads him back into trust. 1. He remembers the object of his former 
trust. " In thy loving-kindness have I trusted." Not iu his personal merits, nor only 
in the justice of his cause. Faith grasps the unseen as the ground of its trust. 2. Ee 
recollects the reasons of that trust. " Thy salvation," which I have experienced in former 
times. God's bountiful dealing with him. That had been the rule of the Divine 
conduct towards him. Faith draws hope out of experience. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XIV. 



It has been strongly argued, from the 
mention of the " captivity " of God's people 
in ver. 7, that this psalm was written during 
the sojourn in Babylon, and therefore not 
by David (De Wette). But "captivity" ia 
often used metaphorically iu Scripture (Job 
xlii. 10; Ezek. xvi. 53; Rom. vii. 23; 2 
Cor. X. 5 ; Bph. iv. 8, etc.) ; and to " return 
to the captivity " — which is the expression 
used in ver. 7 — is simply to visit and relieve 
those who are oppressed. There is nothing, 
therefore, to prevent the psalm from being 
David's, as it is said to bn in the title. 
With respect to the time in David's life 
whereto it is to be referred, Dr Kay's con- 
jecture, which assigns it to the period of 
the flight from Absalom, may be accepted. 



The psalm ia composed of two stanzas, one 
setting forth the wickedness of the ungodly 
(vers. 1 — 3), the otlier announcing their 
coming discomfiture, and the relief and 
consequent joy of the oppressed (vers. 4 — 7). 
(On tlie resera))lance and differences between 
this psalm and Ps. liii., see the comment -jo 
Pa. liii.) 

Ver. 1. — The fool hath said in his heart, 
There is no God. An atheism ia here de- 
picted which goea beyond even tliat of Ps. 
X. There the existence of God was not so 
much denied as liia providence. Here bis 
exiistence is not only denied, but denied in 
the very depths of the man's heart. He 
hiis contrived to convince himself of what 
be so much wishes. The psalmist regards 
such a state of mind as imlicative of tha;: 
utter perversity and folly which ia implied 
in the term nabal ("jaj). They are oor- 



86 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XIV. 1—7. 



rapt; literally, they hava corrupted them- 
telvet (comp. Gen. yi. 12; Judg. ii. 19). 
Their atlieism is accompanied by deep 
moral corruption. We have no right to saj 
that this is always so ; but the tendency of 
atheism to relax moral restraints is indis- 
pntable. They have done abominable works 
(oump. vers, 3 and 4). There is none that 
doeth good; ue. none among them. The 
psalmist does not intend his words to apply 
to tbe whole human race. He has in hia 
mind a "righteous generation" (ver. 5), 
" God's people " (ver. 4), whom he sets 
over against the wicked, both in this psalm 
and elsewhere universally (see Pss. i. 1 — 3; 
ii. 12 ; iii. S ; iv. 3, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — The Lord looked down from 
heaven upon the children of men. Cor- 
ruption having reached such a height as it 
had, God is lepresented as looking down 
from heaven witti a special object — to see if 
there were any that did understand, and 
seek God. To see, i.e,, if among the crowd 
of the " abominable " doers spoken of in 
ver. 1 there were any of a better spirit, and 
possessed of understandiug, and willing to 
seek after God. But it was in vain. The re- 
sult of his scrutiny appears in the next verse. 

Yer. 3. — They are all gone aside. Hae- 
c6l ("jsn). "tlie totality" — one and all of 
them had turned aside, like the Israelites 
at Sinai (Exod. xxxii. 8) ; they had quitted 
the way of righteousness, and turned to 
wicked courses. The expression "denotes 
a general — all but universal — corruption" 
('Speaker's Onmmentary '). They are all 
together become filthy ; litej ally, sour, rancid 
— like milk that has turned, or butter that 
has become bad. Tliere is none that doeth 
good, no, not one. St. Paul's application 
of this passage (Rom. iii. 10 — 12), to prove 
that "all have sinned, and come short of 
the glory of God" (ver. 23), goes beyond 
the intention of the psalmist. 

Ver. 4.— Have all the workers of iniquity 
no knowledge t The exclamation is put in 
the mouth of God. Can it be possible that 
none of these evil-doers is aware of the 
results of evil-doing? Do they think to 
escape Divine retribution? The "wonder 
expresses the magnitude of their folly" 
(Hengstenberg). Who eat up my people as 
they eat bread. Eedueing men to poverty, 
robbing them, and devouring their sub- 
stance, is called, in Scripture, devouring 
the men themselves (see Prov. 5?x. 14; 
Isa. iii. 14 ; Micah iii. 3). Those who are 



plundered and despoiled are compared to 
"bread" in Numb. xiv. 2. The Homeric 
S-niio$6pos pauriKsbs, adduced by Dr. Kay, is 
an instance of the same metaphor. And 
call not upon the lord. This might have 
seemed scarcely to need mention, since 
"how shall they call on him in whom 
they have not believed?" (Rom. z. 14). 
But it connects them definitely with the 
atheists of ver. 1. 

Verl 5. — There were they in great fear. 
" There" — ^in the midst of their evil-doing, 
while they are devouring God's people — a 
sudden terror seizes on them. Ps. liii. 5 
adds, "Where no fear was," which seems 
to imply a panio terror, like that which 
seized the Syrians when they were besieg- 
ing Samaria (2 Kings vii 6, 7). For God is 
in the generation of the lighteons. God's 
people cannot be attacked without provok- 
ing him ; they are in him, and he in them ; 
he will assuredly come to their relief. 

Ver. 6. — ^Ye have shamed the oounsel of 
the poor, because the Lord is his Refuge. 
The sense is obscure. Some translate, " Ya 
may shame tbe counsel of the poor (i«. 
put it to shame, ba£3e it); but t» vatn; 
for the poor have a sure Refuge," and the 
ultimate triumph will belong to them. 
Others, "Ye pour contempt on tbe poor 
man's counsel," or " resolve," because " the 
Lord is his Refuge ; " i.e. ye contemn it, and 
deride it, just because it rests wholly on a 
belief in God, which you regard as folly 
(see ver. 1). 

Ver. 7. — Oh that the salvation of Israel 
were come out of Zion! The salvation of 
the "righteous generation" (ver. 5), the 
"true Israel," is sure to come. Oh tliat it 
were come already 1 It will proceed " out 
of Zion," since God's Kame is set there. 
The ark of the covenant had been already 
set up in the place which it was thenceforth 
to occupy (see 2 Sam. vi. 1^ — 17). David's 
reign in Jerusalem is begun. When the 
Lord bringeth back the captivity of his 
people ; either, when the Lord turneth the ill 
fortune of his people, or, when the Lord re- 
turneth to the captivity of his people ; i.e. when 
he no longer turns away from their sufferings 
and afflictions, but turns towards them, and 
lifts up the light of his countenance upon 
them, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel 
shall be glad. (For the union of these two 
names, see Pss. Ixxviii. 21, 71 ; ov. 23 ; cxxxv. 
4, etc.) God's people shall celebrate their 
deliverance with a psalm of thanksgiving. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 1. — The fooVs creed, and its consequences. "The fool hath said," etc. This is 
very plain speaking. Bible writers are not wont to wrap their meaning in soft phrases. 
They utter truth in words clear as sunbeams, keen as lightning. This word "fool" 



PS. XIV. 1—7.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 87 



refers to character rather than understanding. The psalmist has in his eye one blinded 
by worldlinesB or besotted with vice, who can see no charm in virtue, no beauty in 
holiness, no loveliness, grandeur, attractiveness, in Divine truth. " The fool's creed,'.' as 
it has been called, is not the conclusion of his reason, but the practical language of a 
lawless, selfish life. On this very account it is objected that this is not only a harsh, 
but an unjust judgment, if it be taken to mean that none but fools say, "There is no 
God." Wise men, it is affirmed, are to be found saying the same thing. 

I. This claim requires our careful consideration. For our first duty is to be 
just. An unjust Christian is a living contradiction. 1. Now, it is at all eyents clear 
that any one who should affirm positively, as a truth men may be certain of, that " there is 
no God," would be guilty of stupendous folly. Whether the evidence that G-od exists 
be adequate and convincing or no, there can be no contrary evidence. To be entitled 
to assert that God does not exist, a man must possess at least one attribute of Deity — 
omniscience. 2. Therefore thoughtful sceptics in our own day do not venture on this 
tremendous assertion. They disclaim the name "atheists," and call themselves 
" agnostics ; " q.d. persons who do not pretend to assert or deny the Divine existence, 
but simply maintain that the Cause of all things is altogether unknown and unknow- 
able. Let us be honest, and not confuse things with a mist of words. Practically, 
agnosticism and atheism (differ as they may philosophically) come to the same result. 
"The ungodly" in Scripture language, are not merely the openly vicious or violently 
wicked ; they are those who do not fear, love, trust, obey God ; who do not hnow God 
(1 John iv. 8). Practically, therefore, the agnostic, who may be wise in all worldly 
wisdom ; cultured, virtuous, benevolent ; takes sides in the great warfare and journey 
of life, with the fool. If the agnostic be right, Moses, David, Isaiah, and all the ancient 
prophets; St. Paul, St. John, and all the apostles; St. Stephen and all the martyrs; 
with the greatest champions of justice and benevolence in all ages, — followed cunningly 
devised fables ; Jesus Christ founded his religion and his Church on an illusion. The 
fool has in his blindness stumbled on the truth hid from the best and wisest in all ages : 
"There is no God 1" 

II. Supposing this ghastly denial to be, not the fool's, but the wise man's creed — the 
nearest approach to truth we can make on the greatest of all questions : let us reflect a 
little on the conseqv^nces. Truth, it may be said, is truth, whatever be the consequences. 
That is so. But consequences may be a test of truth. Unless truth leads to happiness 
and goodness, life is aimless wandering, and human nature a lie. 1. "No God!" 
Then Divine providence is a fiction. No wise plan or gracious purpose lives through 
each life, or through the history of the race. No eye watches over us with unsleeping 
care. No hand is on the helm of human affairs. We thought that the steps of a good 
man were ordered by the Lord ; that he was the Ruler of nations. King of kings, and 
Friend of the widow and fatherless. These ideas must be given up as idle dreams. Law 
— a meaningless word, if there be no Supreme Will or Organizing Mind ; and chance — 
the jumble of misconnected causes — ^rule all. 2. " No God ! " Then prayer must he on 
illusion. We thought that when the poor man cried, the Lord heard him ; that when 
we cast our care on him, he cared for us ; that it was as easy for him to grant his 
children's requests, without any interference with the laws of his universe, as for a 
mother to give her child bread. All the laws of the universe went to the making of 
the loaf — not to disable, but to enable her to grant her child's prayer. If there be no 
God, or none we can know, prayer is of all delusions the most vain. 3. " No God ! " 
Then there is no pardon for sin. Conscience must bear its awful burden : the heart's 
deepest wound must bleed without balm ; the tears of repentance must be frozen at 
their source by the terrible thought — there is no forgiveness I 4. " No God ! " Then 
human life is degraded inexpressibly. It has no supreme purpose— no aim beyond or 
above itself. Human reason can draw no light or strength from wisdom higher than its 
own. History has no goal. 5. "No God 1" ITien sorrow is comfortless. No voice has a 
right to say, " Come unto me, and I will give you rest." You must bear your bunleii in 
your own strength. Death and darkness close all. 6. "No God! " Then there is no 
vrisdom higher than man's; no strength stronger; no love deeper. No communion 
with an unseen, ever-present Friend and Helper, to lift our life above this world. No 
fountain of hope, purity, wisdom, for humanity. No common object of trust or centre 
cf unity for mankind. Is it reasonable to think that it is truth which leads us into 



88 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xiv. 1— 7. 



this pathless, sunless desert of despair? Is it falsehood that has inspired the teaching 
of apostles and prophets, nerved the courage of martyrs, sanctified the genius and 
learning of some of the noblest intellects, inspired the purest and most loving and 
lovely lives; that is the salt of goodness in daily life, the lamp of home, the victory 
over death, the comfort of bereaved hearts? Or is it the truest as well as highest 
instinct iu our nature that answers to the voice (Isa. xli. 10, 13 ; zliii. 11, 13, 25)? 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS ADTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — The depravity of a godless world, viewed by Ood. This psalm is given 
us twice — as the fourteenth and the fifty-third. It is oue of those which assumes 
a revelation of God as a redeeming God, and also the existence of a redeemed people 
of God. And by way of consequence it assumes the necessity of a Divine redemption 
in order to bring about " the generation of the righteous." This could only have come 
about by Divine grace and by Divine power. Hence the very manifest distinction noted 
in the psalm between "the children of men" (ver. 2) and the people of God (ver. 4). 
The central part of the third chapter of the Epistle to the Romans is a commen- 
tary on this psalm by one of the most richly inspired penmen. When God saw, 
as with his all-piercing gaze he looked down from heaven, that among " the children 
of men " there was absolutely not one righteous, no, not one — manifestly, a " generation 
of the righteous" could never have existed save for a gracious redemption and 
regeneration from above. And while the Apostle Paul develops from this description 
of the world, man's absolute need of a Divine interposition, we, in expounding the 
psalm itself, must work distinctly on its own lines, showing the state of things in the 
world on which the eye of God rested, and also how far that state of things exists 
in it still. The expositor must also take up the Christian standpoint, and show when 
and for what purpose the Lord looked down on such a sight. 

I. A FEARFUL SIGHT ON WHICH "THE LOED LOOKED DOWN." To what prcoise 

period of time the psalm refers, we have no means of knowing ; nor at what exact period 
it was written. This, however, is of no consequence. Every point specified here can 
be verified now. 1. The depravity of man had vented itself in the most egregious folly, 
even in the denial, of God. There is ample room for the Christian teacher to expose 
the folly of such denial quite irrespectively of his theory of creation, be it the evolu- 
tionary one or no.^ Either way, the (1) teleological, (2) cosmological, and (3) onto- 
logioal proofs remain the same; in fact, the teleological proof is receiving abundant 
and amaziijg illustrations in modern discovery; so much so that its power again and 
again "overwhelmed" Mr. Darwin himself. The argument in Paley's 'Natural 
Theology ' may need resetting, but in substance has lost none of its force. While Mr. 
Herbert Spencer's statement, that we know with undoubting certainty that there is 
"an infinite and eternal Energy from which everything proceeds" is one of which 
the Christian advocate may make large atid effective use. That there is a God all 
Nature cries aloud in all her works. And not till a man is a "nabal," "a fool," a 
withered, sapless being, does he come to deny the Divine existence. Such denial has, 
however, not yet ceased. On the contrary, it has assumed in our days a boldness not 
even contemplated by the psalmist himself. There is (1) practical atheism, where men 
proless to knuw God, while in works they deny him; (2) agnosticism; (3) theoretical 
atheism, and even anti-theism ; (4) and in some of the works of positivists,* it is 
even reckoned as a virtue for men to have " no fear of God before their eyes " 1 2. Such 
atheism is the most striking and grievous folly. (1) It is irrational. (2) It is 
corrupting. (3) It breaks out into abominable acts. (4) In the course of its evolution, 

' See Ebrard's 'Apologetics' (Clark: 1886); Dorner's 'System of Christian Doctrine' 
(Clark); three articles by tl,e Du1<c of Argyll, on "Darwinism as a Philosophy," in 
Qood Words, March, April, May, 1888 ; ' The Law of Causality,' by Professor Watts, D.D., 
1888; and 'The Orlo-in of the World, according to Scripture and Science,' by Sir J. W. 
Dawson, F.E S. (Hodder and Stoushton). Spurgeon's 'Treasury of David' has a large 
number of forcible passages on the first verse of this psalm, which, if read with caution, 
may be found helpful and suggestive. 

• Of. George Eliot's ' Tlieophrastus Such.' 



PS. XIV. 1—7.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 89 



it ma^es aggressions on and even mocks at theology, religicn, and relisinns people. 
(5) It will gradually dry up entirely the springs of social virtue. It m;iy not do this 
in the first generation, if the denier of &od has first been oast by ( arly Christi.iTi 
teaching in the mould of social morality and goodness; but let general ion alter 
generation of atheists arise, and it will be seen that when the ties are snapped which 
bind men to their God, the ties which bind man to man are cut asunder as well ! 
3. Such atheism i$ fearfully widespread among "the chillren of men." "None 
that did understand, that did seek God." It is common among (1) the irreligious ; 
(2) the free-thinkers; (3) philosophers, under the guise of philosophy; (4) .scientific 
men, under the guise of science. The fact is, atheism is of the heart, not of the head 
"The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked," and turns the very 
arguments which prove the Divine existence into an excuse for denying it! Its cry 
is, " Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us I " How 
grievous and terrible a sight is a world like this ! How loathsome to Infinite purity, 
when men are altogether become unprofitable, when there is " not one that doeth good, 
no, not one." Every repression in the psalm should be critically examined: they 
are all "gone aside;" they are all together become "filthy," "stinking," "corrupt," 
etc. There is a marvellous variety of words in the Hebrew for moral corruption. 
Nowhere in the whole world was the sense of sin, as sin, so deep as among the 
Hebrews. How was this ? It will be seen how it was when we study our second 
question. 

II. When and fob what purpose did the Lord look down on this mass of 
ETIL? The meaning of the psalmist could not go beyond the range of his inspiration 
and enlightenment. We live in a later age; the light is brighter now than then; and 
therefore the preacher will fall short alike of his privileges and of his mission, if he 
does not open up from this point more truth than it was possible for the psalmist to 
know. 1. In an ea/rly stage of the world, God looked down on it to punish its 
iniquity. The Deluge. Sodom and Gomorrah. The desolations which have come on 
Egypt, Babylon, Tyre, Bdom, Ammon, Moab, Philistia, Jerusalem. And when great 
calamitieg come, the most irreligious men become the greatest cowards. '■ There were 
they in great fear, where no fear was." 2. Ood looked on the wickedness of the sons 
of men, and resolved to call out therefrom a people for himself. (Of. Isa. li. 1, 2, 
Hebrew.) God called Abraham; and how his people became a family, a tribe, and a 
nation, the roll of sacred history records. And it is owing to this that the psalmist 
refers to "the generation of the righteous" (ver. 5), in distinction from "the children 
of men " (ver. 2). Hence it is and has ever been the case, that, however prevalent the 
depravity of men may have become, there have ever been some trusting hearts who 
have found their refuge in God.' 3. Ood instituted a priesthood and sacrifices to 
instruct his people in the dread evil of sin. The whole Levitical institute means 
this, and nothing less than this. The Law was a "child-guide," which took men 
to school, and taught them that nothing was right with men till they were right with 
God. 4. Ood established a prophetic order, which should declaim against sin. 
(See laa. lix. 1 — 20, specially the fifteenth verse.) The mission of all the prophets 
was to speak for God, and uphold his claims before the people. And as they 
prophesied, God's treatment of the world's sin was being unfolded, as we see in the 
chapter from Isaiah to which we have just referred. 5. In the fulness of the times, Ood 
sent forth his Son, who by his death should atone for sin, and who by his Spirit should 
conquer sin. This, then, is like a God. We might have expected, from the pBalmist|s 
words, that God would take vengeance on the sinner and crush him. But no. He is 
a just God and a Saviour; condemning sin and saving the sinner (Eom. iii.). 6. Ood 
has created in the hearts of his own a yearning after salvation and righteousness, which 
is in itself a prophecy of God's ultimate triumph over sin, and of a time when the 
anguish of his people shall give place to joy (ver. 7) I These desires of the holy are 
prophetic germs. The aspiration in the closing verse of the psalm* is one the 

' See Hengstenberg on Psalms, vol. i. 216. 

* According to Dr. Payne Smith, the allusion therein ii to the return of the ark from 
captivity. The editor of the K.T.S. edition of the PBalms regards this last verse as a 
liturgical addition, which may have been added about the time of Ezra. (See note hereon 
in 'The Cambridge Bible.'l 



90 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pa. xrv. 1— 7. 

fulfilment of which has been going on ever since, and will, till the Redeemer who 
has come out of Zion shall have completed his saving work. -C. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Bight views of God's government. L In considering God's moral 
government of the world, we should be careful to takb the bioht standpoint. Much 
depends on the way we look at things. We may be too near or too far off; we may 
lean too much to the one side or' to the other. Here the standpoint is not earth, but 
"heaven." This is the perfect state. Here we take our place by the side of God, 
and look at things in the light of his truth. If we have the Spirit of Christ, the true 
Son of man, then, though on earth, we shall yet be "in heaven" (John iii. 13). 

II. Another thing is that we should have regard to the teub standard of judgment 
(Ver. 2.) Much is being done to find out about the people who lived in the ages that 
are past; but we have to do more with the present day. Wise governments make 
inquiry as to population and the condition of the people — materially, intellectually, 
and socially. Here God is represented as holding inquest, and the chief concern is as 
to the moral condition of men. Religion is put first. If men are right with God, then 
all is right. The standard by which things are measured is the Law of God. How 
do men stand to God ? Do they believe in God? What is the state of their mind and 
affectiuas with reference to God? "To see if there be any that understand, and seek 
God." It is not what other men think of us, nor is it what we think of ourselves, 
that is of importance, but the supreme thing is what God thinks of us. 

III. We are thus led to apprehend the just eeteibution impendino. (Vers. 2 — 6.) 
Life presents a varied aspect. But when we look at it in the light of God, society divides 
itself iuto two great parties — the wicked and the righteous. 1. There is marked diversity 
of character. Contrasted with the righteous — " my people," as God calls them in his love 
and grace — there are the multitude who have gone aside, and who have waxed worse 
and worse, in their corruption and ungodly deeds. In this psalm there is something 
like a climax. In Fs. x. we have the ungodly, or fool, hugging himself in his fancied 
security, and saying, " I shall not be moved." Then in Ps. xi. there is an advance 
to a bold denial of God's omniscience and justice : " The foundations are destroyed." 
Then in Ps. xii. there is a further and still more fearful stride, in daring defiance of 
God : " Our lips are our own : who is Lord over us ? " From this it is but a step to sit 
down " in the seat of the scornful," and to cry out in derision, " There is no God 1 " 2. 
But as there is diversity of character, so there will also be diversity of retribution. 
Judgment will be according to righteousness. Reason is appealed to (ver. 4). In 
wonder and pity, the question is asked, "Are they so senseless as not to see the con- 
sequences of their own wrong-doing ? " But their stupidity and stubbornness will not 
stop the progress of events. Conscience is also appealed to (ver. 5). The term " there " 
brings the scene before us with the vividness of a picture. We see these wicked men 
"there" in their places; "there," in the midst of their works and their pleasures; 
"there," where they are priding themselves on their strength and their conquests; 
and "there" the hand of God seizes them, and they are stricken with terror (Lev. 
xxvi. 36). And what conscience confesses, experience confirms (ver. 6). The uneasy 
sense, that, after all, God is on the side of the righteous, causes fear, and events are 
continually occurring which go to prove that the fear is well-grounded. The nearer 
we come to God, the fuller our sympathy with God, the more complete our trust in 
God, the better shall we be able to judge as to God's doings. In God's light we shall 
see light. God's interest in man will be clear ; God's holy grief because of the folly 
and wickedness of man, will be evident ; and bright and enlivening as the outshining 
of the sun from the midst of clouds and darkness will be the love of God for his people, 
and his tender and abiding care of them through all the vicissitudes of their earthly 
life. The wicked dishonour God by their distrust and their scorn. Let us honour God 
by our faith in his eternal love and goodness, and by our unceasing prayer that his 
salvation may come to all nations. " Alleluia 1 Salvation, and glory, and honour 
and power unto the Lord our God 1 " — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — l.—Conflid between Ood and the wicked. The psalmist begins by lament- 
ing the extent and the power of the atheism which reigns among men (vers. 1 — 3). 
But the righteous who have to suffer much on account of it, must not therefore 



ta. XV. 1 — 5.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



91 



despair; fools shall certainly bring destruction upon themselves (vers. 4 — 6). He closet 
with the prayer that God would send deliverance to his people (ver. 7). 

I. Atheism. (Vers. 1 — 3.) 1. Atheism in the thought and in the desires, (Ver. 1.) 
Tlie " heart" in the Old 'I'est.iment is not only the seat of desire, but of thought alsa 
But it is more easy for a bad man to wish there were no God, than honestly to think it. 
2. Atheism in conduct. This is described under a posiViwe and iieg'afiw aspect. Corrupt 
conduct — they are gone away from the right path into every wrong way ; especially they 
prey upon the righteous as they would eat bread ; i.e. it is as natural for them to be cruel 
and unjust towards them as it is to eat bread. They have tried to defeat the counsels 
of the poor. The negative aspect is that not any of them did good, nor did they seek 
God or call upon the Lord. God was wholly shut out of their lives and thoughts. 

II. The incredible ignobanoe of atheism. The " fool " hath said. " The fool " 
expresses the climax of imbecility. " Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge,*" 
etc. ? 1. He is ignorant of OocPs all-seeing scrutiny of the human race. (Ver. 2.) In 
Gen. xi. 5 it is said, " The Lord came down from heaven, to see the city and the tower," 
etc. Men from a very early period have had this thought of God's perfect know- 
ledge of human affairs. 2. Tliey have had experiences which filUd them with great 
fear. (Ver. 5.) God was in the righteous generation ; where they thought themselves 
safe, there they began suddenly to be afraid. The discourse here is of Divine judgments 
actually inflicted. 3. They have been frustrated in their best-laid plans. (Ver. 6.) 
" Whatsoever the pious man plans to do for the glory of God, the children of the world, 
seek to frustrate ; but in the final issue their attempt is futile ; for Jehovah is his 
Befuge." This is the meaning ; and their defeat should have taught them who was on 
the side of the righteous. 

in. The pbayeb spkingino out oi' this conflict between God and thk 
WICKED. (Ver. 7.) Prayer for the speedy deliverance of God's people. This is the 
perpetual cry of the Church. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XV. 
Bo much having been said in so many 
psalms of the privileges and blessings ac- 
corded to the righteous man (Fss. i. 3 ; iii. 8 ; 
T. 11, 12 ; iv. 9, 12, 18 ; x 17, 18 ; li. 7, 
etc.), the arrangers of this book thought it 
fitting to insert in this place a definition, 
or description, of who the righteous man is. 
They found a " psalm of David " (see title) 
in which such a description was set forth 
with singular force and brevity. The psalm 
is one of five verses. In the first verse the 
question is raised ; the remaining four 
give the answer, which is arranged in two 
•trophes of two verses each, the first verse of 
each strophe declaring the character of the 
righteous man positively, and the second 
verse negatively. The result is that five 
positive and five negative features are 
pointed out, by which the righteous man 
may be known. There is nothing to indicate 
at what period in David's life this psalm 
was composed, except that it was after the 
establishment of the tabernacle on Mount 
Zion (ver. 1). 



Ver. 1. — Lord, who shall abide in thy 
tabernacle ? rather, Who shall sojourn f 
Whom wilt thou accept as a sojourner in 
thy tent, to be near to thee, and consort 
with thee ? Who shall dwell (i.e. whom wilt 
thou permit to dwell) in thy holy hill ? The 
•'tabernacle" and the "holy hill" of Zion 
are, of course, not to be understood literally. 
They are Hgurative expressions, pointing to 
the Divine presence and favour, and the 
blessedness of abiding in them. 

Ver. 2. — He that walketh uprightly, and 
worketh righteousness. An upright walk 
is the first requisite (comp. Gen. xvii. 1 ; Ps. 
xxvi. 3, 11; Isa. xxxiii. 15). Such » walk 
involves the doing of righteousness, not, of 
course, in absolute perfection, but with a 
sincere intention, and so as to have "the 
answer of a good conscience towards God " 
(1 Fet. iii. 21). And speaketh the truth in 
his heart. Not "from his heart," as in the 
Prayer-book Version, which would make 
the reference one to mere truth of speech, 
but " in his heart," which points to internal 
truthlulnesB — that truthfulness "in the 
bidden council-chamber of the soul," which 
" holds no parley with what is false " (Kay). 

Ver. 3. — He thnt hackbiteth not with hii 
tongue. Among the negative virtues the 
first place is given to the observance of the 
nintli commandment, probably because to 



92 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. XT. 1—5 



err in this respect is so very oommon a 
fault (see Jer. vi. 28 ; ix. 4 ; Jas. iii. 5 — 8). 
Nor doeth evil to his neighboar ; rather, to 
hii friend, or his companion — a diifeient 
word from that used at the end of the verse, 
and implying greater intimacy. There is 
special wickedness in injuring one with 
whom we are intimate. Nor taketh np a 
reproach against his neighhour. The good 
man does not, even when it is true, spread 
an ill report concerning his neighhour. He 
prefers to keep silence, and let the report 
die out (see Exod. zxxiii. 1). 

Yer. 4. — In whose eyes a vile person is 
contemned. So the LXX., the Vulgate, 
Ewald, Hupfeld, Hengotenbeig, and the 
Bevised Version. Otliers prefer to translate, 
"He is despised in his own eyes, [and] 
worthless " (Aben Ezra, Hitzig, Delitzsch, 
Kay, ' Speaker's Commentary '). Either 
rendering furnishes a good sense ; but the 
law of parallelism is very decidedly in 
favour of the former. As the righteous 
man honours those who fear God, so he con- 
temns those who are vile or worthless. He 
is no respecter of persons. Men's outward 
circumstances are nothing to him. He 
awards honour or contempt according to 
men's moral qualities. But he honoureth 
them that fear the Lord. " It is no common 
virtue," says Oalvin, "to honour pious 
and godly men, since in the opinion of the 



world they are often as the offscouiing of 
all things (1 Cor. iv. 13)." He that sweareth 
to his own hurt, and changeth not. The 
righteous man, if he happens to have sworn 
to do something which it turns out will be 
to his owu hurt, nevertheless keeps his 
engagement (comp Lev. v. 4, whore VJip? 
is used in the same sense). 

Ver. 5. — He that pnttethnot out Ms money 
to usury. Usury.wheu one Israelite borrowed 
of another, was strictly forbidden by the 
Law (Exod. xxii. 25; Lev. xxv. 36; Deut. 
xxiii. 19). When the borrower was a fo- 
reigner, it was lawful (Deut. xv. 3; zxxiii. 
20); and no discredit can attach to the 
practice, so long as the rate of interest 
charged is moderate (comp. Matt. xxv. 27). 
Here the writer contemplates only such 
usury as was forbidden by the Law. Nor 
taketh reward against the innocent; re- 
fuses, i.e., to take a bribe, either as judge 
or witness, when a charge is made against 
an innocent person. The contrary conduct 
was widely practised by the Israelites in 
later times (see Isa. i. 23; v. 23; Jer. xxii. 
17 ; Ezek. xxii. 12 ; Hos. iv. 18 ; Micah iii. 
11, etc.), and prevails generally in the East 
to the present day. He that doeth these 
things shall never be moved (comp. Ps. xvi, 
8). He shall continue " steadfast, unmov- 
able," having God " at his right hand," as 
his Protector and Sustainer. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — A standard of integrity. " Lord, who shall abide," etc. ? We may 
truly call this brief psalm a flawless gem of religious ethics, unmatched in all the 
treasures of heathen literature. It is a sufiBcient proof that the moral failures which 
surprise and distress us in many of the Old Testament saints were due to human 
infirmity — the imperfect character of the men and of the times, not to deficient 
revelation of truth and duty. Then, as now, men knew more than they practiced. 
What the New Testament has done for morality is, firstly, to give us a model of 
holiness — a pattern life, which human imagination could never have framed, in the 
Person and life of Jesus our Lord ; secondly, to supply motives to holiness only given 
in his gospel. But no higher standard {^spotless integrity can be set forth than this 
psalu contains. The beat commentaries on it are St. John's First Epistle and St. 
James's Epistle. 

I. The qdbbtion. Who is the guest of Qod f " Lord, who shall abide in thy 
tabernacle?" etc. In David's time there were two tabernacles — the ancient one, where 
the brazen altar remained, at Gibeon ; and the new one, to which the ark had been 
removed, on Mount Moviah, which thenceforth became the " holy hill" (1 Chron. xv. 1 ; 
xvi. 1 ; 2 Ohron. i. 3 — 6). But here is no question of priestly ritual or ofBoe, but of 
personal character before God; therefore under the image drawn from the actual 
tabernacle, the real thought is of spiritual communion with God (cf. Pss. xxiii. 6 ; 
xxvil. 4). Who is he who shall commune with God as a chiM with his father — to 
whom Christ's great promise fhall be fulfilled (John xiv. 23) ? 

II. The anbweb. (Ver. 2.) The portrait is here drawn in three strokes. The 
rest of the psalm is the ghading and colouring of the picture. 1. " Walketh uprigl tJy.'* 
Our walk in Scripture means cur conduct, especially as regards ourselves, and as in 
God'B Mght — the inward, eveL- Bore than the outward, life (Luke i. 6 ; Acts ix. 31 ; 



fs. XV. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 9S 

Oen. V. 24). 2, " Worketh righteousness." Deals justly, fairly, honestly, with others. 
This is the outward side, of which Christ says, " Let your light shine " (Matt. t. 16). 
3. " Speaketh truth in his heart." The correspondence of the inward and outward life. 
People sometimes speak truth tuith the lips — what is literally true, hut with a different 
meaning in the heart. Transparent integrity ii indicated — speech, the clear mirror of 
the hidden soul. No need to draw any strong line of distinction between these three — 
walk, work, speech. Like the sides of a triangle, each implies the other two. If we 
walk with Qod, we must needs deal justly with our fellows, and shall account our 
speech one of the most responsible parts of conduct towards God and towards man. 

This is no impossible picture ot ideal perfection — simply a description of whole- 
hearted obedience. Our Lord and Saviour expects no less. Strange if less were 
expected in a " disciple indeed " than in " an Israelite iudeed " (John i. 47 ; viiL 81). 
Fellowship with our Father and our Saviour implies " walking in the light " (1 John 
i. 6 — 7; John xv. 1 — 5). This fellowship is the earnest of and preparation for thai 
of which the earthly " tabernacle " and " holy hill " were the fainti vanishing ihadowi 
'(^Rev. vii. 15 ; xxL 3, 27 ; xxlL 3, 4). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—5. — The man in undisturbed rest. It matters little when this psalm 
was written, or by whom. Although there is no reason for denying its Davidio 
authorship, still its contents are manifestly and equally precious, whoever was the 
inspired penman, and whenever he penned these words. Manifestly, the psalm is a 
product of Judaism.^ The Mosaic legislation had its ritual, but it was not ritualistic. 
There was not only an altar of sacrifice, but also a pillar of testimony and the tables 
of the Law ; and to leave out either the sacrificial or the ethical part of the Hebrew 
faith would give as the residuum, only a mutilated fragment of it. This psalm is 
not one of those which in itsell contains a new revelation, but one the inspiration of 
which is due to a revelation already received. The forms of expression in the first 
verse indicate this with sufficient clearness ; the entire psalm suggests to us three lines 
■of truth for pulpit exposition. 

I. Thebe is a home fob thb soul nt God. We do not regard the question in the 
first verse as one of despair, but simply as one of inquiry. It suggests that there is a 
sphere wherein men may dwell with God, and asks who are the men who can and do live 
in this sphere. Tlie inquiry is addressed to "Jehovah," the redeeming God of Israel, 
who by this name had made himself known to the chosen people as their God — the 
Loving, the Eternal, the Changeless One. Moreover, there had been a tabernacle made, 
and afterwards the palace of the great King was erected on Mount Zion, the holy hill. 
^' This is my rest for ever ; here will I dwell, for I have desired it." And inasmuch as 
this was the spot where God dwelt with men, to the devout soul the happiest place 
was that spot where he could meet with God ; and if, perchance, he could there abide, 
not only to sojourn as for a night, but even to take up his permanent abode, he would 
realize the very ideal of good. " One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek 
after : that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the 
beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." But in the later form of scriptural 
thought it is not only in this place or that that the yearning spirit can find Gud, but 
everywhere; yea, Qod himself ia the soul's home — a home neither enclosed by walls, nor 
restricted in space, nor bounded by time. And we know what are the features of that 
home — it is one of righteousness, of a purity which allows no stain ; it is one of mercy, 
in which all the occupants have made a covenant vrith God by sacrifice ; it is one of 
closest fellowship, in which there may be a perpetual interchange of communion 
between the soul and the great eternal God. And when we remember that on the 
one hand, God is of purer eyes than to b,ehold evil, and cannot look on iniquity, and 
that on the other hand, even all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, it must always be 
a wonder of wonders that the sinner should ever be allowed to find a home in God ; and 
never can it be inappropriate to ask the question with which the psalm begins, " Lord, 

> See Fansset's ' Studies in the Psalms,' lect. x. p. 84. 



«4 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xv. 1— i. 

dost thou give it to all men to find their rest in thee ? If not, who are these happy 
ones?" "Who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy 
hUl?" 

II. Only some souls find God a home fob thbm. The rest of the psalm 
answers the question which is raised at the outset of it. Inasmuch as the very 
phraseology of the psalm is built upon and assumes the divinely appointed institutions 
of priesthood; saerifloe, penitence, prayer, and pardon, it is needful only to remark in 
passing that the man who dwells in God's holy hill is the one who accepts the divinely 
revealed plan of mercy and pardon through an appointed sacrifice. But the fact that 
by God's mercy we are permitted to base the edifice of our life on such a foundation 
does by no means dispense with the necessity or lessen the importance of our erecting 
such edifice with scrupulous exactness according to the Divine requirements. The two 
parts of revealed religion cannot be disjoined now, any more than of old ; the sacrificial 
and ethical departments must be equally recognized. And we are here called upon to 
study a Scripture portraiture of a virtue which God will approve, by seeing how a man 
who lives in God will demean himself before the world. 1. His walk is itpright. His 
entire life and bearing will be of unswerving integrity. Bisho|j Perowne renders the 
word "uprightly," "perfectly," which in the scriptural sense is equivalent to 
"sincerely," with an absolutely incorruptible aim at the glory of God. 2. His deeds 
are right. They correspond with the simplicity and integrity of his life's aim and 
intent. 3. His heart is true to his words. He does not say one thing and mean another, 
nor will he cajole another by false pretences, 4. He giuirds his tongue. He will not 
"backbite" or "slander:" the verb is from a root signifying "to go about," and 
conveys the idea of one going about from house to house, spreading an evil report of • 
neighbour. 5. He checks the tongues of others. He will not take up a reproach a_ainst 
his neighbour. Eetailers of gossip and scandal will find their labour lost on him. 
6. He abstains from injuring a friend — by deeds of wrong. 7. He estimates people 
according to a moral standard, not according to their wealth. A base person is rejected, 
however rich. A man who fears the Lord is honoured, however poor. 8. He is true 
to his promise, though it may cost him much, even more than he at first supposed. 
9. He is conscientious in the use of what he has. He will not he one to bite, to devour, 
or to oppress another by greed of gain, nor will he take a bribe to trick a guUeless 
man. He will be clear as light, bright as day, true as steel, firm as rock. While 
resting on the promises of God as a ground of hope, he will follow the Divine precepts 
as the rule of his life. As Bishop Perowne admirably remarks, " Faith in God and 
spotless integrity may not be sundered. Religion does not veil or excuse petty 
dishonesties. Love to God is only then worthy the name, when it is the life and bond 
of every social virtue." ^ A holy man haid on his death-bed, " Next to my hope in 
Ohiist, my greatest comfort is that 1 never wronged any oue in business." 

in. From their home in God sncH souls can never be dislodged. (Ver. 5, 
"He that doeih these things sh.iU never be moved.") The man is one who lives up to 
the Divine requirements under the gospel. 

" Yet when hia holiest works are done. 
His soul depends on grace alone." 

Even so. And he shall not be disappointed. Note, in passing, it is not his excel- 
lence that ensures this security ; but the grace of God honours a man whose faith 
and works accord with his will. 1. No convulsions can disturh such a man. Hia 
rest in Divine love is one which is secure against any catastrophe whatever (Ps. 
xlvi. 1, 2 ; Eom. viii. 38, 39). 2. Time is on the side of such a one. For both the 
graces of faith and obedience will strengthen with age ; while the Being who is his 
Stronghold is the same " yesterday, and to-day, and for ever." Such characters, more- 
over, can never get out of date. 3. No discoveries in science nor in any department 
can dim the lustre of such a life. To trust in the great eternal God and to aspire to 
his likeness, is surely that of which no advance in human thought can ever make us 
ashamed. 4. 2%e faithful Qod will never desert such a om: Whoever clings to God 
in faith, love, and obedience will never find liis love unreoiprocnted or liis trust 
unrec(jmpensed. 5. The promises made to sack a one will never fail. They are all 
' Perowne, in loc., and notes on the whole psalm in 'The Cambridge Bible.' 



n. XV. 1—6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 96 



Tea and Amen in Christ ; they are sealed hy " the blood of the everlasting covenant." 
And hence they who repose their trust in them can never he moved. 

In conclusion, the preacher may well warn against any attempt to divorce these two 
departments of character — trust and action. 1. Without trust in God there can be no 
right action. 2. Without the aim at right action we have no right ^ to trust in God. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — A life without reproach. In all ages there has been a sense of imper- 
fection, and a longing and a cry for the perfect in human character. The ethical 
philosophers of Greece and Eome have given us their views ; Christian teachers have 
aimed to set forth, in poetry and prose, their ideals of perfection ; but it may be 
questioned whether anywhere we can find a truer or more beautiful portrait than this 
by the ancient Jewish poet. It has been said, " Christian chivahy has not diawn a 
hrighter." And we might even dare to say that it compares well with the character 
of the perfect man as depicted by our Lord in the Sermon on the Mount. No doubt 
there are traits in the character that are peculiar to the times, and things are put 
differently in some respects from what they would have been in the liglit of the 
gospel; but we cannot contemplate the picture except with wonder and dtlight. In 
heart aud tongue, in deed and life, as a member of society and as an individual, the 
man of this psalm is without reproach. 

I. His inspiration ib from above. It is the life within that determines character. 
Abraham walked before God, and therefore was exhorted to aim at perfection. The 
" tabernacle " is not wholly a figure of speech, but represents the meeting-place with 
God. For us Christ is the " tabernacle." Here we ever find light and strength. 
" Our life is hid with Christ in God." 

II. His CHARAOTEB 18 MOULDED AFTER THE HIGHEST PATTERN. (Vers. 2, 3.) The 

law of righteousness is his rule. Conscience is not enough ; the lives of the good are 
not enough : there is more needed. Tlie will of God as revealed to us is our true rule 
of faith and practice. There is a certain order observed — first, the person must be 
acceptable by' entire surrender to God ; then he must work by righteousness ; lastly, 
his word must be truth. So God had regard first to Abel, and then to his offering (cf. 
2 Cor. viii. 5). 

III. HiB SOCIAL LIFE IS MARKED BY THE NOBLEST VIRTUES. (Vers. 3 5.) Some 

have counted h"- •- ten or eleven particulars; but it is better to regard the spirit than 
the letter. The chief things are truth, justice, and benevolence, while with these 
ther^ is humility of spirit and charity towards all men. All this is brought out the 
more vividly by contrast with the selfish and worldly life of the wicked. 

IV. His happy destiny is sure as the throne of the Eternal. (Vflr. 6.) 
There are things that can be moved ; they have no stability or permanence. There 
are other things which cannot be moved ; they are true as God is true, and stable as 
God is stable, with whom there is " no variableness, neither shadow of turning." This 
holds good of religion and the religious life (Heb. xii. 27, 28). There are people who 
have no fixed principles. They cannot be trusted. St. James compares them to the 
waves of the sea — driven with the wind and tossed (Jas. i. 6). But the man who 
trusts in God can say, " My heart is fixed ; " and of such it is true — he " shall never be 
moved " (cf. 1 Cor. xv. 56—58; Acts xx. 22—24 ; xxi. 13).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 5. — 2%e essentials of a ipiritual religion. This psalm is supposed by some 

to have been written on the removal of the ark to Zion. " As it is not only in David's 
time that the symbol has been placed above the thing signified, and a superstitious 
efficacy attached to the externals of worship, this psalm has an equal value in every 
age in keeping before the mind the great lesson that sanctity of life and truth of heart 
are the absolute essentials of a spiritual religion." Bow can we dwell truly and in the 
most intimate abiding fellowship with Oodf That is the question which the psalm 
answers ; and the answer is — Access to Qod lies open to none but his pure worshippers. 
Two answers are given, each answer having both a positive and a negative form. 

L First answbb. 1. Positively. (Ver. 2.) (1) He walketh uprightly; i.e. with 
Integrity, with an undivided purpose of heart and mind. _ He does not try " to serve 
two-masters." (2) He worketh righteousness, or does the vnll of God. Not hig own will, 
' See our homily on Fi. xxxvii. %. 



96 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P9. XVI. 1 — 11. 



or the desires of the passions and appetites. He loves and does the right. (3) Ee speaks 
the truth in his heart. Speaks the truth hecause he loves it, not with unwilling con- 
straint. He speaks it in his heart, hecause it dwells there, hefore he utters it with his 
tongue. 2. Negativdy. (Ver. 3.) He is not one who injures others (1) hy word ; or 
(2) by deed ; or (3) by listening to and propagating slander. 

II. Sboond answer. (Vers. 4, 5.) 1. Positivdy. (Ver. 4.) (1) He turns away 
from the company of evil persona because he has no sympathy with them. He con- 
temns them. (2) He honours the good in every way that he can honour thetn — 
defending, applauding, imitating them. (3) He keeps sacred his word or his oath. 
" Not a casuist, who sets himself to find a pretext lor breaking his word when it is 
inconvenient to keep it." 2. Negatively. (Ver. 5.) (1) Not one who loves usury, but 
is willing to help the poor from a generous heart (Exod. xxii. 25). (2) Does not take 
b'ibes in the administration of justice. Incorruptibly just. "Such a man may not 
take up his dwelling in the earthly courts of the Lord ; but he shall so live in the 
presence of Grod, and under the care of Ood, that his feet shall be upon a rock." 
Would that all Christians answered to this picture 1 — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XVL 



Thi sixteenth psalm is bo far conneoted 
with the fifteenth that it is exclusively 
concerned, like the fifteenth, with the truly 
righteous man. It "depicts the true 
Israelite as rejoicing in God aa the highest 
Good, and placing affiance in him in the 
faoe of Death and Hades" (Kay). The 
ascription of it to David in the title may 
well be acquiesced in. It has been called 
" a golden psalm," and the word " Michtam " 
In the title has been understood in this 
sense (Kimchi, Aben Ezra, margin of the 
Authorized Version); but that is more 
probainy a musical term, like "Mizmor," 
"Masohil," "Shiggaion," etc. It is "full 
of the spirit of David," and remarkably 
evangelical in tone ; its Messianic chaiacter 
is attested by the Apostle Peter (Acts ii. 
25; xiii. 35). It seems to divide itself 
only into two strophes — one extending from 
ver. 1 to the end of ver. 6, and the other 
from ver. 7 to the conclusion. 

Ver. 1. — Preserve me, Ood; i.e. keep 
me, guard me — protect me both in body 
and soul. It does not appear that the 
writer is threatened by any special danger. 
He simply calls upon God to continue his 
protecting care. For in thee do I pnt my 
trust. In thee, and in thee only. There- 
fore to thee only do I look for protection 
and preservation 

Ver. 2.— O my eoul, thon hast said onto 
the Lord. The ordinary Hebrew text, pictJ, 
" thou hast said," requires the insertion 
of " O my soul," or something similar. 
But if we read -nlDN, with a large number 



of manuscripts, with the LXX. , the Vulgmte, 
the Syriac, and most other versions, no 
insei'ticin will be necessary. The meaning 
will then be, I have said to Jehovah. 
Thou art my Lord; Hebrew, ationai — "my 
Lord and Master " Uy goodness extendeth 
not to thee. This meaning cannot be 
elicited from the Hebrew words. Tobdh is 
not " goodness," but " prosperity " or 
"liappiuess" (comp. Ps. ovi. 5); and 
'aleyka is best explained as " beside tbee," 
"beyond thee." The psalmist means to 
say tliat he has no happiness beside (or 
apart fiom) God. (So Ewald, Hengstenberg, 
Cheyne, the ' Speaker's Commentary,' and 
the Bevised Version.) 

Ver. 3. — ^But to the saints that ^e ia 
the earth ; rather, it is for the saints: It 
(i.e. my prosperity) is granted me for the 
advantage of the saints that are in the land ; 
i.e of all the true Israelites. "I hold it 
in trust for them " (Kay). And to (rather, 
for) the excellent, in whom is all my 
delight. And, especially. I hold it in trust 
for " the inner circle of the excellent ones," 
in whom God takes pleasure (Ps. cxlvii. 11), 
and in whom therefore I also "delight." 

Ver. 4. — Their sorrows shall be multiplied 
that hasten after another god. This is the 
only note of sadness in the entire psalm, 
and it is inserted to add force by contrast to 
the joyous outburst in ver. 5. If men 
would not cleave to Jehovah, but would 
"hasten after" — or perhaps it should be 
trans'ated "wed themselves to" — another 
god (see Exod. ii. 16, the only other place 
where the word occurs^, then they must not 
expect "prosperity," or joy of any kind. 
Tlieir " sorrows will be muliiplied;" distress 
and anguish will come upon them (Prov. i. 
27) ; they will have to pay dear for their 
apostasy. Their drink offerings of blood 
will I not offer. Drink offerings of actual 



PS. XVI. 1 — 11.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



»7 



blood are not elsewhere mentioned in 
Scripture, and tlieTe is very little evidence 
of their having been o£fered by auy of the 
heathen nations, though it is conjectured 
that they may have been employed in the 
worship of Moloch. It is therefore best to 
explain the expression, as here used, 
metaphorically, as drink offerings as hate- 
ful as if they had been of blood (comp. 
Isa. Ixvi. 3). Nor take np their names into 
my lips. By "their names" we must 
understand the names which they used — 
those by which they called their gods. The 
Law forbade the mention of these names by 
Israelites (Exod. xxiii. 13; Deut. xil. 3). 

Ver. 5 —The lord is the Portion of mine 
inheiitanoe. God had said to Aaron, when 
he guve him no special inheritance in 
Canaan, "I am thy Part and thine Inherit- 
ance among the children of Israel " (Numb, 
iviii. 20). David claims the same privilege. 
God is his "Portion," and he needs no 
other. And of my oup. A man's " cup " is, 
in Scripture, his lot or condition in life 
(Pss. xi. 6 ; xxiii. 5) — that which is given 
him to drink. David will have God only 
for his cup. Thou maintainest my lot; i.e. 
thou makest it firm and sure (comp. Ps. 
XXX. 6, " In my prosperity I said, I shall 
never be moved "). 

Ver. 6. — The liies are fallen unto me in 
pleasant places. The "lines" which 
marked out the place of his abode (comp. 
Deut. xxxii. 9 ; Josh. xvii. 5). These had 
fallen to him "in pleasant places" — in 
Jerusalem and its near vicinity. Yea, I 
have a goodly heritage. Some explain 
" heritage " here by the " inheritance " of 
rer. 5. But the word used is different ; and 
it is most natural to understand DaTid's 
earthly heritage, or lot in life. This, h* 
says, is "pleasing" or "delightsome" to 
him. 

Ver. 7. — I will bless the lord, who hath 
given me counsel. God has become David's 
"Counsellor" (see Ps. xxxii. 8), makes 
suggestions to him' which he follows, and so 
guides his life that he feels bound to praise 
and bless him for it. Uy reins also instruct 
me in the night seasons. The reins, accord- 
ing to Hebrew ideas, are the seat of feeling 
and emotion. David is "instructed" or 
" stimulated " (Hengstenberg) to bless God 
by the feelings which stir within him as he 
lies awake at night — ^feelings, we must 
suppose, of affection and gratitude. 

Ver. 8. — I have set the lord always 
before me. I have brought myself, that is, 
to realize the continual presence of God, 
alike in happiness and in trouble. I feel 
him to be ever with me. Because he is at 
By light hand (t'.e. close to me, ready to 



protect and save), therefore I shall not be 
moved. Nothing will shake me or disturb 
me from my trust and confidence. 

Ver. 9. — Therefore my heart is glad, and 
my glory rejoiceth. The thought of God's 
continual presence at his right hand causes 
David's "heart" to be "glad," and his 
" glory " — i.e. his soul, or spirit (Gen. xlix. 
6),man'strue glory — to rejoice. My flesh also 
shall rest in hope. His " flesh " — his 
corporeal nature, united closely with his 
« heart " and " spirit "—rests, and will rest, 
secure, confident that God will watch over 
it, and make the whole complex man — 
body, soul, and spirit — to " dwell in safety " 
(Ps. iv. 8). 

Ver. 10.— For thou wilt not leave my 
soul in hell ; literally, to Bheol, or " to 
Hades." The confidence in a future life 
shown here is beyond that exhibited by 
Job. Job hopes that he may not always 
remain in Hades, but may one day experi- 
ence a " change " or " renewal " (Job xiv. 
14) ; David is certain that his soul will not 
be left in hell. Hell {Sheol) is to him an 
" intermediate state," through which a man 
passes between his life in this world and 
his final condition in some blest abode. 
Neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to 
see corruption. The present Hebrew text 
has ■^'TDn, " thy holy ones," »'.«. thy saints 
generally ; but the majority of the manu- 
scripts, all the ancient versions, and even 
the Hebrew revised text (the Keri) have 
the word in the singular number, thus 
agreeing with Acts ii. 27, 31 ; xiii. 35, which 
give us the translation, rhv SaiSn irov, and 
declare the psalmist to have spoken deter- 
minately of Christ. Certainly he would not 
have ipoklB sf himself as " God's holy 
ona." The translation of ihdchath (nnK>) 
by "corruption" has been questioned, and 
it has been rendered "the pit," or "the 
grave," but quite gratuitously. The LXX. 
have Sia<pBojih.v as the equivalent ; and the 
rabbinical commentators, giving it the 
same meaning, but expounding it of David, 
invented the myth tliat David's body was 
miraculously preserved from corruption. 

Ver. 11. — Thou wilt show me the path of 
life ; i.e. the path which leads to the Source 
and Centre of all life, even God himself — the 
way to heaven, in contract with corruption 
and Sheol. In thy presence is fulness of 
joy ; literally, latiety of joy — enough, and 
more than enough, to satisfy the extreinest 
cravings of the human heart. At thy right 
hand ; rather, in thy right hand — ^ready for 
bestowal on thy saints. Are pleasures for 
evermore. An inexhaustible store, whiob 
may be drawn upon for ever. 



PSALUS. 



98 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. xvi, 1— IL 



HOMILETIOS, 

Ver. 10. — 2%« antidote to death. " Thou wilt not leave," etc. More than thirty 
generations of believers read and sang this psalm, pondered and prayed over it, and 
drew, no doubt, sweet though vague comfort from this verse, before the hidden glory 
of its meaning was disclosed. The temple built by David's son was laid in ashes. 
The Scriptures were carried with the captives to Babylon, and brought back. A 
second and at last a third temple arose on Mount Moriah. Empires arose and fell. 
Above one thousand years roUed away. At last, one summer morning, when the 
Feast of Pentecost had returned in its yearly round, and Jerusalem was filled with 
gladness, the time arrived for putting the key into the lock. The same Spirit who 
inspired the prophecy, interpreted it. " Peter, standing up with the eleven," etc 
(Acts ii. 14, 25—32). 

L The contbabt between life and death, in its two most feabfql asfectb. 
1. 27le separation of the sovl. " My soul in hell," or " to hell." The Revisers here 
(and elsewhere) have given the Hebrew word Sheol, because the English word 
"hell "has come to be applied exclusively to the state of the lost. Thanks to the 
gospel, we have no word by which to translate this Hebrew word, because we have 
no corresponding idea. Often it is translated " grave ; " but only figuratively — it never 
means a literal sepulchre. It is the world, place, or state of departed spirits, good or 
bad, happy or unhappy (in Greek, Hades). It is this view of death — the parting, 
rending asunder of spirit and body, which Solomon describes (Eccles. zii. 7). It is this 
which appals. We see the deserted house of clay; but where is the tenant? Qone, 
AS if into nothingness and eternal silence. 2. The corruption of the hody. The other 
view of death increases our distress. Death may come gently, as though but a deeper 
•leep ; even with a solemn, sad beauty of its own. But the beauty death brings, it 
hastens to destroy. Just because that sleeping form is so dear, we must hasten to 
hide it out of sight. Cover it with green turf and flowers. Let not thought pierce 
the secrets of the grave. Nothing is plainer than that God mecmt death to be terrible. 
It is something wholly different to man from what it is to the lower animals. Gtod 
knew we should love sin, and think it beautiful. So when he tells us " the wages of 
sin is death," it is as though he said, " Look at what death does to the body ; that is 
the image of what sin does to the soul ! " Whither shall we turn ? The answer 
gleams forth in that word " not." " Thou wilt not leave," etc. Here is — 

II. The antidote to the terror of death in the resxjbbection of Jesus. (Acts 
ii 81, 32.) So St. Paul at Antioch in Pisidia (Acts xiii. 34—37). We are not 
now concerned with any reference these words may have to David himself. Modem 
critics are intensely anxious always to find a precise occasion for every psalm (after 
the manner of Horace's odes), though such a rule would be wholly misleading if 
applied to modern poetry. But suppose it so. What concerns us is the glorious 
event to which the Apostles Peter and Paul apply these words as a prophecy. 
" Now is Christ risen from the dead ; " " Come, see the place where the Lord lay." 1, 
Christ's resurrection proves the fact of immortality ; q.d. that death, which destroys 
the bodily life, does not touch the spirit, the self. "Behold," he said, "it is I 
myself" — not a spectre, a phantom. " This same Jesus," said the angels (Luke xxiv. 
39; Acts i. 11). The doctrine or belief of immortality was common to Jews and 
Gentiles. The Egyptians based their religion on it. The Greeks had their Elysium 
and Tartarus. So other nations. What was wanted was not doctrine, but proof. No 
proof so entirely decisive as this — that One should publicly die, and be buried, and rise 
from the dead. The value of the resurrection of Christ's body lay in the proof thus 
given, that, though his body died, he lived. Death, then, does not end us. Hence 
the only way in which denial of immortality can now be maintained is by denying 
the resurrection of Jesus. For its reality there is not only (1) that mass of testimony 
which St. Paul summarizes (1 Cor. xv. 5 — 8 ; comp. Acts ii. 32, etc.) ; and (2) the 
utter failure of the Jewish authorities to produce any contrary evidence ; but (3) the 
whole history of the founding of Christianity, based entirely on this fact. It would 
have been utterly contrary to human nature for the disciples to have preached and 
suffered as they did, had they not believed in the Saviour they preached ; equally 



n. rw. 1—11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 99 

impossible for them to have believed, if he had not really risen. Further, neithel 
their faith nor their preaching would have availed, had not the living Christ fulfilled 
his promises (Matt, xxviii. 20 ; Acts i. 4, 5). 2. Christ's resurrection is the assurance. 
As he has been one with us in death, we are to be one with him in life. His resur- 
rection is the seal both of his power and of his faithfulness ; and both are pledged 
(John X. 28—30 ; xiv. 19). True, this flesh must " see corruption ; " this '• earthly 
house be dissolved." But for the humblest believer, as much as for an apostle, " to 
depart," is " to be with Christ ; " " Absent from the body, at home with the Lord" (Phil. L 
23 ; 2 Cor. v. 8). And the body is to be " raised incorruptible ; " not fleshly, but 
spiritual (Phil. iii. 20, 21 ; 1 Cor. xv. 50—53; John v. 28, 29 j vi. 39). Because he 
lives, where he lives, as he lives, we shall live also. 

CoNOLnsiON. All this turns on one simple, infinitely significant question— ./Irt 
tee hist 

Ver. 11, — " The path of life." The attractiveness and ease, or the reverse, of any 
path may depend on many conditions. Smooth or rough, steep or level, plain or 
confused with turns and windings ; bright with sunshine or dark with tempest. But 
the main question is — ^Whither will it lead ? We speak often of human life as a journey 
— a path along which, like pilgrims, we are travelling. Whither does it lead ? Apart 
from Christ and his gospel, the only answer is — to the grave. Our Saviour's death 
and resurrection have changed all this; made both life and death something quite 
other than before. He lived in order to die ; died in order to live again ; lives again, 
to make us partakers of his life, 

I. Jebub lived that he might die. In quite another sense from what is true of 
all men, or of any other, his life was the path of death. In the prime of life and 
unrivalled usefulness, he thirsted for death ; not the rest of the grave, but the conflict 
of the cross (Luke xii. 50). As the purpose of his coming (Matt. xx. 28). The ful- 
filment of prophecy (Luke is. 31). The commission of the Father (John z, 17, 18), 
The pain of his joy (Heb, xii, 2), 

II, Jesus died that he uiaHT uve agaix. Life saw for him the path of death ; 
death, the path of life. To this the text points, as interpreted by the Holy Spirit 
(Acts ii. 24 — 32). His resurrection has changed our whole view of death, and 
therefore of life (Heb, ii, 14, 15). What seemed the mountain barrier against which 
the last waves of life break, proves to be but the narrow strait leading into the bound- 
less ocean of life indeed, 

IIL Jesub lives to make ub fabtaeebb of his life. (John xiv, 3, 19; x, 28.) 
CoNCLUBiON. It is a poor, mean view of Christianity which speaks of it as pre- 
paration for death. It is preparation for life. It is more — it is the beginning, 
the first stage, the infancy and childhood, of eternal life (1 John v, 11, 12 ; Col. iii, 
1—4). 

Ver, 11, — " Fulness of Joy." The natural effect of sin is to quench all desire after 
God, deaden all sense of his presence ; to make the thought of him unwelcome, even 
terrible, " I heard thy voice, . , . and was afraid," The beginning of spiritual life is 
turning to Q-od, Its highest attainments, joy in God. The supreme happiness to 
which it looks forward, fulness of joy in his presence. 

I. God has bestowed on human nature a wonderful oapaoitt for jot. The 
sunshine of the heart, in which " all the flowers of life unfold." Look at the child 
with a birthday gift, a game, a holiday. Joy shines in his eyes, sets him singing and 
dancing. As oiir nature expands, and life's varied experience gathers strength, such 
simple exuberance of joy becomes impossible; but its sources are deeper, more manifold. 
No longer a dancing brook, but a deep well, sometimes brimming over. As the Bible 
is fuller than all other books of human life, so you can nowhere match the fulness 
and variety of its images of joy. Beside its warm Eastern pictures, our Western 
modem life looks bleak and sad. But above the whole range of common life, it opens 
the range of spiritual joy — the joy of forgiveness, of salvation, of knowledge, of trust, 
peace, security; of fellowship with God in Christ (John xv, 11 ; xvi, 20, 22). Higher 
«till the Scripture lifts our thoughts— to the joy of angels ; to God's own joy (Luke 
XV. 7, 10, 32; Zeph, iii. 17), 



100 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvi. 1— 11. 



II. Gk)D IS THE SouBCE OF ALL JOT. Even the gladness of the frisking lambs, of tie 
gnats dancing in the sunshine, of the lark singing in the sky, 1* his gift; even as the 
momentary twinkle on the breaking spray is the sun's image. All pure joy is from 
God. There are impure joys — " the pleasures of sin." But as the mountain stream 
is pure at its source, though in its course through plains and cities it becomes foul and 
tainted; so the original desires and affections of our nature are purei Sin alone 
corrupts. 

IIL Joy vuksows BsroBE, awd else xmATTAiNASLE, comes into human life through 
faith in the Saviour — our crucified, risen, glorified Lord. " Then were the disciples 
glad " (John XX. 30). Well they might be ; for the heaviest grief human hearts ever 
■uffered was in a moment rolled away, and " life and inuuortality brought to light." 
1. The joy of forgiveness — of knowing we are right with God (Rom, v. 11). 2. Of 
strength, safety, courage, comfort, in fellowship with Christ (John xiv. 18). 3. The 
joy of hope (1 Pet. L 8). 

rV. "Fulness of joy." Joy unalloyed, complete, enduring, is not for this world. 
Not possible where all fairest flowers fade, fruits wither, brightest days have their 
Eonset, fountains run dry. " In thy presence," etc. There will be many sources of 
" everlasting joy " (Isa. xxxv. 10) in the heavenly life : society, deliverance from 
pain, grief, sin, conflict, etc. (Rev. vii. 15 — 17). But the source of all, " the fountain 
of living waters" (Jer. ii. 13), will be God's presence (Rev. xxi. 22, 23). 

Conclusion. Is this the heaven we desire; for which we are preparing? There 
is no other prepared for us. In that measure in which the presence of God, realized 
by faith, love, prayer, is a source of joy here and now, we have the earnest and pledge 
of "fulness of joy " for ever. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — " Once thine, ever thine:" the song of a saint, the visUm of a seer. 
This psalm yields many texts for instructive discourse ; but it is not on any of them 
that we propose now to dwell, but on the psalm as a whole. It is one of the most 
evangelical in all the five books of the Psalms. It opens with a prayer and a plea ; 
but its main current is that of joy and praise. It is moreover repeatedly quoted in 
the New Testament, where, by the Apostles Peter and Paul, some of its woids are 
declared to be those of David the prophet, and to have received fulfilment in Christ, 
and in him alone. We cannot, however, apply all the psalm to the Messiah. Some 
of it is evidently the expression of a private personal experience, and the utterance of 
a joyously devout saint, whose joy and devotion have both been inspired by a reve- 
lation of God to him ; while other parts of it are the still more elevated utterances of 
one who was borne along by the Holy Ghost, to tell of visions which he saw of On« 
in whom his royal line should witness the culmination of its glory 1 The touching 
expressions in 2 Sam. xxiii. 3 — 5 will account for both the words of the saint and the 
words of the seer which are here found. As the saint, David was inspired by revela- 
lation; as the seer, he was inspired /or it.* And by making these two main divisions 
we shall, perhaps, best homiletically expound the psnlm. 

I. We have here the sonq of a saint inspieed by eevelation. In this light 
the contents of the psalm are very varied. We number them, not as following in 
exact logical or culminative order, but that we may call the student^s and preacher's 
attention thereto, one by one ; observing that we follow the Revised Version, which is 
most excellent. Here is : 1. A prayer and a plea. (Ver. 1.) Apparently he is in peril ; 
what, we do not know; but, as is his wont, he makes his hi(Ung-plaoe in God; and 
very touching is the plea he puts in : " for in thee do I put my trust." Our God 
loves to be trusted. The confidence which his people repose in him is in his sight of 
great price ; and he will not — cannot disappoint them. 2. The psalmist has taken 
Jehovah to be his own God. Jehovah — the eternal God — the God of Israel, was his 
own sovereign Lord. And as he confided to him all his cares, so he yielded to him 

' On these two kinds of inspiration, see Professor Cave's admirable Congregational 
Lecture, 1888, on 'The Inspiration of the Old Testament;' and also Professor Ladd'f 
' What is the Bible? ' (1888). 



n. XVI. 1—11.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 101 



his entire homage. 3. He finds in Ood his supreme Joy. "I have no good beyond 
thee " (of. Ps. Ixiii. 25). All the largest desires of the soul have their perfect satis- 
faction in God. 4. In his fellow-saints, he finds a holy brotherhood. In them is his 
delight (Ps. xlii. 4 ; Mai. iii. 16). The closest and dearest bond of permanent friend- 
ship is found in the fellowship of holy life and love in God. 5. Be shuns the ungodly. 
In blended pity and anger he looks on those of his nation who have lapsed into 
idolatry, and exchanged the worship of Jehovah for the service of idols (of. Jer. ii. 13 ; 
Bom. i. 25, Eevised Version). 6. ITie portion which he has in God is secured to him. 
(Ver. 5.) It cannot slip from his grasp, nor be snatched out of his hand, nor can he 
in any way be despoiled thereof. God will uphold him in possession, and will give 
him timely counsel and assistance (ver. 7). 7. God is ever h^ore him, as a constantly 
present Friend. He is no abstraction. But one ever at his right hand, to guard, guide, 
advise, gladden, and strengthen. Yea, to give him a steadfast, unconquerable firm- 
ness in the midst of nimierous foes. 8. Consequently, he has a heritage of wealth with 
which he is well pleased. (Ver. 6.) The inheritance assigned to him as it were by lot, 
and marked out as it were by line, was one which gave him a plenitude of delight. 
9. For he knows that the near and dear relationship between himself and God is one 
which not even death itself can disturb.^ David caught a glimpse of the sublime truth 
of how much God had meant when he told Moses, " I am the God of Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob" (of. Matt. xxii. 31, 32). We have almost the truth which is expressed in 
1 Thess. V. 10. " My flesh," he says, " shall rest in hope."* Yea, more ; David even 
peers beyond the unseen state (Sheol) ; he beholds it conquered, and the one whose God 
i8th«>Lord delivered for ever from the hold of death. And eveu this is not all ; but he 
sees far, far beyond, awaiting the believer, fulness of joy and eternal delights in the 
immediate presence of the great eternal God. So that the burden of the song may be 
summed up in our final thought on this aspect of the psalm, that : 10. Once God's, he 
was his far ever I " Thou wilt not leave my soul to Sheol" (cf. Ps. xlviii. 14 ; Ixxiii. 
26). Is it any wonder that, with such a heritage in Divine love, the jjsalmist should 
find his heart glow with joy, and that his tongue should break out into shouts of 
praise? Surely if such a God is ours, and ours /or ever, we are well provided for, and 
shall be well guarded, throughout eternity. 

U. Wb have hekb also the vision op a sbeb who was inspired fob a reve- 
lation. We have in that memorable sermon on the Day of Pentecost, when Peter 
opened up the kingdom to Israel, a remarkable reference to this very psalm (cf. Acts 
iL 25—31). In which the apostle declares that what David said respecting the Holy 
One, he spoke as a prophet, seeing far ahead the fulfilment of the covenant God had 
made with him.' And in Acts xiii. 34 — 37 the Apostle Paul makes an equally distinct 
reference to this psalm, while he even more emphatically declares this prophetic 
utterance to be a Divine declaration. And we get a plain and distinct account of such 
far distant scriptural forecasts in 2 Pet. i. 21. Thus we can clearly trace a second 
significance in the latter half of Ps. xvi., as it recounts " the sure mercies of David." 
For, indeed, if it had not been for the Divine promise and oath made to him — a 
promise and an oath the fulfilment of which could never be disturbed by the vicissi- 
tudes of time, there might not and probably would not have been the like joyful 
repose of the saint in God, in the prospect of death and of eternity. So that, although 
the vision of the prophet comes second in our consideration, it was really the first in 
importance, and the foundation of all the rest. And all this may be brought home 
in fruitful teaching, in four or five progressive steps. 1. David had had a direct 
revelation that his throne should be established for ever. (2 Sam. xxiii. 3—5 ; viL 12 — 16 ; 
Pbs. Ixxii. ; Ixxxix, 20—37.) And to his dying day, amid all the disturbances of his 
house, this covenant, " ordered in all things and sure," was all his salvation, and all 
his desire. 2. In the foreylancings of prophetic vision he saw the Holy One in the 

> It has been asked whether a view so lofty was the average one in Israel. Surely such 
a question is needless. We should meet it with an emphatic negative. Ihis was no mure 
the average view of Israelites than the holiest men of God are the average men in 
Christendom I 

» Note Bishop Perowne on the word " flesh." .. 

» See the following passages: 2Sam.vu.; 1 Ohron. xni. : Pss.u.; xvm.50; Txa.; xlv.- 
Ixxii.; Ixxxix. 22 — 24; ex.; exxxii. 11, 12. 



102 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvi. i >tL 

' ominff age as its Buler and its Head.^ 3. He beheld also the Holy One going down 
into the tomb. To Sheol ; not hell, but Hadea, the invisible realm of the departed. 4. 
He heheld the Holy One rising again. As the Lord and Conqueror of death ; as the 
Head of the redeemed, he beheld him leavins; the ^rave, and going forward and upward 
as their Forerunner. The resurrection of the Lord Jesus carries along with it that of 
all his followers. 5. It was on this sublime Messianic hope that the psalmist built his 
own. And, indeed, it was on this that such as Abraham fixed their gaze, with leaping 
gladness and thankful joy. " That which is true of the members is true, in its highest 
sense, of the Head, and is only true of the members because they are joined to the Head " 
(Perowne); 1 Thess. v. iO. 

IIL In combininq the bono of the saint and the vision of the seer, wb have 
MOST ELEVATED AND ELEVATiNO TEACHING FOB GUKSELVES. 1. Here is the great Secret 
of life made known to and -by the holy prophets. As one expositor remarks, the 
antithesis in the psalm is not between life here and life there, but between a life in 
God and a life apart from him. 2. That God should have disclosed this great secret 
by his Spirit can bring no difficulty whatever to those who understand communion 
with God. 3. 'The grand redemption of God's grace is realized in a fellowship of holy 
souls in blest and everlasting relation to God as their Portion, their endless Heritage of 
infinite purity and delight. 4. This fellowship of life centres round him whom no 
death can retain in its hold, even round him who is the Besurrection and the Life. 
Believers are one in God because one in Christ. 5. His triumph over the tomb is the 
pledge of theirs. He has gone ahead as their Forerunner, and has in their name taken 
his place in the Father's house, preparing theirs likewise. 6. Hence the entire 
blessing of God's great salvation is summed up in the words, " Thou wilt show me 
the path of life." In which phrase, as Austin ' finely says, " we have a guide, ' Thou ; ' 
a traveller, 'me;' a way, ' the path ; ' the end, ' life.' " Happy are they who choose thif 
Guide, who follow this way, who inherit such a life 1 How the troubles and perils of 
this life seem to dwindle away when we can realize that such a God and such a home 
are ours 1 and not ours only, but also of all those who have said to Jehovah, " Thou art 
my Lord"!— C. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Life-long convictions. Happy the man who holds to his faith in Gkxi 
through all changes and chances of this mortal life 1 Beligion to him is a reality. He 
speaks of what he knows. He commends what he has proved to be good. He can 
rejoice in the assurance that God, who has been with him hitherto, will keep him 
safely to the end, and that the portion which satisfied his soul in this life will satisfy 
his soul eternally. We may take the psalm as expressing certain life-long convictions. 

I. That God is to be trusted as the Sufbeme Good. Man is prone to seek 
happiness apart from God. This proves both his littleness and his greatness: his 
littleness in turning from God; his greatness, as nothing earthly can satisfy him, and 
his soul is restless till it finds rest in God. " Thou art my Lord " is the true response 
to God's declaration, " I am the Lord thy God " (Exod. xx. 2 ; Ps. Ixxiii. 25). 

II. That the saints abb to be eeqabdbd as earth's tbue nobles. When God 
has his right place, man gets his right place also. He is valued, not for his wealth, 
but for his worth ; not for his circumstances, but for his character ; not for his high 
standing among men, but for his near relation in love and holiness to God. If we love 
God, we shall love what God loves. If we delight in God, we shall delight in what God 
delighteth in. As a poet of our own has taught us — 

" 'Tis only noble to be good. 
Kind hearts are more than coronets, 
And simple faith than Norman blood." 

IIL That wickedness, whatever it promises, must in the end bbino wretohed- 
KESS. The wicked may be many ; they may seem to prosper ; they may appear as if 
they were to prevail, and have their own way in everything. There will bie at times 
strong temptations to join them — to live as they live, to eat, drink, and be merry. 
But the heart that has known God recoils with horror from such a thought. What 

• See Hengstenberg'a 'Ohristology,' ii. 140, et seq. 
» A.D. 1637, quoted by 0. H. Spurgeon, tn loe. 



M.XTI. 1-11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 103 

can come of forsaken God, but misery ? This is the witness of history, observation, 
and experience. And we should be thankful that it is so. It is a proof of God's love, 
as well as of God's righteousness. That " the way of transgressors is hard " puts for 
many a warning in their path, and sounds for many a merciful call in their ears. " Turn 
ye: why will ye die?" (Ezek. xxxiii. 11; Isa. Iv. 1—7; Job xxxiii. 27—30). 

rV. That the dbstdtt of the good k Divinely obdbred. Life is not fixed by 
chance, or by blind fate, or by man's own designing and devising. It is of God's 
ordering (Prov. xix. 21). As it is with the stars above, so it is with souls beneath. 
They stand as God ordains (Pss. cxix. 91 ; cxlvii. 3, 4). As it was with Canaan, which 
was divided among the tribes by lot (Numb. xxvi. 55 ; Josh. xiii. 6), so it is with the 
inheritance of God's believing people ; it is settled by the hand of God. In many 
things — as to our birth, and kinsfolk, and associations, and so on — we have no choice. 
But trusting in God, we cheerfully accept the place which he has appointed for us. 
And when we are free to choose, we seek counsel of God, and gladly and gratefully 
rest in his will (Heb. xiii. 5). What the King of Babylon did according to his lights 
when at the parting of the ways (Ezek. xxi. 21), we do, in a higher way (Acta ix. 6). 

V, That oodliness has the promise both op this life and op that which is 
TO CWMB. 1. 2%M lift. (Vers. 6—8.) 2. Outdance. (Ver. 7.) 3. Protection. (Ver. 8.) 
4. The life to come. (Ver. 11.) This truth, dimly revealed of old, shines out brightly 
and beautifully in the gospel. — W. P. 

Ver. 11. — The future state. In this prayer it is implied that there is one " path," 
which is truly " the path of life " — ^the path by which we can reach the highest ideal of 
our being, and be blessed for ever ; and further, that God, and God alone, is able to 
show us this path. It may be said that the prayer has been answered in the fullest 
sense by Christ Jesus. We may use the words with reference to Christ's teaching as 
to a fixture state. Christ has shown us — 

I. The obbtainty op a fotube state. Reason may speculate, imagination may 
form pictures, the instincts of the heart may prompt the hope that there is a future 
state of being; but it is only through Holy Scripture that we attain to full conviction. 
What was dimly revealed to Old Testament saints has been now " made manifest by 
the appearing of our Saviour Jesus Christ" (2 Tim. i. 10). 

II. The iupobtanoe of character as determining man's place in a rtrruRE 
state. Our Lord always teaches that holy character is indispensable to blessedness. 
True life is from God, and tends to God (John v. 26; Col. iii. 3). " The path of life " 
must be entered upon here, or we can never reach from earth to heaven. Faith 
and action determine character, and character settles destiny. " If ye believe not that 
I am he, ye shall die in your sins " (John viii. 24). 

III. 'The intimate connection between the life that now is and that which 
IS to come. There is continuity. Death transfers, but it does not transform. Life it 
the seed-time for eternity. Our present actions, good or bad, determine our future 
fate (Gal. vi. 7, 8 ; Bom. ii. 6—10). 

IV. That everything tends to a great crisis, when judgment shall be given 
UPON ALL MEN. Our Lord teaches us that judgment is already begun. Whatever we 
do has its effect. Every deed of self-denial and justice and love brings its blessing, 
and every deed of evil its curse. But there is to be a final judgment, and our Lord 
shows US that the acts of that great day will be based on law ; that God will render 
unto every man according to his works. It is very striking also that our Lord should 
put such emphasis upon acts of love and charity (Matt. xxv. 31 — 46). 

V. That he himself will hold the supreme place as Judge and King in thb 
WORLD to come. If the future state is a reality, this has been made certain by Christ 
(John ii. 25). If character will determine our place in eternity, it is through Christ 
that we are to attain to the meetness of character required (Col. i. 12). If the awards 
of the judgment are final, it is because Christ is Judge, and there can be no appeal 
against his decisions. If the future state is, for the good, to be a state of highest 
and divinest "life," it is because they have been made partakers of the life of Christ, 
and shall dwell for ever with him in the light and love of God. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — Oroundi of the prayer for preservation. This psalm is golden in 



104 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvi. 1—11. 

thought, feeling, and expression. The substance of it is comprised in the first verse : 
" May God preserve him who has no other refuge in which he can hide hut him I " The 
subject up to the end of the sixth verse may be called — Qrotmds of the prayer far 
preservation. 

I. He has taken God fob his Supbemb Good. (Ver. 2, "I said to Jehovah, 
Thou art my Lord ; beside thee I have no good.") The " good " here in contrast 
with the " sorrows " in ver. 4. " Whom have I in heaven but thee," etc. ? It is the 
answer of the soul to, " Thou shalt have no other gods but me." " Thou, Lord, art 
my Portion, my Help, my Joy, my All in all." 

II. He DBLI0HT8 IN THE FELLOWSHIP OF ALL THE GOOD. (Ver. 3.) He trUStS God 

in company with the best and noblest in the land. If they trust and serve, it is my 
privilege also. That is one thought. Another is — I love the holy and the excellent 
who reflect most of God; not the worldly rich and great and powerful. The saints 
and only they are the excellent to him, even as they are to God. He is one with God 
in this — he is wholly on God's side ; therefore, he says, save me from impending danger. 

HI. He abhobs apostates and theib idols. (Ver. 4.) He will he loyal, and 
refuse all participation in the fellowship or the rites of the surrounding idolaters. Even 
the names of the false gods he refuses to take upon his lips. Philosophy, and luxury, 
and commerce, and wisdom in government, and the glories of conquest, combined to 
recommend the seductive idolatries of PhUistia, Phceuicia, Syria, Assyria, Egypt. But 
he regarded them all with righteous scorn. We have need of a strong and simple 
trust in God, and sympathy with the good, to be able to repudiate the idolatries that 
ever surround us — the worship of wealth, success, fashion. 

IV. He possesses all things in God. (Vers. 5, 6.) The Lord is the Portion of 
mine inheritance — an allusion to the division of the land among the tribes. And thlg 
was preserved to him by the protecting power of God. God was also his meat and 
drink (equivalent to " cup "). " The lines," etc. — ^in allusion to the ancient custom of 
marking out plots of land by measuring-lines. He had a goodly heritage. " What 
must not he possess who possesses the Possessor of all?" "All things are yours, 
for ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's." — S. 

Vers. 8 — 11. — The confidence of the psalmisfs faith in the future. The two main 
ideas of the writer are (1) a sense of Divine privilege in having God as his chief 
Gbod ; and (2) a confiding, hopeful prayer for deliverance from death. Not, of course, 
from death altogether; he could not hope to be finally delivered firom the grave. 
The prayer, therefore, must have been for deliverance from impending danger, firom 
death that was then threatened at that time, and for being conducted into and preserved 
in " the path of life." The application which has been made of the ninth and tenth 
verses to Christ by Peter and Paul has led to a misunderstanding of the original sense. 
They say that the prayer was fulfilled in Christ, and not in David ; that David did 
see corruption, and that Christ did not. But the best Hebrew scholars say that it if 
a confident prayer, not to be given over to death, but to be preserved in the way of life. 
We must understand, of course, death at present ; for it could not mean death alto- 
gether, nor deliverance from the grave after death. The general subject of these 
verses, then, is — 2%« confidence of the psalmisfs faith in the future, because he had 
chosen Ood as his chief Good. 

L The sense of God's pkesenoe inspires a feeling of safety. (Ver. 8.) " Not 
in the moment of peril only, but at all times has he his eye fixed upon Gud." "God 
in David's eyes is no abstraction, but a Person, real, living, and walking at his side," 
and able to protect him from danger. Have we such a sense of companionship with 
God ? I shall not be moved — neither in character, nor in purpose, nor in worh. 

II. He kejoiced in the confidence that God would not allow him to fkbish. 
(Vers. 9, 10.) " Flesh " here, as always, means the living body — never means a corpse. 
" Shall rest in hope," equivalent to " shall dwell in safety ; " and must be understood 
of this life. No stress can be laid on the word " leave," which means " give over to." 
He is expressiiig the confidence " that God will not leave him to perish, will not giva 
him up to be the prey of the grave," which was the design of his enemies. The 
lessons for us — that God's time is our time, and that he will not abandon us to our 
fpiritual enemies, but will afford us efiectual protection. 



PS. XVII. 1—15.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



106 



ni. He ebjoioed that God would make known to him the way to life. 
(Ver. 11.) Not only preserve him in life, but lead him on to that life whose joy is 
beholding the Divine face, and partaking of the everlasting pleasures which are at his 
right hand. The idea of immortality springs out of the sense of his relationship to 
God ; for he could not think that such a relationship could end with death. If w« 
are the sons of God, that is the strongest guarantee that we shall continue to partake 
of God's life, rich and manifold and everlasting. Christ said, " Because I live, ye shall 
live also." This passage has its highest fulfilment when applied to the resurrection of 
Christ.— S. 

Ver. 8. — The supreme choice of the sotiil. "I have set the Lord always before me: 
because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved." " I have set Christ always 
before me : because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved." 

L This is to make the joubnet of life full of light. FUlar of cloud and fiie. 
And this, in whatever view you look at this life — whether as a stage on which toork 
hai to te done, or on which good has to be acquired, or as a journey to reach our 
destiny. By this light we can clearly see the nature of the work that must be done ; 
the kind of good that must be sought; and the glorious destiny awaiting us. But 
let a man make himself or the world the light by which he walks, the guide he 
follows, then bis work, his well-being, and the future all become dark. Some dark 
moments there will be, when God's way is through the clouds or through the great deep. 

IL This will make us teult stbono. " I shall not be moved." We may know 
duty, self-interest, and the way to honour, and yet be too weak to follow them. 
Weakness of purpose and will is our misery and guilt. It is not merely our mis- 
fortune, but our sin. Importance of strength. " Be strong in the Lord, and in the 
power of his might." The only way to become strong is by " looking unto Jesus." 
All other stimulants soon spend their strength and leave us prostrate. But the 
setting God always before us will endow us with all strength to resist all temptations, 
and aU fortitude to endure. 

m. This is to hake the aim of life really obeat. Our lives are mostly paltry 
•nd little. We go about filled with little vanities and ambitions, aiming at little ends, 
and content" with little results. Often under the guise of humility our larger aims are 
mostly of the depraved or secular sort — wealth ; social position ; fame on the battle- 
field, or in the senate, or in literature. But to " have God always before us " is the 
real lasting greatness. This is the only true ideal of life. 

rV. This is to make the way of life seoube. " Because he is at my right hand, 
I shall not be moved." 1. Net moved with fear. 2. Not moved/;o?» his hope. 3. Not 
moved /rom his righteousness. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XVIL 



This psalm is termed " a prayer " — " a Prayer 
of David." It consists, no doubf^ mainly of 
a series of petitions (vers. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 18, 
14); but contains also a number of verses 
which have no precatory character (vers. 3, 
4, S, 10 — 12, 15); and, on the whole, it 
cannot be said to be occupied with sup- 
plication to a greater extent than many of 
the compositions which are simply termed 
" psalms." Probably it was called a 
" prayer " became the writer himself seemed 
so to entitle it in ver. 1. David's author- 
ship is generally allowed, since the com- 
position has " the marked characteristics of 



David's early style " (' Speaker's Commen- 
tary '). The current of thought and language 
is vehement and abrupt; there is a deep 
dependence upon God, and at the same 
time a warmth of indignation against the 
writer's enemies, found frequently in the 
Davidical psalms, and not very noticeable 
in the others. There is also an earnest 
faith in a future life (ver. 15), which was a 
marked feature of David's character, but 
not very common among his contemporaries. 
The time in David's life to which the psalm 
belongs is uncertain ; but it has been con- 
jectured, with a certain amount of probability, 
to have been written during the heat of the 
persecution by Saul, perhaps when David 



106 



THE BOOK OF PSA.LMS. 



[m. XVII. 1 — 15. 



waa pursued after by the wicked king in the 
wilderness of Maon (1 Sam. xziii. 26). (So 
Hitzig, Moll, and the 'Speaker's Oom- 
mentaiy.') 

The metrical arrangement is somewhat 
doubtful. Perhaps the beat division is that 
of Dr. Kay, who makes the poem one of four 
stanzas — the first of five verses (vers. 1 — 5) ; 
the second of fi)ur (vers. 6—9) ; the third of 
three (vers. 10 — 12); and the fourth also 
of three (vers. 13 — 15). 

Ver. 1. — Hear the right, Lard (comp. 
Pi. iz. 4). Here and elsewhere the psalmist 
assumes that right is on his side, and that 
he is persecuted unjustly. Unless he had 
been convinced of this, he could not have 
called on God to vindicate him. The nar- 
rative in 1 Sam. zviii. — xxvii. fully justifies 
his conviction. Attend nnto my ory (comp. 
Pss. iv. 1 ; V. 2 ; Ixi. 1). Sinnah, the word 
translated "cry " here (and in Ps. Izi. 1) is 
a strong term : it means " shout," " outcry " 
— ^most often, though not here, " a shout of 
joy." Give ear unto my prayer, that goeth 
not out of feigned lips ; rather, feigning lips, 
or guileful lipa — ^lips, t.e., that speak false- 
hood knowingly. 

Ver. 2. — ^Let my sentence come forth from 
thy presence. David does not doubt, any 
more than Job (xiii. 18), what the sen- 
tence will be. As right is on his side (ver. 
1), it must be in his favour. Let thine eyes 
bdiold the things that are eq.ual ; literally, 
Let thine eyes behold equities. 

Ver. 3. — ^Ihon hast proved mine heart 
(comp. Fss. xxvi. 2 ; Izvi. 9 ; xcv. 9 ; cxxxix. 
23). "Proved" means "tried," "tested," 
examined strictly, so as to know whether 
there was any wickedness in it or not. 
Thoa hast visited me in the night. The 
night is the time when men can least escape 
those searching, testing thouglits which 
God's providence then especially sends, to 
" try the very heart and reins " (Ps. vii. 9). 
Thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing ; 
rather, and jindest nothing. The jirocess 
was one begun in the past, and continuing 
on in the present. God was ever searching 
David and trying him ; but " found nothing," 
i.e. no alloy, no base metal, no serious flaw 
in his character ; not that he was sinless, 
but that he was sincere and earnest — a true 
worshipper of God, not a hypocrite. I am 
purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. 
" If any man offend not in word, the same 
is a perfect man" (Jas. iii 2). David's 
resolution to "keep the door of his lips" 
would have a chastening influence over both 
his thoughts and acts. 

Ver. 4. — Concerning the works of man; 
i.e. " with respect to the actions of ordinary 



life" — here called "tlie works of Adam"— 
i.e. of the natural man. By the word of thy 
lips I have kept me from the paths of the 
destroyer. By attending to thy Law, and 
following it (see Ps. cxix. 11), I have re- 
frained myself from sin, and avoided the 
wicked courses of the violent (oomp. 1 Sam. 
xxiv. 4—10). 

Ver. 5.— Hold thou up my goings in thy 
paths, that my footsteps slip not. So De 
Wette and Bosenmiiller; but most recent 
critics prefer to consider the words as an 
assertion rather than a prayer, and translate, 
"My steps have held fast to thy paths: 
[therefore] my feet have not been moved " 
(Kay, Hengstenberg, Alexander, Cheyne, 
' Speaker's Commentary,' Revised Version). 

Ver. 6. — I have called upon thee, for thou 
wilt hear me, God (comp. vers. 1, 2). 
Having established, as the ground of his 
claim to be heard of God, his own sincerity, 
steadfastness, and virtuous course in litis 
(vers. 3 — 5), David now recurs to his 
original intent, and resumes his "prayer." 
He is sure that God will hear him, since his 
piayer is grounded on "right." Incline 
thine ear unto me, and hear my speech 
(comp. Pss. Ixxi. 2 ; Izxxviii. 2, etc.). 

Ver. 7. — Show thy marvellous loving 
kindness, thou that savest by thy right 
hand them which put their trust in thea 
from those that rise up against them. It is 
uncertain to which clause of the sentence 
the word ''|J*!3'a belongs. Its position seems 
to attach it rather to those who resist 
God than to those who trust in him. See 
the marginal version, which has, thou that 
savest them which trust in thee from those 
that rise up against thy right hand. But 
the rendering in the text of the Authorized 
Version ia preferred by most writers. 

Ver. 8. — Keep me as the apple of the eye 
(comp. Deut. zxxii. 10, where the same 
simile is used). Here, however, the expres- 
sion employed is still more tender and more 
practical : " Keep me," says David, " as the 
apple, daughter of the eye." Hide me under 
the shadow of thy wings. This seems also 
to be a reminiscence of Deuteronomy, where, 
after the mention of the " apple of the eye," 
the writer continues, " As an eagle stirreth 
up her nest, flutttreth over her young, 
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, 
beareth them on her wings : so the Lord 
alone did lead him, and there was no strange 
god with him" (Deut. xxxii. 11, 12; oomp. 
furtlier Pss. xxxvi. 7 ; Ivii. 1 ; Ixiii. 8 ; xoi. 4). 

Ver. 9. — From the wicked that oppress 
me ; or, lay me waste — treat me as invaders 
treat an enemy's territory (see laa. xv, 1). 
From my deadly enemies, who compass me 
about ; literally, my enemies in <ou2— those 
who in heart and mind are wholly set against 
me. When hunted by Saul upon the moun- 



PB. XTIL 1 — 15.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



101 



tains, David was often " compassed about" 
with foes (1 Sam. zxiii. 14, 15, 26; xxvl 
20). 

Yer. 10.— They are enclosed in their own 
fat (comp. Deut. xxxii. 15 ; Job xv. 27 ; Ps. 
cxix. 70). Self-indulgence has hardened 
their feelings and dulled their souls. An 
organ 'enclosed in fat cannot work freely. 
So their feelings cannot work as nature 
intended through the coarseness and hard- 
ness in which they are, as it were, embedded. 
With their mouth they speak proudly (oomp. 
PsB. xii. 3, 4 ; Ixxxvi. 14). 

"Ver. 11. — They have now compassed us in 
our steps ; rather, [/oltoioi'ng] our iteps, they 
now compasa me (comp. ver. 9 ; and see 1 Sam. 
xxiii. 26). They have set their eyes bowing 
down to the earth ; rather, they have set their 
eyes, to eaet [me] doien to the earth. The 
simile of the lion is already in the writer's 
mind. As the lion, before making his 
spring, fixes his eyes intently upon the prey 
— not to fascinate it, but to make sure of 
his distance — with intent, when he springs, 
to cast the prey down to the earth ; so it is 
now with my enemies, who have set their 
eye« on me. (So Dr. Kay, the ' Speaker's 
Commentary,' and the Revised Version.) 

Ver. 12.— Like as a lion that is greedy of 
his prey ; literally, his likenett [i»] a» o lion 
that it greedy to rend (oomp. Pss. vii. 2 ; x. 9 ; 
Ivli. 4). And as it were a young lion (kiphtr, 
» a lion in the first burst of youthful vigour ") 
lurkiijg in secret places ; rather, crouohing. 
The attitude of the lion when he is just 
preparing to spring. 

Ver. 13.— Arise, lord (comp. Pss. vii. 6; 
ix. 19; x. 12; xliv. 26, eta). Having de- 
scribed the character of the wicked man, 
and pointeil out his ill desert (vers. 9—12), 
the psalmist now invokes God's vengeance 
upon him. "Right" requires equally the 
succour of the godly and the punishment of 
the ungodly man. Disappoint him, oast him 
down; literally, get before him, bow him 
down; i.e. intercept his spring, and bow him 
down to the earth (see Ps. xviii. 39). Do- 
liver my soul from the wicked. This will 
be the result of the interposition. When 
the ungodly are oast down, t..e righteous 
are delivered out of their hand. Which is 
thy sword. A true statement (see Isa. x. 5), 
but scarcely what the writer intended in 



this place, where he is regarding the wicked 
as altogether opposed to God. It is best to 
translate, with the Revised Version, Deliver 
my aoul from the wicked by thy tvoord. 

Ver. 14. — From men which are thy hand, 
Lord; rather, from men, by thy hand, as 
in the margin of the Authorized Version, 
and in the text of the Revised Version. 
From men of the world; i.e, men who are 
altogether worldly, whose views, aspirations, 
hopes, longings, are bounded by this life — 
the "children of this world," as our Lord 
expressed it (Luke xvi. 8). Which hav« 
their portion in this life ; {.«. who have here 
all that they will ever receive, and all that 
they care to receive. And whose heUy thoa 
flilest with thy hid treasure; rather, with 
thy stores — the good things that thou mtikest 
the eartli to produce. There seems to ba 
some allusion here to the frequent worldly 
prosperity of the ungodly (comp. Job xii. 6; 
xxi. 7—13; Ps. Ixxiii. 3—12). They are 
full of children (so Job xxi. 8, 11; xxvii 
14). And leave the rest of their substance 
to their babes (comp. Ps. xlix. 10). No 
doubt this is often the case; but the ill- 
gotten gains handed on by the wicked to 
their children seldom prosper (see Job xxvii. 
14—17). 

Ver. 15. — As for me, I will behold thy 
face in righteousness ; i.e. " As for me, I do 
not envy the wicked man's prosperity. I 
set against it the blessedness of which I am 
quite sure. I in my righteousness shall 
behold the face of God, have the light of 
his countenance shine upon me, and thus be 
raised to a condition of perfect happiness." 
Moreover, I shall be satisfied, when I awake, 
with tiiy likeness. David had already 
spoken of death as a " sleep " (Ps. xiii. 3). 
Now he speaks of "awaking." What 
awaking can this be but an awaking from 
the sleep of death? When he so awakes, 
be says, he will be "satistied with God's 
likeness." The word used is the same as 
that employed in Numb. xii. 8, of the mani- 
feitatiou of the Divine glory to Moses — viz. 
temanah. David therefore expects to see, 
on awaking, a similar manifestation. He 
will have the enjoyment of the "beatilio 
vision," if not in the Christian sense, at 
any rate in a true and real sense, and one 
that wiU wholly " satisfy " him. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver V&.— True satisfaction. "Asforme . . . thy likeness" "I shaU be satisfied." 
This is a great and bold thing to say. It implies one of two things— either a low 
.tandard of satisfaction, a poor measure of what it takes to satisfy a human soul ; or 
elM a prospect beyond this world. If only a question of lovjer wants-" What shall I 
eat . drink ? Wherewithal Ise clothed ? what wages shaU I earn ? what holidays and 
amusements secure ? "-then if your desires be temperate, you may easily say," I riiaU 
be satisfied." But if it be a question of your soul, life, whole being, with »U high. 



108 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvii. 1— 15. 

deep, partially developed capacities for happiness and blessedness, — then it is not in 
this world that satisfaction is possible. Earth might be bankrupt, and yet leave your 
soul, your inner immortal self, starving (Matt. xvi. 26). 

I. The satisfaction desibed and expected — ardently desired and confidently 
expected (the Hebrew implies both ; in the margin of the Revised Version, " Let me "). 
To behold God's face in righteousness ; to awake from the dream of life, from the sleep 
of death, to the nality of his presence, the sight of his unveiled glory. We are met 
here by one of those apparent contradictions in Scripture, which are always rich in 
deep meaning and instruction. On one hand, it is declared that to see Ood is 
impossible. He is " the King immortal, invisible " (1 Tim. i. 17 ; vi. 16). " &od is a 
Spirit," the Infinite Spirit ; and how can spirit become visible to sense ? On the other 
hand, our Saviour promises that " the pure in heart shall see God." Of Moses it 
was said, " The similitude [or ' form,' ' image,' — the same word as in the text] of the 
Lord shall he behold " (Numb. xii. 8). Isaiah tells us how, in vision, he beheld the 
Lord on his throne (Isa. vi.). Ezeklel, Daniel, and St. John had similar visions. 
Visions, it is true; but visions that stood for that infinitely glorious reality of which 
the Lord said to Moses, "There shall be no man see me, and live" (Exod. xxxiii. 20). 
The explanation of this seeming contradiction is found in John i. 18. All thosa 
glorious manifestations, as well as the occasions on which a Divine angel appeared, as to 
Abraham, Jacob, Joshua, etc., who is identified with the Lord, we understand to have 
been manifestations of the Son of God, the everlasting Word, crowned and completed 
by the Incarnation (John i. 14). He is " the Image of the invisible God " (CoL i. 15 ; 
Heb. i. 3). Thus this desire and expectation have for us as Christians a clearness and 
force they could not have for the holiest of the ancient believers. Even in the days of 
his flesh, the Lord could say, " He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." How 
much more in his glory I The Lord God and the Lamb are the light of the heavenly 
city. This does not exclude other manifestations of God as Spirit to our spirits ; like 
that of which Christ speaks (John xiv. 23). Some have thought there is a dead 
faculty in our nature, by which we should have direct intuition of God ; be naturally 
conscious of his presence, as we are of space and time. If so, this dead or sleeping 
sense, partially quickened by faith, shall awake ; we shall know, consciously, what now 
we believe, that " in him we live, and move, and have our being." Meantime, this is 
enough for faith to lay hold on, to rest in — we shall see Jesus our Lord in his glory. 
" To depart," is, for the Christian, " to be with Christ ; " " Absent from the body, at home 
with the Lord." We shall " see him as he is ; " " the Fulness of the Godhead bodily " 
dwelling in the Immortal temple of glorified humanity. And in him we shall see the 
Father, and come to the Father. Our fellowship will be " with the Father, and with his 
Son Jesus Christ." Ambition cannot rise higher than this. Thought cannot soar 
beyond this. Faith, hope, Isve, cannot desire more than this. 

" Then shall I. see and hear and know 
All 1 desired or wish'd below." 

Divines have been wont to call this " the beatific vision," q.d. the happy-making 
sight of God. But note that whatever be the forms of inconceivable glory in which 
God reveals himself to his children, the true satisfaction is in the knowledge of Ood 
himself (1 Cor. xiii. 12). As we look into the face and eyes of a friend to read his 
soul — thought, feeling, inner self — so the knowledge of God of which Christ says, 
" This is life eternal (John xviL 3), is of his character, holiness, truth, wisdom, 
infinite love to us. 

II. The QLOEions fulness and perfection of this satisfaction. 1. The end 
of the conflict between faith and doubt. How many a soul has echoed Job's cry 
(Job xxiii. 3, 8 — 10) ! The life of faith is a wholesome discipline (John sx. 29 ; 1 Pet, 
i. 8). But who could bear to think that it would last for ever? 2. The consciousness 
of perfect recmciliation to God, No shadow oifear, any more than of doubt. 3. The 
experience of complete likeness to our Saviour (Col. iii. 10). This is the point of 1 John 
iii. 2. 4. The perfect rest of the soul. Hope is compared to the " anchor of the soul " 
(Heb. vi. 19). But the ship is still tossed on the surges (Heb. iv. 9). 6. The elevation 
of our being and life to the highest pitch of love, knowledge, and joy. 

Conclusion. Turn this expectation and desire intn a question, a heart-trying test — 



P8. xvn. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 109 



Shall I he thus tatisfied t Ib my keenest desire tnued to this note ? Will this satisfy 
me ? — ^this and nothing else ? The presence of Christ, perfect likeness to him, and 
eterniil fellowship with him; to behold, without a veil, the glory of God in the face 
of Jesug ; to know God ? Believe it, no other heaven is promised or possible. If your 
life be not tending this way, you are misdirecting, misspending it. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers.! — ^16. — 2%« saint's appeal from the wrongs ofea/rthto the Bighteous One on the 
throne. The title of our homily on this psalm is in some respects similar to that on 
the seventh psalm. There, however, the psalm is an appeal to the great Vindicator 
of one unjustly accused ; here, it is the appeal of one beset with persecutors to the 
great Judge of all. Whenever or by whomsoever the words of this psalm were 
penned, it may not be easy to say. The probability is that it is one of David's.* If 
80, there is an abundance of incident in the record of his career by which it may be 
illustrated and explained. And, indeed, the surest (perhaps the only) way of inter- 
preting such psalms as this is to read them by the light of the Books of Samuel 
Anyway, however, it is an infinite mercy that we have preserved to us, not only psalms 
to be enjoyed at all times (such as the twenty-third and the forty-sixth), but others 
adapted for special times. For very often the saints of God have been so impeached, 
slandered, worried, beset, and persecuted, that the words of this- psalm have exactly 
fitted their case. And in all such instances, the people of God may find sweet repose in 
reading the words before us ; showing us, as they do, (1) that however greatly we may 
be wronged on earth, there is a Righteous One to whom we may make our final appeal ; 
(2) that he who sitteth on the throne is not only just, but is also One of " marvellous 
loving-kindness ; " (3) that therefore we may pour out our heart before him, and tell 
him our case — the whole of it, exactly as it is ; so that, though we are by no means 
obliged to adopt as our own every word in psalms like this, yet we may learn from , 
them to present owr case before Ood as minutely and exactly as the psalmists did 
theirs, — as varied as are the cases, so varied may be the words. 

I. Hebk IB A REMAEKABLB CASE LAID BBFOEE GoD. There are in it six features. 
1. The writer is sorely and grievously persecuted. (Vers. 9 — 12.) It has been well said, 
"Where would David's psalms have been, if he had not been persecuted?"* The 
experiences through which he passed may be studied in the records to which we have 
referred above. In fact, one of our most skilled expositors said to the writer that his 
own study of the Books of Samuel had thrown floods of light on the Psalms, had cleared 
up many phrases that before were unintelligible, and had shown the reason of many 
others that seemed unjustifiable. And since David was withal the poet of the sanctuary, 
he could and did put these hard experiences of his life in such words as should be 
helpful to the troubled and ill-treated saint in all future time. (For the exact signifi- 
cance of detailed expressions, see the Exposition.') Let believers follow David here, and 
whatever their cares and worries may be, let them tell them out, one by one, to their 
God, who will never misunderstand them, and, even if some expressions of emotion are 
imwise and faulty, will cover the faults with the mantle of his forgiving love, and 
fulfil the desires according to his own perfect wisdom. Oh, the infinite relief of 
having a Friend to whom we may safely tell every thing ! 2. David is conscious of hit 
vwn integrity. (Vers. 1 — 4.) This is by no means to be understood as a piece of self- 
righteousness (see Ps. cxliii. 2). It is quite consistent with the deepest humiliation 
before a holy and heart-searching God, that an upright man should avow his innocence 
of the guilt that false accusers may charge upon him. In fact, we ought, while penitent 
before our God for innumerable heart-sins, to be able to look our fellow-men in ths 
face with the dignity of conscious honesty and purity. 3. David knows there is a 

• The notes on Pss. xvi and xvii. in ' The Cambridge Bible ' (1891) should not be over- 

» See Ml. Fauesef 8 Horse PBalmicte,' 2nd edit., pp. 18, 25 (Nisbet) ; and ' The Life 
of David as reflected in his Psalms,' by Dr. Maclaren (Maoniven and Wallace), 

* Also several illustrative remarks in Spurgeon's ' Treasury,' in loo. 



110 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvii. 1—15. 



Judge on the Throne, a Judge of perfect righteousness — and One who will listen to his 
cry (ver. 7). He knows God as One who saves the trusting ones from their foes by 
his own omnipotent hand. 4. Henceto Mm David makes Ms appeal. (Ver. 2.) Note: 
Only one who is at peace with God, and who is among the upright in heart, could 
possibly make such an appeal as this, — for sentence to come forth from God's presence 
must be a terror to the rebel, for that sentence could only be one of condemnatioii. 
But souls in harmony with God can lovingly look to God as their Redeemer, their 
Goel, their Vindicator ; they will say, with Job, " I know that my Redeemer liveth ; " 
or with Cromwell, " I know that God is above all ill reports ; and that he will in his 
own time vindicate me." Yea, they can call on God to do this, leaving in his hand* 
the time and the way of doing it (cf. 1 John iii. 21, 22). 6. With the appeal, David joint 
fervent supplication. (1) With regard to his enemies. That God would arise, i.9. 
interpose in the way of providential aid; that he would cast down the wicked from 
their high pretensions, and disappoint them, ».«. prevent them — be beforehand with 
them, and frustrate their evil designs ere they attempt to carry them out. (2) With 
regard to himself, (a) That God would deliver him out of their hand. (6) That God 
would hold up his goings in the right way. (c) That God would keep him (a) as the 
apple of the eye (literally, " the little man," " the daughter of the eye ") — an exquisitely 
beautiful figure, admirably adapted to be the basis of an address to the young on God's 
care in the structure of the eye ; (;3) as a hen gathereth her brood under her wings — 
another figure of marvellous tenderness * (Pss. xxxvi. 7 ; IviL 1 ; Ixi. 4 ; xci. 4 ; Matt, 
xxiii. 37). Nor let it be unnoticed that for all this, David uttered a "piercing cry" 
(for so the word in the first verse signifies). 6. David remembers that, after all, he has 
no reason to envy Ms persecutors ; that, after all, it is far better to know God as his 
God, and to have him as a Refuge, than to have all the ease, comfort, and wealth 
which this world can give. And this brings us to note — 

II. That, eemaekable as the psalmist's case is, it peesbnts to tjs a still 
MOEB eemaekable CONTRAST.' (Ver. 14.) How much forco is there in the expression, 
" As for me " (cf Ps. Iv. 16) ! Note : Amid all the confusion, strife, and whirl of earth, 
each man has a distinctive individuality, which is all his own, and is never confounded 
with another's (Gal. vi. 5 ; Isa. xl. 27). No one has a right to think he is lost in the 
crowd (2 Tim. ii. 19 ; Rev. ii. 17 ; Isa. xhii. 1 ; Luke xii. 6, 7). Bach one has a relation 
to God entirely his own. The had may mingle with the good, but are never con- 
founded with them. Not one grain of wheat is by mistake cast into the fire, nor yet 
one of the tares gathered into the gamer. All that is momentous in hope, character, 
relation, security, destiny, gathers round the individual. Bach one has an •' As for me." 
In the psalm before us there are indications of six points of difference between David 
and his enemies ; so vital are they, that not all the distress which he suffers from them 
could make him desire to change places with them. 1. He is right ; they are in the wrong. 
(Ver. 1.) As we have before said, the writer by no means claims to be perfect, but he 
knows that he has chosen the side of righteousness, and is sincerely anxious to walk 
according thereto ; he walks in his integrity, though he may be conscious of coming 
far short of his own ideal. But as for his enemies, to be in the right is no concern of 
theirs ! Their's is might against right. Note : Happy is the man who sees infinite 
honour in being right, however much it may cost him ! 2. Qod is to him a Defender ; 
to them he is a Judge — to condemn them and put them to shame. This is the ground- 
tone of the psalm. The throne of the great Btemal is to the psalmist one of grace, 
mercy, and love ; but to his enemies, it appears to shoot forth devouring flame. Note ; 
God will seem to us according to our state before him (see Ps. xviii. 25, 26). 3. The 
psalmist addresses Ood in confident hope ; they resist Ood, in proud defiance. The 
whole attitude of David's enemies was one of proud self-confidence : " Our tongues are 
our own : who is Lord over us ? " Hence : 4. T%e throne of righteousness, which was the 
safely of David, was the peril of his persecutors. His joy was their dread. Wicked 

' See remarks of Hupfeld, Wordsworth, and Briggs, in Schaff s Lange, in loo. 

' The structure of these verses is difficult. See notes thereon by Bishop Perowne and 
Mr. Briggs ; and above all, the priceless treatise of John Howe, on 'The Blessedness of the 
EighteouB,' which treats the last verse of this psalm with unapproaohed grandeur. Helpful 
and illuetnitive notes thereon will also be found in the edition of the Psalter published 
by the E.T.S. (1891). 



w. xvn. 1— 16.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. Ill 

men are afraid of God ; and it is saddening to reflect that the guilt of an uneasy 
conscience projects its own dark shadow on the face of infinite love 1 5. David had 
an eternal portion in his Ood ; they lived only for this life. He calls them (ver. 14) 
" men of the world " (of. Hebrew original). David could say, " Thou art my Portion, O 
God ; " but with them their all was laid up here. When they depart hence, they will 
leave behind them all their treasures ; but David would go, at death, to the enjoyment 
of his. Hence: 6. The outlook of the psalmist was full of gladness ; theirs,full of gloom. 
How blissful the anticipation in the one case 1 (1) A glorious vision. " I shall behold 
thy face in righteousness." Whether the writer thought of a bodily vision of Jehovah's 
form, or of a spiritual vision of the invisible glory, we cannot say. At any rate, know- 
ing even now the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, we can forecast the ecstatic 
rapture which we shall feel when he shall be manifested, and we shall be like him, 
because we shall see h\ia as he is\ (2) A glorious transformation. "When I awake, 
with thy likeness," t.e. with possessing it (otherwise the phrase would be a tautology). 
As Watts beautifully puts it — 

"I sliall behold thy blissful face, 
And stand complete in rigliteonaness." 

^3) Entire tatisfaetion therein ; i.e. both with the vision and with the conformation. 
Yes 1 There will be full and complete realization of the glory which now we see 
only "as through a glass darkly." And this will be in the awakening (cf. Ps. 
xlix. 14, "The upright ...inthe morning"). The state after death has been viewed 
in three aspects, (o) As a slumbrous state in the under-world, from which there was 
no awaking. This was the pagan view. (6) As a slumbrous state in the under- 
world, but with the hope of an awaking " in the morning." This was the Hebrew 
conception, (c) To the Christian, however, the state after death is — " Absent from the 
body, at home with the Lord " (2 Cor. v. 8, Eevised Version). The glory, however, 
will be completed at the resurrection (Col. iii. 4, Eevised Version). But how different 
the outlook of the wicked ! (Matt. vii. 13, 14 ; Phil. iii. 19 ; Luke xvL 22, 23 ; xii. 21 ; 
xiii. 28). Well may preachers plead agonizingly with their hearers to choose life rather 
than death (Heb. xi. 25, 26) I Little will the godly think of past sorrow when they 
have their recompense in heaven 1 Small comfort will earth's wealth give to those 
who miss heaven I — 0. 

Vers. 1 — ^15. — Ute righteousnest of QocFs dealing. It is a common saying that " the 
pillow is a good counsellor;" and there is much truth in this. In the quietness and 
retirement of night we are able to collect our thoughts and to commune with our own 
hearts, as to the past, the present, and the future. And if we do this in the spirit of 
the psalmist, realizing God's presence and relying upon him for counsel and guidance, 
it will be well. Whether this psalm was written at night or not, we cannot tell ; but 
it contains truths fitted to soothe and comfort the soul in the night of trouble, and 
•that mark the progress of the light from sunrise to the perfect day. 

L That God will heab the bioht. This faith accords with the intuitions of 
the heart. We are sure that God must be on the side of right, for we feel that it is only 
when we are for the right that we are on the side of God. If we are true, much more 
must God be true. If we are just, much more must God be just. And this confi- 
dence is confirmed by Ood's words and deeds (vers. 4, 5). If it were otherwise, how 
could we trust God ? and how could God govern and judge the world ? 

II. That God will depend the faithful. Perfect righteousness no man can 
claim. But as regards spirit and intention, and even as to actual conduct, some can 
plead" integrity. Job could say, " Behold, my witness is in heaven " (Job xvi. 19). 
Samuel could appeal to Israel as to his uprightness, " Behold, here I am, witness against 
m% before the Lord, . . . whom have I defrauded, or whom have I oppressed ? " (1 Sam. 
xii. 3). So David called Saul to witness to his innocence. "Moreover, my father, 
know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand, and I 
have not sinned against thee" (1 Sam. xxiv. 11). It is a great matter if we can thus 
•pproach God with a good conscience (1 John iii. 21). But our integrity, after all, is 
nothing to boast of. Before men, we may be innocent, but not before God. Our 
trust must therefore be, not in our own merits, but in God's mercy. God's loving- 



112 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvii. 1—16. 

kmdness will shine forth in giving protection and deHverance (vers. 6 — 12) to those 
who love him and hope in his mercy. He will be their Befuge and Defence against 
every foe. With tender care and nerer-failing prayer, he will keep them from tba 
evil. 

II. That God will disappoint the pbbseoutoe, while he will abundantly 
BATI8FT THE DESIRES OP THE HUMBLE. (Vers. 13 — 15.) When David was pursued 
by the forces of Saul, and in sore straits in the wilderness of Maon, God in a wonderful 
way brought him deliverance (1 Sam. xxiii. 25). So we may expect that God will 
meet the enemies of his people, front to front, and oast them down. There are mar- 
vellous deliverances wrought by God in behalf of his children (2 Pet. ii. 9 ; 2 Thess. i. 
6—10). But God does far more than deliver — he satisfies. The heart is ever yearning 
•fter some unattained possession and enjoyment. " Man never ig, but always to he 
blessed." The children of this world have their desires, and, though they may so far 
be successful, though they may gain wealth, and have sons to bear their name and 
inherit their possessions, yet for Hi this they are not satisfied. Their blessings, through 
their own 'perversity, are turned to curses. But in bright contrast with these men of 
carnal minds, is the man who loveth God and worketh righteousness. "I shall be 
satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness." — W. F. 

Ver. 3. — The visits of Ood in the night. The psalmist seems to have been one of 
the children of Israel scattered abroad. From the midst of a strange country he looks 
with a wistful eye towards the far-off land of his youth. Tried and persecuted by the 
worldly and prcfane, he takes refuge under the sheltering wings of Jehovah, his 
tather's God. If he was not David, he has the r.pirit of David. There are foreshadow- 
ings and foregleams of gospel times, in the ideas as to "the world," the "loving- 
kindness," and saving power of the Lord ; and the blessed hope of satisfaction in God. 
This verse leads us to consider the visits of God in the night. 

I. Befbgshmsnt. The divisions of time have to do with man (Gen. L 5; Ps. 
dv. 20). 

"God has set labour and rest, 
As day and night to men euccesslTet 
And the timely dew of sleep." 

When night comes. It brings, not only relief from toil, but needed rest in sleep. In 
this we see the mercy of God. Like the sunshine and the rain, sleep is a common gift 
from God to men. Sleep also often brings return of health. How often is it said 
of some beloved one, with trembling hope, "If he sleep, he shall do well" (John 
xi. 12)1 

n. Proteotiok. We associate the day with safety (John xL 9). On the other 
band, night is the season when not only wild beasts, but lawless men, seek their prey 
(Ps. civ. 20, 21 ; Job xxiv. 14 — 17 ; 1 Thess. iii. 7). There may be dangers unseen 
and unknown (Ps. xci. 5, 6). Besides, there are perils from evil thoughts and the wiles 
of the wicked one. But come what will, God is our sure Defence. He visits us in love 
and mercy. He watches over us with untiring vigilance (Ps. cxxi. 3). The angel of 
judgment may be abroad, but under the shelter of the blood of the covenant we are 
safe. Even though God should say, " This night thy soul shall be required of thee," 
it will be in love, and not in wrath. Even should we be taken away in our sleep, it 
will be to light, and not to darkness. Hence we may say, " I will lay rae down in 
peace, and sleep; for thou. Lord, only makest me dwell in safety" (Ps. iv. 8). 

m. Inbtbuotion. God has access to us at all times. He speaks to us continually 
by day, when our ears are open ; but he also speaks to us, as he sees cause, by night, 
in dreams and visions, and when he holds our souls waking. Of this we have many- 
examples in the Bible, and who is there who has not had some knowledge of this_ in 
his own experience ? Dreams and visions are, for the most part, vain things ; but th"er» 
•re even dreams and visions that have been found to be visits of God and turning- 
points in life. But it is when we have hours of sleeplessness that precious oppor- 
tunities occur of communing in our hearts with God. Then there is not only quietness^ 
out solitude. We are alone with God, and if we recognize his presence and hearken to 
iis Word, we shall have cause to say, with thankfulness, " Thou hast visited me in the- 



w.xvn. 1— 15.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS 118 

night." Sleeplessness, if prolonged, if it becomes a habit, is a sore evil ; but sleepleu 
hours may be turned to great profit. We have then the opportunity for quiet thought, 
for self-examination, for converse with God. Perhaps the past, with its joys and 
sorrows, rises before us, or we are troubled about the present or the future ; but God 
is ever near, to counsel and to comfort us. " He giveth songs in the night " (Job zxzv. 
10). " One practical lesson at least may be remembered as bearing on this subject — 
the duty of storing the mind, while we are yet comparatively young and strong, with 
that which, in the hours of sleeplessness and pain, will enable us to rise up to God. 
A mind well stored with Holy Scripture, with good prayers and hymns, need never feel 
that the waking hours of the night are lost. We may do more, for the soul's true 
sanctification and peace, than many others in their own brief earthly pilgrimage" 
(Canon Liddon).— W. F. 

Ver. 15. — 2%r«« awakings. The Bible is a book of contrasts. Here we have a con- 
trast between the man of God and " the men of the world." We may bring out some- 
thing of its force and significance by considering the three awakings here suggested. 

I. The awaking from sleep. The psalmist says (ver. 3), " Thou hast visited me in 
the night." The sense of God's presence abides. When he awakes, it is not, like the 
worldling, to a life of selfish pleasure, but to a life of holy service. His first thought is 
not of self, but of God. His highest joy is in fellowship vrith God and in doing his 
work. His prayer is — 

** Guard my first springs of thought and will, 
And with thyself my spirit till." 

II. The awaking from the night of teodble. Darkness is the image of 
gloom ; light, of joy. " The men of the world " have few troubles, but they have fewer 
comforts. Their hope is in the things that perish. The godly man may be sorely 
tried (vers. 7 — 9), but he has " strong consolation." And even if gloom settles down 
upon him, it is but for a little, and when he awakes, thoughts that troubled him pass 
away as the visions of the night, and he rejoices in God's favour as in the light. Joy 
comes with the morning. 

III. The awaking from the sleep of death. "Here we see right into the 
heart of the Old Testament faith." In Ufa and death, God is all. Thus the soul rises 
to the hope of immortality. " God is not the God of the dead, but of the living." 

1. This awaking holds good of th'' whole being. The spirit is first, but the body next. 

2. This awaking opens up a glorious vision. There will be many and wondrous sights, 
but the first and chief of all will be God. " Thy face." So Moses (Numb. xii. 8) ; so 
believers (2 Cor. iii. 18). But here in a far higher way. 3. This awaking will bring 
complete satisfaction. Here we are never satisfied. This awaking into glory will first 
of all, and in the fullest sense of the word, bring satisfaction. " Thy likeness." Nothing 
less will satisfy. This is the hope of all our hoping. The joy of joys. " The rest that 
remaineth for the people of God." How grand must that possession be that will satisfy 
the soul, awiikened to the highest life and the noblest aspirings ! Not only will the 
redeemed be satisfied, but the Bedeemer also. " He shall see of the travail of his soul, 
and be satisfied." Study the awful contrast (Dan. xii. 2j Luke xvi. 25; John v. 
28, 29).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The prayer of the righteous. "In this psalm a servant of God, con- 
scious of his own uprightness, and surrounded by enemies, prays to be kept from 
the evil world and from the evil men who persecute him, and then from the dark 
present looks forward with joy to the bright future." The first five verses are as the 
porch to the temple — the introduction to the main prayer of the psalm. The psalmist 
pleads with God — 

I. Fob the bighteods oaosb. (Vers. 1, 2.) God is righteous, therefore he must 
be on the side of justice and right. When we pray that liberty may prevail against 
slavery of mind or body, that justice may triumph over all injustice, that truth may 
overcome falsehood, that the spiiit may be stronger than the flesh, and that religion 
may conquer all irreligion, we may be sure that we are praying according to the will 
of God, and may expect him to answer us. ^ 

PSALMS. 



114 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. .[pb. xvin -5a 



II. I» A BiGHTEOTTS sPiBiT. The prayer is offered by "lips without deceit," in al) 
sincerity, without any hypocritical pretence. The truthfulness, righteousness, of his 
spirit are here pleaded as a ground for his being heard. " If I regard iniquity in my heart, 
the Lord will not hear me." Integrity of mind is necessary to all true and successful 
prayer. He is in earnest about the righteous cause, and not making a pretence to it. 

III. On the oeound of a eighteous ohaeactbb. (Ver. 3.) 1. God had subjected 
him to dose scrutiny in the night. He had been divinely tested. " In the night," when 
good and evil thoughts spring up in greatest force, because of our freedom from out- 
ward occupation, and when the rjative bias discovers itself unchecked. Then God tries 
him, and does not find that his thoughts are dross, but gold. This is a bold statement, 
when put by the side of other statements, " If thou, Lord, shouldst mark iniquity," 
etc. 2. He keeps evil thoughts in subjection, even when they do arise. They do not pass 
his mouth, do not find expression, but are held back from utterance. We cannot 
help evil thoughts, but we can help the utterance of them. 

IV. He pleads also kightbous conduot. (Vers. 4, 5.) He has kept himself firom 
the common doings of men, from the ways of the oppressor and destroyer. This is the 
negative side of his conduct ; but it is a great virtue to resist the mass and run against 
the stream. The positive is that he had held fast in his doings to the Divine paths, 
and been steadfast in the right course. He has been constant, and steered by the 
heavenly pole-star. — S. 

Vers. 6 — 15. — Confidence in God. From the first to the fifth verse the prayer 
bases his confidence in God on four pleas. 1. He prays for the righteous cause. 2. 
In a righteous spirit. 3. On the ground of a righteous character. 4. On the ground of 
righteous conduct. Now we come to other grounds upon which he urges God to save him. 

L The compassion or God foe those who urgently cry to him. (Vers. 6, 7.) 
He calls, because God answers him ; and now he calls for a special exercise of mercy, 
because God saves those who find their refuge or safety in him. He was pleading 
according to the law of God's nature, and had, therefore, a Divine warrant for his 
prayer: "If we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us." 

II. tfis IMMINENT DANQBR. (Vers. 7, 9, 11, 12.) His enemies were the enemies 
of God (ver. 7). They would destroy him (ver. 9). They haunted his footsteps every- 
where (ver. 11). He prays, therefore, to be protected as the pupil of the eye is pro- 
tected, as if he could not be kept secure enough ; and to be hidden under the shadow 
of the Divine wings, where no danger could reach him (Deut. xxxii. 10, 11). 

III. The wickedness of his adversaries. 1. 'J'heir want of empathy and their 
hard pride. (Ver. 10.) " Enclosed in fat " is equivalent to " have become gross and 
unfeeling." 2. They were bent on the ruin of others as well as themselves. (Ver. 11.) 
3. They were fierce and furious in their wicked efforts. (Ver. 12.) Like a greedy 
lion, like a young vigorous lion lurking in his lair. 

IV. They were men who sought theie poetion in this passing life ; while 
HE SOUGHT HIS IN GoD. (Vers. 13 — 15.) 1. They were satisfied with the treasures 
of this world. With children and worldly substance, and were not worthy, therefore, to 
triumph over the righteous cause and the righteous persons. Deliver me from such 
worldlings. 2. He was seeking after the highest good. (Ver. 15.) " In righteousness 
let me behold thy face ; let me be satisfied, when I awake, with thine image." An echo 
of the eleventh verse of the previous psalm, which reveals his trust in a future life. 
" There is an allusion probably to such a manifestation of God as that made to Moses 
(Numb. xii. 8), where God declares that with Moses he will speak " mouth to mouth, 
even apparently, and not in dark speeches, and the similitude [rather, ' form,' the same 
word as here] of Jehovah shall he behold." — S. 



PSALM xvin. 

Ihis psalm has many oharnoteristios which 
distin guish it, not only from all that have 
prtoeded it in the eoUeotion, but from all 



EXPOSITION. 

those whioh are assigned to David by their 
titles. In the first place, it is tho longest 
of such psalms, extending, as it does, to fifty 
verses, or a hundred and fourteen lines of 
Hebrew poetry. Next, it is continuont, 



PS. XVIII. 1—50.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



116 



not broken into atrophea (Hengateiiberg). 
Thirdly, it appears, not only in the Psalter, 
but siso in one of the historical books — the 
Second Book of Samuel, in what seems to 
be a second editiou. Further, it is in itself 
a very remarkable composition, being dis- 
tinguished alike by " vigour and grace ; full 
of archaic grandeur, and yet free from abrupt 
transitions and thoughts labouring for 
utterance, such as make some of the earlier 
psalms difficult to understand" (' Speaker's 
Commentary'). Hitzig calls it "an un- 
rivalled pruduction of art and reflection." 

The authorsliip of David is generally 
allowed, and indeed has been questioned 
only by three recent critics — Olshausen, Von 
Lengerke, and Professor Cheyne. The period 
at which it was written is declared in the 
title to be " when the Lord had delivered 
him from the hand of all his enemies, and 
from the hand of Saul" — a date which is 
quite in accord with the contents of the poem. 
For while it celebrates his deliverance from 
perils (if various kinds — from a "strong 
enemy " (ver. 17), from a " flood of unsrodly 
men" (ver. 4), from the near approach of 
death (vers. 4, 5), and from a host of foreign 
enemies (vers. 29 — 43) — there is no allusion 
in it to domestic foes, and no indication of 
remorse for any special sin. The exact time 
cannot be fixed ; but it was probably soon 
after the series of victories described in 2 
Sam. X., and before the events recorded in 
2 Sam. xi. and xii. 

It is thought, with some reason, that the 
psalm was composed for a great occasion of 
public thanksgiving. Most likely it was 
proc*sional, and tlierefore not broken Into 
strophes, but continuous. Still, we may 
trace in it, (1) an introduction, or prologue 
. (vers. 1 — 3), which is an ascription of 
praise ; (2) a central mass, chiefly in a 
narrative form (vers. 4—45), recounting 
God's goodness ; and (3) a conclusion, or 
epilogue (vers. 46—50), which is mainly 
thanksgiving. The central mass is further 
broken up by the interposition into the 
narrative of a passage (vers. 19 — 27) de- 
claring the grounds of the favour and pro- 
tection wliich God had extended to the 
psalmist, and, so far, "setting forth tlie 
subjective principles on which the Lord 
imparts his aid " to his servants (Henprsten- 
berg). 



Ver. 1.— I will love thee, lord, my 
Strength. This opening is very remark- 
able. The verb translated "I will love" 
expresses the very tenderest affection, and 
is elsewhere never used to denote the love 
of man towards God, but only that of God 
towards man. The entire verse, moreover, 
is withdrawn from tlie " second edition " of 
the psalm (2 Sam. xxii.) — which was perhaps 
prepared for liturgical use — as too sacred 
and too private to suit a public occasion. 

Ver. 2. — ^The Lord is my Book ; or, my Cliff 
— my Sela' — an expnssion used commonly 
of Petra. And my Fortress (comp. Ps. cxliv. 
2). Not only a natural stronghold, but one 
made additionally strong by art. And my 
Deliverer. A living Protector, not a mere 
inanimate defence. My God, my Strength ; 
rather, my Bock, as the same woid (<8ur) is 
translated in Bxod. xvii. 6; xxxiii. 21, 22; 
Deut. xxxii. 4, 15, 18, 31 j 1 Sam. ii. 2 ; 2 
Sam. xxiii. 3 ; laa. xxvi. 4. It is the word 
from which the strong city. Tyre, derived 
its name. In whom I will trust (comp. 
Deut. xxxii. 37). My Buckler (comp. Gen. 
XV. 1, where God announced himself as 
Abraham's " Shield ; " and see also Deut. 
xxxiii. 29; Pss. iii. 2; v. 12; Ixxxiv. 11 ; 
cxix. 114 ; cxliv. 2). The Horn also of my 
salvation (comp. Luke i. 69). The horn ia 
tlie emblem at once of strength and of 
dignity. A " horn of salvation" is a source 
of excellency and might, whence " salva- 
tion " or deliverance comes to those who 
trust in it. And my high Tower (comp. Ps. 
ix. 9, with the comment ad Zoo.). It is re- 
marked that God, in this passage, receives 
seven epithets, "the mystic number which 
in sacred things symbolizes perfection" 
(Delitzsch). 

Ver. 3. — I will call upon the Lord, who 
is worthy to be praised. Not so much a 
simple future, " I will call upon the Lord 
at some particular time," as a future of 
continuance, "I call, and will ever call, 
upon the Lonl, worthy to be praised ; " 
and so — i.e. so long ns I call — shall I be 
saved from mine enemies (comp. Pss. v. 10, 
12 ; vi. 8—10 ; x. 15, 16, etc.). 

Ver. 4. — The sorrows of death com^asscd 
me. Here begins the narrative of David's 
sufferings in the past. " ' The sorrows ' — or 
rather, ' the cords ' — of death," he says, 
" encompassed me," or " coiled around me " 
(Kay). Death is represented as a hunter, 
who goes out with nets and cords, encom- 
passing his victims and driving them Into 
the toils. David's recollection is probably 
of the time when he was " hunted upon the 
mountains " by Saul (1 Sam. xxvi. 20), and 
expected continually to be caught and put 
to death (1 Sam. xix. 1 ; xxiii. 15 ; xxvii. 
1). And the floods of ungodlvmen m^de me 
airaii! literally, the torrents' of Btlial, ol 



11« 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[», xvn:. 1 — 50. 



0/ ungodlinsm. The LXX. have x^'/""^^"' 
iwo/tieis. Streams of ungodly men, the 
myrmidons of Saul, cut him off from escape. 
Yer. 5. — The sorrows of hell compassed 
me about; literally, the eordB of Sheol, 
or Hades. Death and Hell are, both of 
them, personified, and made to join in the 
chase. The ensnaring nets are drawn 
nearer and nearer ; at last the toils close in, 
the last cast is made, and the prey is taken. 
The snares of death prevented me ; or, came 
«pon me (Revised Version) — "took me by 
surprise" (Kny). 

Yer. 6. — In my distress I called npon the 
lord, and cried unto my Ood. At this 
supreme moment, when he is entangled in 
the snares, and on the point of being slain, 
the psalmist represents himself as invoking 
the aid of the Almighty. As Hengsten- 
berg notes, " While the manifold distresses 
are united in the beginning of the verse into 
one great ' distress,' so the manifold Divine 
hearings and helps are united into a single 
grand hearing and help"— and, we may 
add, the manifold cries into one great cry. 
He heard my voice out of his temple ; i.e, 
his tabernacle, since the temple was not yet 
built (comp. Pas. v. 7 ; xi. 4) ; or perhaps, 
" out of heaven " (Cheyne). And my cry came 
before him, even into his ears (comp. Exnd. 
ii. 23, where the same word is used for the 
" cry " of the children of Israel in Esypt). 

Yer. 7. — ^Then the earth shook and trem- 
bled; or, quailed and quaJced (Kay, who 
thus expresses the assonance of the Hebrew 
vat-tig'ash vat-tir'asb). The psalmist must 
not be understood literally. He does not 
mean tliat the deliverance came by earth- 
quake, storm, and thunder, but describes 
the discomfiture and dismay of his opponents 
by a series of higlily poetical images. In 
these he, no doubt, follows nature closely, 
and probably describes what he had seen, 
heard, and felt. The foundations also of the 
hills moved and were shaken. In violent 
eartljquakes, tlie earth seems to rock to its 
foundations; mountain ranges are some- 
times actually elevated to a height of several 
feet; rocks topple down; and occasionally 
there are earth-slips of enormous dimensions. 
Because he was virroth. God's anger against 
the psalmist's enemies produced the entire 
disturbance which he is describing. 

Ver. 8. — There went up a smoke out of his 
nostrils. Emissions of smoke are a common 
fe.iture of volcanic disturbances, with which 
earlhqualces are closely connected. The 
LXX. sive, instead of "out of bis nostrils," 
in his anger (Jv opyp avTov"), which is better, 
since the Hebrew prefix 3, "in," certainly 
cannot mean "out of." And fire out of his 
mouth devoured. Fire-balls are said to have 
accompanied some earthquakes, as especi- 
ally that one by which Julian's design of 



rebuilding Jerusalem was frustrated. Coals 
were kindled by it. The fire-balls above 
spoken of are declared to have scorched and 
burnt the workmen employed by Julian 
(Amm. Marc, xxiii. 1). 

Yer. 9. — He bowed the heavens also, and 
came down (comp. Ps. cxliv. 5). In a storm 
the clouds do actually descend, and the 
whole heaven seems to be bowed down to 
earth. God is said to "come down" to 
earth whenever he delivers the oppressed, 
and takes vengeance on their oppressors 
(see Exod. iii. 8; 2 Sam. xxii. 10; Fs. 
cxliv. 5 ; Isa. Ixiv. 1, 3, etc.). And dark- 
ness was under his feet. A deep darkness 
commonly accompanies both earthquake 
and storm. When God actually descended 
on Mount Sinai, it was amid thunders and 
lightnings, ami "a thick cloud" (Exod. 
xix. 16), elsewhere called " thick darkness " 
(Deut. V. 22). 

Yer. 10. — And he rode upon a cherub, and 
did fly. The imagery here transcends all 
experience, and scarcely admits of comment 
or explanation. God is represented as borne 
through the heavens, as he proceeds to exe- 
cute his purposes, by the highest of his 
creatures, the cherubim. Elsewhere (Ps. 
civ. 3) he sails through the sky supported 
on clouds. Yea, he did fly npon the wings 
of the wind ; rather, he sped sunfth/ (Kay). 
The verb used is different from that trans- 
lated " did fly " in the preceding verse. It 
is applied elsewhere especially to the eagle 
(Deut. xxviii. 49 ; Jer. xlviii. 40 ; xlix. 22). 
Ver. 11. — He made darkness his secret 
place ; i.e. ho hid himself amid clouds and 
thick darkness. In executing hia judg- 
ments he did not allow himself to be seen. 
God's action is always secret and inscrut- 
able. His pavilion round about him were 
dark waters and thick clouds of the skies. 
The original runs as followa : " He made 
darknesa his secret place — his pavilion 
round about him — dark waters, thick diouds 
of the skies." The whole forms one aen- 
tence, "his pavilion" being in apposition 
with " secret place," and the last clause, 
"dark waters, thick clouds of the skies," 
being exegetical of the " darkness " in the 
first clause. God's "pavilion," or "tent" 
(n3D), is mentioned again in Pss. zxyii. 5 
and xxxi. 20. 

Yer. 12. — At the brightness that was 
before him his thick clouds passed. The 
" brightness " intended ia probably that of 
lightning. The "thick clouds" are riven 
and parted asunder for the lightning to 
burst forth. Then come, almost simul- 
taneously, bail atones and coals of fire ; t.e. 
hail like that which fell in Egypt before the 
Exodus (Exod. ix. 22—34), when "thero 
was hail, and fire mingled with the hail " 
(ver. 24) — a fire which "ran along upon the 



rs. XVIII. 1 — 50.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



117 



ground," or some very unusual electrical 
phenomenon (see the commeut on Exodus 
in the ' Homiletio Commentary,' p. 208). 

Ver. 13. — The Lord also thundered in the 
heavens, and the Highest gave his voice. 
With the lightning came, necessarily, 
thunder, rolling along the lienvens, and 
seeming like tlie voice of God (comp. Job 
xxxviii. 4, 5). Hail stones and coals of fire. 
The phrase is repeated for the sake of em- 
phasis. The hail and the liglitning are 
represented as conjointly the ministers of 
the Divine vengeance. 

Ver. 14, — ^Yea, he sent out his arrows, 
•nd scattered them. God's "arrows" ure 
often spoken of. Job felt them within liim 
(Job vL 4). David has already said of them, 
tliat they are " ordained against the perse- 
cutors " (Ps. vii. 13). We may under»tand 
by the expression any sharp pains, mental 
or bodily, wliich God sends. And he shot 
cut lightnings, and discomfited them. The 
effect of the tempest of God's wrath is to 
" scatter " and " discomfit " the enemy 
(comp. Exod. xiv. 24). Instead of " and he 
shot out lightnings," our Kevisers give, 
and lightnings manifold, which is perhaps 
better. 

Yer. IS. — Then the channels of waters 
were seen. By "the channels of waters" 
seem to be meant the torrent-courses, so 
common in Palestine, especially on either 
side of Jordan, which convey into it the 
winter rains. These " were seen," lit up 
by the " lightnings manifold," having pre- 
viously been in darkness (see vers. 9 — 11). 
At the same time, the foundations of the 
world were discovered. The eaithquake 
(ver. 7) still continuing, the earth gaped 
in places, and the glare of the lightning 
enabled the eye to penetrate deep into 
the solid globe — so deep that it seemed to 
reach the "foundations." At thy rebuke, 
Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy 
nostrils (comp. ver. 7, "because he was 
wroth"). 

Yer. 16. — He sent from above, he took 
me, hs drew me out of many waters. 
While destruction thus came upon David's 
enemies (vers. 12 — 14), God's protecting 
band was stretched out to save David him- 
self, who was carefully "taken" and ten- 
derly " drawn " forth from among the 
"many waters," i.e. the dangers and 
diflaculties which threatened him. Some 
commentators see in the words used — " he 
$ent, he took me, he drew me" — a tacit 
reference to Exod. ii. 5, 10, and, by impli- 
cation, a sort of parallel between the de- 
liverance of David from his foes and 
that of Moses from the \?aters of the Nile 
(Kay, Hengsteuberg, 'Speaker's Commen- 
tary '). 

Ver. 17. — ^He delivered me from my strcnj 



enemy. This is generally understood of 
Saul. By the defeat of Gilboa, and its eon- 
sequences (1 Sam. xxxi. 1 — 4), God delivered 
David from the peril of death which hung 
over him bo long as Saul lived. And from 
them which hated me. David's enemies 
among the courtiers of Saul were powerless 
without their master. Many, probably, (ell 
in the battle; the rest sank into obscurity. 
For they were too strong for me. I must 
have succumbed to them had not God 
helped me. , 

Ver. 18. — They prevented me in the day 
of my calamity (comp. 1 Sam. xxiii. 13—15 ; 
xxiv. 1-3; xxvi. 1 — 4, etc.). But the lord 
was my Stay. God frustrated all the designs 
of David's foes, and prevented him frum 
falling into their hands. 

Yer. 19. — ^He brought me forth also into a 
large place (comp. Pss. xxxi. 8; cxviii. H) 
By " a large place " is probably meant opi-n 
ground, not encompassed by snares, or nets, 
or enemies in ambush. He delivered me, 
because he delighted in me. David now 
proceeds to explain the grounds of God's 
favour towards him.- He begins by summing 
up all in a word, " God delighted in him." 
He then goes on to explain the causes of 
God's " d( light" (vers. 20—26). 

Yer. 20. — The Lord rewarded me accord- 
ing to my righteousness. David has spoken 
of his " righteousness " already in P,4. vii. 8. 
We must not suppose him to mean absolute 
blamelessness, any more than Job means 
such blamelessness by his " integrity " (Job 
xxvii. o; xxxi. 6). He means honesty of 
purpose, the sincere endeavour to do right, 
such conduct as brings about " the answer 
of a good conscience before God" (1 Pet 
iii. 21). According to the cleanness of my 
hands hath he recompensed me (comp. Job 
xxvii. 9 ; Ps. xxiv. 4). " Clean hands " are 
hands unstained by any wicked action. 

Ver. 21. — For I have kept the ways of the 
Lord. Compare the statement of the young 
man whom Jesus " luoked upon and loved " 
(Mark x. 21), "All these commandments 
have I observed from my youth " (ver. 20). 
And have not wi«kedly departed from my 
God. It is observed that the word trans- 
lated by " departed wickedly " implies " wil- 
ful and persistent wickedness " (' Speaker's 
Oommenlary ') — " an entire alienation from 
God " (Calvin). Not even in the humblest 
of the penitential psalms, when David is 
bewailing his great offence, does he use this 
verb of himself. He is an example to all 
men not to indulge in a false humility, nor 
employ phrases concerning himself which 
go beyond the truth. 

Ver. 22. — For all his judgments were 
before me; i.e. "all his commandments'' 
(compare the use of the same word (OBtJiD 
throughout the hundred and nineteenth 



118 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. XVIII. 1 — 50. 



psalm). And I did not put away Ms statutes 
from me. The wicked are said to "oast 
God's commandments behind their back" 
(1 Kings xiv. 9; Neh. ix. 26; Ps. 1. 17; 
Ezek. zxiii. 35). David declares that be 
had never so acted; he had kept God's 
statutes always well befoie him, had borue 
them in mind, and ^iven heed to them. 

Ver. 23. — I was also upright before him 
(compare wliat is said of David in 1 Kings 
xi. 4 ; xiv. 8 ; xv. 5). Like Job, he was 
"perfect and upright" — "one that feared 
God, and esofiewed evil" (Job i. 1). And 
I kept myself from mine iniquity; i.e. 
"from the sin to which I was especially 
tempted." (Kay compares the {i/ttepiVtotos 
a/iapTla of Heb. xii. 1.) But what sin 
this was, we have no means of determining. 
All that appears is that David had an 
inclination to some particular form of sin, 
against which be found it necessary to be 
continually upon bis guard. 

Ver. 24. — Therefore hath the Lord re- 
compensed me according to my righteous- 
ness, according to the cleanness of my 
hands in his eyesight.. Having set forih 
the particulars of his righteousness (vers. 
21 — 2B), the psalmist returns to his previous 
general statement (ver. 20), and emphati- 
cally reatiirms it. 

Vers. 25 — 28. — A short didactic digression 
is here interposed, extending the principles 
on which God has dealt with David and 
his enemies, to mankind generally (vers. 
25—27); after which a return is made to 
God's special dealings with David (ver. 
28). 

Ver. 25.— With the merciful thon wilt 
show thyself merciful. The main principle 
is that God will act towards men as they 
act towards him. If they are kindly, 
gracious, loving towards him — ^for this is 
what the word ehtisid means — be will be 
kindly, gracious, loving towards them, and 
vice versa, as explained in vers. 26, 27. 
With an upright man thou wilt show 
thyself upright ; or, a perfect man (Gevised 
Version). The word is the same as that 
used in Fss. iv. 3 ; xii. 1 ; xxxi. 23 ; xxxii. 
6; xxxvii. 28, etc., and generally translated 
"godly," or, in the plural, "saints." 

Ver. 26. — With the pure thon wilt show 
thyself pure; and with the froward thou 
wilt show thyself froward ; rather, thou wiU 
tliow 'thyself adverse. The same root is not 
here used for the verb as for the adjective, as 
is done in the three preceding clauses. The 
reason is well explained in the 'Speaker's 
Commentary : ' "In dealing with the good, 
God shows his approval by manifesting 
attributes similar or identical in essence; 
in dealing with the wicked, be exhibits 



attributes which are correlative — in just 
proportion to their acts," but not identical. 
God cannot "show himself froward" — ^he 
can only show himself opposed, antago- 
nistic, an adversary. What the psalmist 
means to say is that, if men oppose and 
thwart God, be in return will oppose and 
thwart them. But they will act in a 
perverse spirit, he in a spirit of justice 
and righteousness. 

Ver. 27.— For thou wilt save the afflicted 
people ; i.e. the oppressed and down-trodden, 
who are assumed to be pious and God- 
fearing (comp. Pss. X. 12 — 14; xi. 2, etc.). 
Bat wilt bring down high looks (comp. 
Ps. ci. 5 and Prov. vi. 17). The faet of 
"pride going before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall," was noticed 
by the heathen of the ancient world, no- 
less than by the "peculiar people." And 
both alike attribnted the downfall of the 
proud to God. " Seest thou," says Herodotus, 
" how God with his lightning smites always 
the bigger animals, and will not suffer 
them to wax insolent, while those of a 
lesser bulk chafe him not? How likewise- 
his bolts ever fall on the highest houses and 
the tallest trees? So plainly does he love 
to bring down everything that exalts itself. 
Thus ofttimes a mighty host is discomfited 
by a few men, when God in his jealousy sends 
panio or storm from heaven, and they perish 
in a way unworthy of thom. For God 
allows no one to have bigli thoughts but 
himself" (vii. 10, § 5). But the heathen 
seem to have imaginrd tiiat God envied 
the proud ones, and therefore cast them 
down. 

Vers. 28 — 45. — As in the former narrative 
section (vers. 4 — 24) David seems to have 
bad liis earlier troubles in mind, so, in the 
present one, his troubles sinoe he entered 
upon the kingdom seem especially to engage 
bis thoughts. These consisted chietly of 
wars with foreign enemies, in which, while 
he incurred many dangers, he was, upon the 
whole, eminently successful. 

Ver. 28.— For thou wilt light my candle r 
rather, my lamp — the word genenilly used 

01 the lamps supported by the seven-branched 
candelabrum of the tabernacle (see Exod. 
XXV. 37; xxxvii. 22, 23; xl. 25). David 
himself is called "the lamp of Israel" in- 

2 Sam. xxi. 17. The lord my God will 
enlighten my darkness. The true lamp of 
David, which " enlightened his darkness," 
was "the light of God's countenance." 
While this shone upon him, his whole path, 
was bright, and he himself, reflecting the 
Divine rays, was a lamp to others. 

Ver. 29.— For by thee I have run through 



P8. XTIII. 1—50.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



119 



a troop. The military ke;y-note is at once 
struck. GSdud (yni) is a maraudlog band 
of light-armed troops sent out to plunder an 
enemy's country. David '■ ran through" such 
a "troop," when he pursued and defeated 
the Amalckiteg who had plundered and 
burnt Ziklag (1 Sam, xxx. 17). It is called 
three times a ggdM (vers. 8 and 15 twice). 
And by my God have I leaped over a wall. 
Shut (yi^ is a rare word for " wall," occur- 
ring in the Hebrew text only here and in Gen. 
xUz. 22, though used also of the walls of 
Jerusalem in the Chaldee of Ezra (iv. 
12, 13, 16). It may designate the walls 
of Jerusalem in this place, and David may 
intend to allude to his conquest of the 
stronghold of Zion from the Jebusites 
(2 Sam. V. 6, 7). 

Ver. 30. — As for God, Ms way is perfect 
(comp. Deut. xxxii. 4, " His work is 
perfect, for all his ways are judgment"). 
What God does, he dues effectually; he 
does not have recourse to half-measures. 
The word of the Lord is tribd; i.e. tlie 
promises of God are sure, thoy have been 
tested, and tried as by fire, and will never 
fail. He is a Buckler to all those that trust 
in Um (oomp. ver. 2). 

Ver. 31. — For who is God save the Lord I 
<|see Exod. xx. 3 ; Deut. xxxii. 39). As the 
one and only God, absolute confidence may 
be placed in Jehovah, who is able to protect 
and preserve to the uttermost all who serve 
him (comp. 2 Sam. vii. 2i — '.^9). Or who is 
a Book gave our Godi (comp. ver, 2; and 
see also Deut. xxxii. 4, 18, 30, 31; and 
Ps, Ixi. 2). 

Ver. 32,— It ia God that girdath me with 
strength (comp. ver. 89). And maketh my 
way perfect. Keeps me, i.e., iu the right 
way — the way of his commandments. 

"Ver. 83. — He maketh my feet like hinds' 
feet (comp. 2 Sam. ii. 18; 1 Chron. xii. 8; 
Hab. iii. 19). The Israelites reckoned swift- 
ness of foot, agility, nml endurance among 
the highest of warlike qualities. These 
qualities were needed especially in the 
pursuit of defeated enemies ; and the 
rapidity of David's conquests (2 Sam. v. 6 — 
10 ; viii. 1 — 14 ; x. 15 — 20) must be ascribed 
to them mainly. And setteth me upon my 
high places; i.e. establislies me iu the 
strongholds that command my extensive 
territory, and give me secure possession 
of it, as Zion, Babbath-Ammon, Damascus, 
Petra, perhaps Zobah. Rehob, and others. 

Ver. 34. — He teaoheth my hands to war, 
BO that a how df steel is broken by mine arms 
(oomp. Ps. cxliv. 1). "A bow of steel" is 
a mistranslation, since nfifefeiisfta (n^'inp) is not 
" steel," but "brass," or rather " bronze"— 
and bows of steel were unknown to the 
ancients. Compare the comment on Job 
XX. 24 (' Homiletio Commentary,' p. 342). 



Ver. 35. — ^Thou hast also given me the 
shield of thy salvation; i.e. in batlle thou 
extendest over me the shield of thy protec- 
tion. Nothing was more common in ancient 
warfare than for a warrior, while he was 
engaged in using his offensive weapons, 
especially the bow, to be protected from the 
missiles of the enemy by a comrade who 
held a shield before him. The Assyrian- 
kings were constantly thus defended in 
battle, and it was even common lor an 
ordinary archer to be similarly guarded (see 
' Ancient Monarchies,' vol. ii. pp. 30, 32, 38, 
for illustrations). And thy right hand hath 
holden me up, The " right hand " is always 
spoken of as the arm of greatest strength 
(comp. Pss. xliv. 3; xlv. 4: xlviii. 10; Ix. 
5, etc.). And thy gentleness hath made me 
great ; rather, thy condesoemion (Kay) — the 
quality in God which most nearly corre- 
sponds to humility in man. The word is 
not elsewhere used of God. 

Ver. 36. — Thou hast enlarged my steps 
nnder me, that my feet did not slip. Job 
often complained that God " hedged in his 
steps" (iii. 23) and "fenced up his way" 
(xix. 5), so that he had no liberty ol 
movement. David enumerates among the 
blessings which he receives of God, the 
freedom which lie enjoys (oomp. Ps. xxxi. 
8). He is at liberty to go where he likes, 
and also his footsteps "do not slip." This 
is rather an independent clause than a con- 
sequeikce. Translate, and my ankUs slip 
not. 

Ver. 37. — ^I have pursued mine enemies 
and overtaken them (seel Sam. xxx. 8 — 17; 
2 Sam. viii. 1—13; x. 6—18). Neither did 
I turn again till they were consumed. The 
greatest severities exercised by David seem 
to have been those against Edom (1 Kings 
xi. 15, 16) and Ammon (2 Sam. xii. 29—31). 
Otherwise he would seem not to have used, 
with any great harshness, his rights as a 
conqueror. 

Ver. 38. — I have wounded them that thay 
were not able to rise : they are fallen under 
my feet. It is remarkable that the nations 
which David subdued scarcely ever, wliile 
he lived, rose up again in revolt. 

Ver. 39. — For thou hast girded me with 
strength unto the battle. Having Ijoasted 
of liis own actions during the space of two 
verses (vers. 37, 38), David falls back upon 
his habitual acknowledgments, that all 
which he has done has been done wholly 
through the strength of the Divine arm, 
whioii has upheld him, sustained him, and 
given him the victory. Thou hast subdued 
under ma those that rose up against me; 
rather, thou hast bowed down mine adi:er- 
laries under me (Hengstenbi rg, Kay, 
Cheyne) 

Ver. 40 — Thou hast also given me tha 



120 



THE BOOK OP FSALMS. 



[p«. tviii. 1 — 50. 



neoks of mine enemies ; i.e. "thou hast made 
them turn their backs upon me in flight" 
(oomp. Exod. xxiii. 27, where tlie same 
expression is used). That I might destroy 
them that hate me. David must not be 
supposed to speak from personal animosity. 
He expresses himself as the king of God's 
people, bound to do his utmost to protect 
tUem, and to deliver them from tlie enemies 
who"hate" him only because he is the leader 
and champion of his countrymen. The 
neighbouring nations in David a time seem 
to have been bent on the total extirpation 
of the Hebrew people. 

Ver. 41. — They cried, but there was none 
to save them ; even nnto the Lord, but ha 
answered them not. It seems strange, at 
first sight, that the heathen enemies of 
David should " cry unto the Lord," i.e. to 
Jehovah ; and hence some have been driven 
to suppose that a victory over domestic 
enemies is here interpolated into the series 
of foreign victories. But it seems better 
to explain, with Hengstenberg and the 
' Speaker's Commentary,' that the heathen 
did sometimes, as n last re-sort, pray to a 
foreign god, whom they seemed to find by 
experience to be more powerful than their 
own (see Jonah i. 14). Jehovah was known 
by name, as the God of the Israelites, to the 
surrounding nations. Mesha mentions him 
upon the Mnabite Stone ; and Sennacherib 
declared, by the mouth of Eabshakeh, " Am 
I come up without the Lord against this 
place to destroy it? The Lord (Jehovah) 
said to me. Go up against this land, and 
destroy it" (2 Kings xviii. 25). 

Yer. 42. — Then did I beat them small as 
the dust before the wind (comp. Ps. xxxv. 5). 
The enemy were beaten anci dispersed so 
that they seemed driven as dust before the 
-wind. I did cast them out as the dirt in 
the streets. They were made no account 
of, treated with as little ceremony as the 
clay in the streets. Language of utter 
contempt. 

Ver. 43. — ^Thou hast delivered me from 
the strivings of the people. David now 
approaches his conclusion. In one verse 
he at once sums up his past deliverances 
and anticipates fresh glories. God has 
delivered him from the strivings of those 
who were hostile to him among his own 
people (see vers. 4 — 18), and has also given 
him victory over the heathen. In the 
future he will do even more. And thou 
hast made me the head of the heathen. 
The antithesis between " people " (or) and 
" heathen," or " nations " ('a;iJ), is unmis- 
takable. The long series of David's victories 
have made him "head" over the latter. 
This is less clearly seen in the history of 
David's reign than in the description given 
of the state of the kingdom inherited fiom 



David by Solomon (1 Kings iv. 21, 24). A 
people whom I have not known shall serve 
me. It is not clear that this was over ful- 
filled literally in the person of David, and 
we are entitled to explain it as a Messianic 
prophecy, parallel with that of Ps. ii. 8. 

Ver. 44.— As soon as they hear of me, they 
shaU obey me ; literally, at the hearing of the 
ear. But the meaning is that given in the 
Authorized Version. The words aptly de- 
scribe the conversion of the Gentiles (see 
Acts X. 34 — 48 ; xiii. 48 ; xvU. 11 ; xviii. 8, 
etc.). The strangers shall submit them- 
selves nnto me ; literally, the sons of the 
stranger shaU pay court to me — not neces- 
sarily a false court, as Hengstenberg and 
others suppose, but, as Dr. Kay explains, 
an "obsequious and servile homage." 

Ver. 45. — ^The strangers shall fade away, 
and be afraid out of their close places. 
Converts are represeuted as coming into 
the Church, not merely from love, but partly 
from fear. The kingdom of the Bedeemer 
at once attracts and alarms. So Isaiah 
says, "The nation and kingdom that will 
not serve thee shall perish ; yea, those 
nations shall be utterly wasted. . . . The 
sons also of them that afSict thee shall 
come kneeling witn thee; and all they that 
despised thee shall how themselves down at 
the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee. 
The city of the Holy One of Israel " (Isa. 
Ix. 1? -14 ; see also Mioah vii. 16, 17). 

Vers. 46 — 50. — This glorious and trium- 
phant psalm concludes with a solemn ascrip- 
tion of praise, blessing, and thanksgiving 
to Almighty God — partly recapitulation of 
what has preceJed (vers. 47, 48), partly 
additional (vers. 46, 49, 50). Terms of 
praise are accumulated, and the whole is 
made to culminate in a Messianic burst, 
where David is swallowed up in his " Seed; " 
and the " Anointed King " presented to our 
view is rather the antitype than the type — 
rather Christ Jesus than the son of Jesse. 

Ver 46. — The Lord liveth. God was 
known to Israel as " the living God " from 
the time of Moses (Deut. v. 26). The 
epithet exalted him above all other so- 
called gods, who were not living (oomp. 
2 Kings xix. 4; Isa. xxxvii. 4, 17; Dan. 
vi. 26). But it had also a very precious, 
absolute meaning. ( ^od's life was the source 
of man's. It was through God (who had 
life in himself) breathing into man the 
breath of life that man became a living soul 
(Gen. ii. 7). Hence " the living God " (Pa. 
xlii. 2) is "the God of our life" (Ps. xlii 
8). And blessed be my Eock (see vers. 1. 
31). In blessing "his Eock," David blesses 
God for his qualities of firmness, steadfast- 



P8. xvin. 1—50.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



121 



ness, and trustworthiness. And let the Sod 
of my salvation be exalted. " The God of 
my salvation " is a Cavourite phrase witli 
David (see Pss. xxv. 5; xxvii 9; xxxviii. 
22; li. 14; Ixxxviii. 1). Other writers use 
it rarely. When David prays that the God 
of hie salvation (i.e. the God who con- 
tinually saves liim and preserves him) may 
be " exalted," he probably desires that he 
may be praised and honoured of all men. 

Ver. 47. — It is God that avengeth me; 
rather, even the God avengeth me (comp. 
vers. 3, 6, 14, 17, etc.). And subdueth the 
people under me ; rather, the peoples ; i.e. 
the nations (comp. vers. 37 — 42). 

Ver. 48. — He delivereth me from mine 
enemies. The " deliverance " was especially 
from domestic foes (see vers. 17, 19). His 
foreign foes seem never to have brought 
David into much periL Yea, thou liftest 
me up above those that rise up against me. 
Tlie " lifting up " was above eneiuies of 
both kinds (see ver. 43). Thou hast delivered 
me from the violent man (comp. ver. 17). 
There is no reason to doubt that in 
both places Saul is intended. He was at 
once David's "enemy," and a "man of- 
violence." Were the question open other- 
wise, it would be closed by the statement 
in the title. 

"Ver. 49. — Therefore will I give thanks 
unto thee, Lord, among the heathen. As, 
in some sense, " the liead of the heathen " 
(ver. 43), David was bound to offer prayer, 
and praise, and thanksgiving " among 



them," if it were only to teaoh them by his 
example, and lead them on towards thp 
worship of tlie true God. And sing praises 
unto thy Name ; i.e. to thy Person — God 
being in his Name. 

Ver. SO.-t-Great deliverance giveth he to 
his king ; literally, he magnifies salutations 
to his king. The primary reference seems 
to be to tiie gracious message which God 
sent to David by Natlian when he hnd 
brought the tabernacle into Jerusalem, and 
purposed to build ii " house " worthy of it 
(see 2 Sam. vii 8—16). God had tlien 
"saluted" Djvid as "his servant" (ver. 5), 
and sent him a message of the most gracious 
character, even promising the kingdom to 
him and to his seed "for ever" (vers. 13, 
16). And showeth nercy to his anointed, 
to David. No doubt David is primarily 
intended, both by the " king " of the first 
clause, and by tlie " anointed " of the 
second ; but the combination of the two, 
and the immediate mention of the " seed " 
which is to reign "for ever," carry the 
passage beyond the psalmist individually, 
and give to the conclusion of the psalm, at 
any rate, a semi-Messianic character. As 
Hengstenberg says, "Psalms of this kind 
are distinguished from tliose which may 
more strictly be called Messianic, only by 
this — that in the latter the Messiah exclu- 
sively is brought into view, while here he 
is presented to our notice only as a member 
of the seed of David " (' Commentary on the 
Psalms,' voL i. p. 324, Engl, trans.). 



H0MILETIC8., 

Vers. 25, 26. — &od'$ revelation of himself is suited toman's capacity. "With the 
merciful," etc. ' We see what we hav6 eyes to see ; hear what we have ears to hear ; 
feel what we have capacity to feel. Suppose four listeners to the same [liece of music. 
To one, with a critical ear, it is a rendering, good or ill, of the musician's composition ; 
to a second, a strain of national music ; to a third, full of memories of childhood ; to 
a fourth, who has no ear for music, a tedious noise. Suppose a group watching a lamb 
skipping in a field. One is a painter ; another, a naturalist , another, a shepherd ; 
another, a butcher. Each sees something the rest cannot see. Perhaps a simple 
Christian coming by sees what none of them perceives — a reminder of the good Shep- 
herd, who gathers the lambs in his arms. As in outward things, so in spiritual. As 
with bodily sight, hearing, feeling, so with spiritual perception. He that has eyes 
will see. "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." Therefore the lesson of the text 
is a great and widely applicable truth— G'od's revelation of himself is suited to men's 
spiritual capacity. Different souls get different views of God. 

I. This is tbue of God's dbamnos. 1. They appear different^ to different eyes. 
Visit two homes, perhaps in the same street, in which there is similar trouble — sick- 
ness or bereavement, or failure in business, or sore poverty. In one, all is gloom, 
repinin'T, comfortless perplexity. In the other, there is light lu the darkness, a rainbow 
on the storm. To one sufferer God's ways are hard, dark, mysterious ; he is even ready 
to think them unjust. The other says, " I could not bear it in my own strength, but the 
Lord stands by me and strengthens me. God's will must be right. He cannot make 
mistakes or be unfaithful. He is my Refuge and Strength." So with God's govern- 
ment of the world and general providence. One mind fastens on the pam, sorn.u 



122 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvni. 1— 50. 

calamity, which every hour records — pestilence, earthquake, tempest, aud so forth. 
Another sees that the universal design and general worhing of all natural laws is for 
good and happiness, not evil ; that the main part of human suffering has its root in 
Bin ; that " the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord ; " and trusts Grod for the resi . 
2. God's dealings not only op^eor different ; tkey are and must he different, accordins; 
to the temper and attitude of our souls. To the soul that hows under God's hand, 
trusts his Word, clings closer to him in trial, it is "chastening" — full of mercy, rich 
in result (Heb. xii. 6, etc.). The proud, stubborn heart, that resents and rebels against 
affliction, is hardened by it, like Pharaoh. 

IL It is so with God's Woed. Come to the Scriptures in a cavilling, c: tical, 
hostile spirit, and they will teem with difSculties. Read them carelessly, scornfully ; 
they will be dull and lifeless. Search them, with an earnest desire to know the truth, 
with prayer for the Holy Spirit's teaching, with candour and humility; they will 
" talk with thee " (Prov. vi. 22), and unfold their secrets. Thou shalt hear God's own 
voice speaking to thy soul ; and find what the Thessalonians found (1 Thess. ii. 13). 

III. So IT WAS WITH OUE LoBD Jesus. Isaiah's prediction was fulfilled (Isa. liii. 2, 
3). Scrupulously religions persons, but blinded by self-righteousness, could no more 
see his glory than sceptics, hypocrites, or scoffing triflers (Matt. xiii. 14, 15). But his 
disciples — those who first l3elieved on him, and then lived in close converse with him — 
could say, " We beheld his glory" (John i. 14). 

Conclusion. So it is to-day. This is a universal law — What God is to you — what 
Christ is to you, shows what you are, and determines what you shall be. The gospel 
is an open secret, but still a secret, from proud, worldly hearts. The physician is for 
those who are sick and hnow it. The Saviour is for sinners who feel themselves 
sinners. The living water will not flow into a vessel turned upside down. Heaven 
itself would be no heaven to a heart full of love of the world, of self, of sin, and void 
of love to God. 

Ver. 35. — Our exaltation through Ood's gentleness. " Thy gentleness hath made me 
great." "Gentleness!" A most remarkRble and wonderful word to apply to the 
Aln)ighty Creator, the infinite God ! Nowhere else do we find it thus applied. As 
applied to men, the Hebrew word so rendered here means " meekness," " lowliness." 
We are reminded of our Saviour's words, " Learn of me ; for I am meek and lowly in 
heart." " Gentleness" is a very happy and beautiful translation. "Condescension," 
which the Eevisers give in the margin, would not be nearly so apt. It reminds us of 
Ps. cxiii. 6. But there the leading thought is the glory and condescension of God ; 
here, our exaltation through his gracious gentleness. 

I. The gentleness of God's providence is the sapeguaed or all oub wblfaeb, 
the condition of all human greatness and prosperity. Human life is like a flower, that 
can thrive only if fenced from storms and frosts. We are in a world filled with forces 
which, if they broke loose, would be our destruction. There is power sleeping in the 
winds and waves to wreck or drown all our navies ; in earthquakes, to overthrow all 
our cities; in blight and insect ravages, to destroy our harvests. Even the light snow- 
flakes, if they fell for a fortnight twenty feet deep all over our land, would turn it into 
a desert of the dead. On the other hand, how gently those immense forces work which 
minister to life ! How smoothly earth flies in her yearly circle ! No eye, or ear, or 
sense of ours can make the vapour rising from the ocean to fill the springs and water 
the plains; the secret ministry of the world of plants to the life of the animal world — 
pouring forth from numberless millions of millions of invisible mouths vital air, and 
removing what otherwise would soon poison and stifle us ; or the pulse of growth in 
bud and blade, leaf, flower, and fruit, in spring and summer, as the returning tide of 
life answers to the gentle sunshine. " He causeth the grass to grow," etc. (Ps. civ, 14, 
24, 27 ; 2 Cor. ix. 10). How gently the great machine works 1 How gently the sun- 
beam touches the eye, after its flight of over ninety millions of miles in eight minutes I 
How gently the force of gravity, that holds suns and worlds in their places, draws the 
child's foot to the ground and poises the gnat in the air ! True, nature has a stem 
side, by fixing our thoughts on which a gloomy view may be made out. But take in 
the whole scope of natural law and Divine providence. For one city overthrown by 
earthquake, how many have stood !-afe for ages ! For one shipwreck, how many proa- 



PS. XVIII. 1—50.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 123 



perous voyages 1 For a season of local scarcity, how many plenteous harvests I For 
one home in mourning, how many bright with health and love 1 — how many happy 
years, perhaps, in that very home ! In a word, our Saviour sums up all we can sav of 
the gracious gentleness of our Father's providence (Luke xii. 6, 7 ; Matt. vi. 26—30). 

II. The gentlbness op God's revelation of himself in his Wobd is our highest 
WISDOM. The Bible is a wonderfully different book from anything the wisest of men 
could have imagined as a revelation of God. Philosophers and men of genius, had they 
been consulted, would have agieed that it must be a book for the select few, not the 
multitude. The notion of teaching peasants, slaves, children, the deep things of God, 
would have seemed to them folly. But " the foolishness of God is wiser than men." 
He has given us a book for the cottage, the schoolroom, the sick-chamber, as well as 
for the college, the palace, the cathedral. A compilation of short books that look as 
though collected by chance, yet with wondrous living unity. Depth is concealed by 
clearness ; sublimity by simplicity. Its deepest, highest lessons are given in words a 
child may understand. No words are too homely, no similitudes too humble, if only 
they can point the arrow of truth, or wing it home to the heart. We read of God's 
eye, ear, hand, face ; his throne, footstool, sword ; of his remembering, forgetting, beins 
anstry, grieved, repenting, being well-pleased (look at Amos ii. 13; Mai. i. 6; Isa. 
i. 3, 14, 18; xlix. 15, 16; Eev. vii. 17). A long unlovely name has been invented 
by learned men to express this setting forth of Divine things in human language, 
"anthropomorphism." It is used as though a reproach, indicating the ignorance and 
narrowness of the sacred writers. Suppose tlie Bible had been a book to please philo- 
sophic critics, what would have been its value to mankind ? Suppose our heavenly 
Father had disdained to speak to us in our own language, how should we have learned 
that wo are his children ? The aim of his Word, his message to men, is not to make 
us philosophers, but to bring us sinners home to God. That teaching which best 
secures this end is worthiest of God. 

III. The gentleness op God is the encouraqbmbnt op our praters. It would 
seem reasonable for God to say to us, " Prayer is needless ; I know all your wants and 
desires. Presumptuous; I am the Judge, not yo\i, of what is best. Useless; you 
cannot change my all-wise purposes." Then we should have been deprived of the 
main comfort of life ; our sheet-anchor in trouble ; our closest, happiest, highest fellow- 
ship with our Maker and Father. Look at Abraham interceding for the guilty cities ; 
Moses interceding for apostate Israel ; Jonah crying from the sea-depths ; Peter pray- 
ing by the corpse of Doi cas ; Paul over that of Butychus. Bead the promises to prayer. 
Consult the experience of all Christians in all ages. In prayer, our weakness takes 
hold on God's strength. His gentleness makes us yreat 

IV. Lastly, God's gentleness is seen in his mercy towards sinners. The Bible, 
like Nature, has a severe side ; a severity solely aimed against that which is man's 
deadliest enemy — sin. It is possible so to read it that terror and judgment seem to 
overshadow mercy and love. This is to misread it utterly. It is to forget that the 
terrible judgments it records — such as the Deluge, the destruction of Sodom, the 
plagues of Egypt, the destruction of the sinful nations, the overthrow of Jeriisalem, of 
Babylon — stand as sure warnings, indispensably necessary, in the long thousands of 
years during which God has made the sun to shine and his rain to fall on the evil and 
unthankful, " not willing that any should perish " (Matt. v. 45 ; 2 Pet. iii. 9). Above 
all, the crowning revelation of God to man, for which the whole Old Testament law 
and history were the preparation, is " the meekness and gentleness of Christ." He is 
" the Brightness of the Father's glory, the express Image of his Person." All power 
is bis. That brightness might have 'olinded us ; that power crushed us. But "though 
he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through his poverty might be 
rich." His gentleness makes us great. He stoops to lift us to God. <7es«s, the Man of 
sorrows, the Friend of sinners, healing the sick, feeding the hungry, weeping by the 
grave, bidding the weary come to him for rest, taking the children in his arms, wash- 
ing his disciples' feet, led as a lamb to the slaughter, praying for his murderers, bearing 
our sins in his own body on the tree, asks us, as he asked his apostles, " Have ye 
understood all these things ? " And if our hearts can answer, " Yea, Lord," he replies, 
" He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." 



124 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xvni. 1—50 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. ] — 50. — The conqtteror's song of praise and hope. It is not our purpose, noi 
is it our province, in this section of the ' Pulpit Commentary,' to write homilies on 
specific texts; but rather Co deal with this psalm (as we have done with others) j,s a 
whole — for it is a unity — and to show how grand a basis it presents for the pulpit 
exposition of the provisions of " the everlasting covenant " to which allusion is made 
in the last verse of the psalm. The student and expositor might with advantage refer 
at the outset to Isa. Iv. 3, "I will give you the sure mercies of David," with the vievt 
of showing that the promises made to David do immeasurably transcend any merely 
personal reference ; that they include all the blessings which come to us through him 
who, though David's Bon, was yet David's Lord. There is no reason to doubt the 
Davidic authorship of the psalm. There are, moreover, more data than most psalms 
present, to aid us in deciding the approximate date of its composition. We have it 
lecorded in 2 Sam. xxii. 4 — 51. This gives us one historic clue to its date. Besides, the 
tone of triumph which is heard throughout it was scarcely heard in the later days 
of David, after bis great crime had darkened the remainder of his earthly life. Vers. 
19 — 24 could scarcely have been written after that catastrophe, even though it be 
urged that David writes rather of his administration as king than of his behaviour as 
a man. Regarding, then, the inscription at the head as showing us the occasion on 
which the psalm was first penned, and taking into account the prophetic far-reaching- 
ness of its closing words, we are called on to view it in a double aspect — one historical, 
the other typical. 

I. Let its sketch its contents ab histoeioally referring to Kino David and 
HIS CONQUESTS. 1. Here is a distinct reference to David as king. And while we 
should miss very much of the significance of the psalm, were we to omit the larger 
view to which we shall presenth refer, yet, on the other hand, if we omit the strictly 
historical application, our use of the psalm will be strangely incomplete. As, without 
the historic setting, there would be no basis on which to set anything further, so, 
without the larger view, there would be no adequate superstructure set up upon that 
basis. Combine both, and the glory of the psalm stands forth as combining inspiration 
and revelation in the contents of this triumphant song (see ver. 50, where the remark- 
able phrase occurs, " his king ; " i.e. God's king). David was God's appointed king for 
Israel, and as such he tunes his harp for Jehovah's praise. 2. With David at king, 
Ood had made a covenant. This is implied in ver. 50, where the mercies already 
granted are referred to as pledged " for evermore." 3. David had been plunged into 
fierce conflict. (See vers. 4, 5.) The study of David's life will furnish us with a host 
of facts in this direction. 4. Conflict had driven him to earnest prayer. (Ver. 6.) 
Again and again had he passed through this exptrience (see Pss. xxxiv. 6 ; cxxxviii. 
3). The believer's most piercing cries are sent upward to God, when he is beiuj^ 
pierced by the sharpest arrows of affliction. How is it that we so often need the 
pressure of sorrow to quicken us from languor in prayer ? Sad, — that prayiT should be 
forced out rather than drawn out! 5. Prayer had been followed by timely deliverance. 
This is set forth in poetry which is truly sublime (see vers. 7 — 16).' The Divine 
deliverance was seen : (1) In girding the assailed one with strength (ver. 39). (2) In 
rescuing him from his pursuers (ver. 16). (3) In causing the foe to be prostrate under 
the conqueror's feet (ver. 40). (4) In bringing forth the conqueror to liberty and gladness 
(ver. 19). 6. Such deliverance led him to triumph in God. It may be asked, however, 
" Is not such joy in God rather of an inferior order, when it arises because God has 
done for us just what we wished f " Perhaps so. But that is not a correct setting of 
the case before us. It is this : God had promised deliverance. David pleaded with 
God on the ground of the promise ; and he found the great Promisor true. Hence 
the jubilation. When piayers that are presented on the basis of God's promise are 
abundantly answered, gratitude may well burst forth in holy song (see vers. 1, 2). 
What joy to a believer to read in the trials and reliefs of life a perpetual revelation of 
the loving-kindness of God ! 7. The mercies of the past assure him of help i. the 

' In Bishop Perowne's notes, some beautiful explanations of the grand imagery of thi« 
1 will be found. 



PS. xTOi. 1— 50.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 125 

future. (Ver. 50.) " For evermore." Even so. So ofton has prayer been turned to 
praise, so often have we cast our burden at God's feet, and borne a song away, that we 
cannot doubt him now. Rather will we sing, "Because thou hast been my help, 
therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice." God has helped us, and vjill 
" for evermore." 

n. Let us kote its contents ttpioallt, as fulfilled and pulfillino in One 
WHO IS OP David's seed, tbt is David's Lord.' Although it is easy to explain the 
greater part of the phrases of this psalm by incidents in David's personal career, there 
are some which seein to tower above his or rny man's experience, and which can be 
adequately interpreted only as the psalm is .'eaiarded as having not only historical 
meaning, but also typical and predictive significance. How this manifests itself will 
appiar, we trust, from the present outlines. 1. The kingship of David was not only 
•personal, hut also typical and prophetic. That such was the case may be gathered 
from the last verse of this psalm, and also from a study of the following passages: 
2 Sam. vii. 12— IH ; xxiii. 2— 5; Pss. xvi. 8—10; Ixxxix. 20—37; cxxxii. 11—18; 
ex. ; Matt. xxii. 41 — 45 ; Acts ii. 25 — 36 ; xiii. 32 — 37. That gracious redemptive 
work, which began with the calling out of Abraham (Isa. li. 2, Hebrew), was being 
carried forward through David with a view to its fulfilment in the Lord Jesus Christ, 
who is seated on David's throne. And the glory of King David is infinitely surpassed 
in David's Lord ; while the promises made to David and his seed are made over to all 
who are in blessed covenant relation to God through the Lord Jesus Christ (Isa. Iv. 3).' 
2. The Lord Jesus and his saints are gone forth to war. (Ver. 34.) In a high and 
holy sense, as the kingship of David was typical, so also were his wars. One of th. 
early visions of the seer of Patmos indicated this. He sees One who speaks of himself 
as the Boot and Ofi^spring of David (Rev. xxii. 16) going forth conquering and to 
conquer (Rev. vi. 2) ; and, indeed, the entire Book of the Apocalypse might be called 
the ' Book of the Wars of the Lord.' 3. The issue of the great conflict is already fore- 
seen. The "for evermore " with which the psalm closes spans the whole of the present 
dispensation, and reaches forward to the time when Jesus shall have "all enemies 
beneath his feet." This is beyond doubt. The everlasting covenant is "ordered in all 
things and sure." 4. Ere this final victory, there will intervene many a struggle and 
many a rescue. While David's Lord is on high, controlling the conflict, and adminis- 
tering all, the saints are in the midst of the struggle. As individtials they are Called 
to " wrestle against the world-rulers of darkness." Ministers of the gospel are to 
" endure hardness, as good soldiers of Jesus Christ." And the Church, as a whole, will 
have to undergo many a severe struggle. At times it may seem as if the cause were 
all but lost. But the great Commander will ensure his army all timely rescue as well 
as final triumph. 5. All the enemies of Christ will be put to shame. (Isa. Ix. 12 ; 
Rom. xvi. 20 ; Ps. xviii. 40 — 42 ; also vers. 13, 14, 45.) 6. 2%« great King vnll receive 
the homage of the peoples, and be exalted above all. (Vers. 43, 44.) The expression in 
ver. 43, " the Head of the nations," can be fully accomplished only in Christ as our 
victorious Lord. "All nations shall serve him." 7. All who are now fighting on the 
King's side will share his victory. That which is the result for David is ensured also 
to " his seed " (ver. 50). As our Lord is not alone in the war, so he will not be alone 
when the war is over. His triumph will be that also of those who are his. 8. The 
result of all will he a new disclosure of Ood. (Vers. 1, 2, 30, 31, 46, 47.) Just as 
David's career was ever unfolding to him the faithfulness and love of God, so will the 
result of the Church's conflict reveal to believers how great, how vast, was the scheme 

' This is not the place to discuss the question of prophecy in the sense of prediction. 
The works of Dr. Patrick Fairbairn and Dr. Payne Smith should be consulted; also the 
late Dr. J. Pye Smith's ' Scripture Testimony to the Messiah.' A wise, instructive article, 
by Rev. C. H. Waller, in the Theological Monthly, August, 1889, will be found helpful. 
Those who will not admit the existence or validity of prediction must, if consistent, reject 
a large part of the New Testament as well as of the Old. 

' " David and David's rule over the nations are but a type and image of Christ, and of 
that spiritual kingdom which he came to establish " (I'erowne, in loc.). " If it be remem- 
bered that the second and forty-ninth verses are both quoted in the New Testament 
(Heb. ii. 13 ; Bora. xv. 19) as the words of the Lord Jesus, it will be clear that a greater 
thin David is here " (0. H. Spurgeon, in Inc.). 



126 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xvm. 1— o3. 

of mercy for men's deliverance, and for the discomfiture of the powers of ill. The 
glory of God will stand out revealed in the day of final triumph, putting doubts an( 
fears to flight, as his love stands forth vindicated in the glorious result of all. Anc 
the oft-repeated Scripture phrase, " They shall know that I am the Lord," will be fulfilled 
with a glory and grandeur beyond our utmost stretch of thought. 9. All thU is noic 
God's noblest prophecy, and will he hereafter the theme of the saints' nohltst song. 
Ps. xviii. may well be regarded as finding its exposition, its supplement, in Rev. v. In 
the psalm we have God's providences forecast ; in the Apocalypse we have God's provi- 
dences reviewed. In the former David's conquests are recited; in the latter the con- 
quests of the Eoot of David. In the former we have the song of the victorious David ; 
in the latter the new song of the victorious Seed of David. And by as much as David's 
Lord is greater than David, by so much will the new song of the redeemed transcend 
the noblest flights of Hebrew praise. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 50. — A retrospect of life. The sailor tells of the perils of the sea ; the 
traveller recounts the varied incidents of his career ; and the soldier who has passed 
through battles and sieges can speak of hairbreadth escapes and moving accidents by 
flood and field. So it is with human life. We have the power of looking back ; we 
can in imagination revive the past, and as scene after scene rises before us, our heart 
is thrilled with various emotions. And what we have experienced and recalled, we 
can set forth to others. The opening of this psalm is very touching and beautiful. It 
is as if the fire which had been burning within could no longer be restrained. The 
psalmist's pent-up feelings must find an outlet. Before and beyond all, he must let his 
full heart speak. " I will love thee, Lord, my strength." This may be regarded as 
the key-note, and it is touching how the psalmist dwells upon it, with variations, as if 
he could not let it go (ver. 2). Love to God was not an impulse, or the result of 
purposes, but the very habit and delight of his soul. Name after name, and epithet 
alter epithet, is pronounced, each having its own peculiar associations, and each not 
only expressing, but exciting his love the more. In this retrospect of life we have — 

I. The perils escaped. Various images are employed. We see how enemies 
increased and dangers thickened. In the midst of one terrible scene of tumult and 
storm, where all perils are gathered into one, the psalmist seems about to be engulfed. 
But in his helplessness, the hand of God from out of the cloud lays hold of him, and 
draws him forth from the great waters. His cry for help was not in vain. So let us 
remember with gratitude God's goodness. There are some that dishonour the great 
memories of life, because they forget God. Let us acknowledge the hand of God, not 
only in the crises of our life, but also in the countless instances in which God has 
shielded us from dangers that we knew not, and saved us from evils and mischances of 
our daily life which else might have been our ruin. 

II. The pkinciples evolved. Trials are a test. There are certain principles which 
we should do well to hold fast, whatevei' conies. 1. Ood's Fatherly care. Relation 
stands. God does not change his love, though he may change his ways. Through all 
afflictions he cleaves to his people, and his people should cleave to him. 2. The efficacy 
of prayer. There are infinite resources with God, but they are only available to us by 
prayer. We may not be able to see how help can come, or relief may reach us in ways 
difierent from what we expected ; but let us have faith in God's Word. " Call upon me 
in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee." To this David and all the saints bear 
witness. 3. Tliat all things are working to a perfect end. God is just, and will do 
justly. God is good, and he cannot will us aiight but good. Let us trust him utterly. 
"It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation of the 
Lord " (Lam. iii. 26 ; Rom. viii. 28). 

III. The blessings enjoyed. Light shines 'n the darkness. Strength is evolved 
out of weakness. I-'rogress is made in spite oi opposition. Peace is enjoyed in the 
midst of trouble. Hope is cherished in the face of difficulties and sorrows. Victory is 
assured over every foe. And why ? Because God is with his people (vers. 31 — 45). 

IV. The acknowledgments demandkd. (Vers. 46, 50.) The psalm concludes 
with a.joyous burst of praise, in which, with brief touches, scenes previously descriiied 
are recalled, and the rich fulness of the Divine goodness is set forth. There is personal 
thanksgiving for God's love and ndghiy works. But there is more. There is tht 



M. xvin. 1— 50.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. iiH 

acknowledgment of God as tlie God of all flesh — not only of David and of Israel, but 
of all nations. And there is the grand hope exiirtssed that, as God had brought 
the nations around within the dominion of Israel, so he would draw all the nations of 
the earth within the benign and blessed rule of Messiah (Rom. xv. 9). " In Christ, the 
Son of David, David's fallen throne hss lasting continuance ; and in him everything 
that was promised to David's seed has eternal truth and reality. According to its final 
prospect, the praise of Jahve, the God of David, his Anointed, is praise of the Father of 
Jesus Christ" (Delitzsch).— W. F. 

Ver. 35. — A Ood-made man. We often hear of what are called self-made men ; 
but here is something nobler by far — a Ood-made man. " Thy gentleness hath made 
me great." We learn from tliis text that — 

I. Man is capable op greatness. At first, man was made great, for he was made 
ja the image of God. But he sinned and fell. Still, the capacity remained. Hence 
there was misery. Ambition wrongly directed became a bane. Powers and cravings 
that rose above earthly things left the heart unsatisfied. To be great, man must be 
i-aised from his fallen state, and renewed in the spirit of his mind. Love is the spirit 
•of greatness ; service is its test, and power with man is its proof. He is the greatest 
who serves his brethren best in love. 

II. That God is able to make man great. It has been said that " some men 
are born great, some achieve greatness, and others have greatness thrust upon them ; " 
bat this is a low and false view of greatness. It is of the earth, earthy. True great- 
ness does not come from without, but from within ; it is not a thing of circumstances, 
but of character ; it does not depend upon the will of other men, but upon the spirit 
that dwelleth in us. We must be great in heart before we can be great in life. When 
God would make a man great, he not only gives him the right spirit, but submits 
bim to a process of education and discipline. God has already made many great. 
Think of the glorious company of the apostles, the goodly fellowship of the prophets, 
ihe noble army of martyrs, and the exceeding great multitude of the saints of every 
fcindred and tongue ; all these would acknowledge, with glad and grateful hearts, that 
they owed everything to God. Their confession would be, " We are his workmanship " 
<Eph. ii. 10 ; Rev. Iv. 10). 

III. God makes men great by his gentleness. Force may overcome force, but 
it cannot win the heart. If we are dealt with in the way of terror and wrath, our 
tendency will be to resistance, aversion, and alienation. Severity may be, at times, 
accessary, but it is not severity but love that conquers. Mark God's gentleness: 
1. In his manifestation of himself in Christ. 2. In the love of the Spirit in the Word. 

3. In the gracious discipline of Providence. We have in the life of David a beautiful 
«Kample of the way in which God makes a man great. In the Gospels we have the 
true doctrine as to greatness (Matt. xx. 26), and illustrative facts of the most convincing 
kind. See how Matthew was called ; how Zacchseus was raised to a nobler life ; how 
Peter and the rest of the apostles were trained to humble and loving service in behalf 
of their fellow-men. These, and such as these, will be hailed as truly great men when 
kings and conquerors, and all the " laurelled Barabbases of history," who have lived 
only for themselves, are forgotten. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 50. — TJie retrospect of a life: a sermon for the close of ihe year. "In this 
magnificent hymn the royal poet sketches in a few grand outlines the history of his 
life. By God's help he had subdued every enemy, and now, in middle life, looking 
back with devoiit thankfulness on the past, he sings this great song of praise to the 
God of his life." Divisions of the psalm: 1. The introduction, setting forth all that 
Jehovah is to David (vers. 1 — 3). 2. The record of David's sufferings and peril, and 
the mighty deliverance by which he was rescued (vers. 4 — 19). 3. The reason fur this 
deliverance, in the character of God and the principles of his government (vers. 20 — 30). 

4. The blessings which David had received in his life ; his own preservation and that of 
his race; help and strength m battle, rule over all enemies (vers. 31 — 45). 5. Joyful 
thanksgiving and acknowledgment of all God's mercies (vers. 46 — 50). The general 
aubject of the psalm is — ITie retrospa-^t of a life. The interest of s ich a retrospect 
liepends on the following conditions : — 



123 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XIX. 1 — 14 



I. Whether a mak has had a bistort or not. (Ver. 43.) Anything to dis- 
tinguish his life from the uneventful lives of the myriads who are born, pass through 
life, and die, and leave no trace behind them. But Moses and David, Paul and others 
gave birth to history, and have mingled in the greatest affairs of a nation and of the 
vporld, and have much to think of and celebrate when they look back. So of modem 
great men. They animated and created their opportunities. Have we made our 
lives in any way worth looking back upon ? Domestic history. Thinkers as well a? 
actors make history. What Christ has done. 

n. Whether a man has seen God in his life or not. (Vers. 19, 29, 32, 39.) 
To most men God has been only remotely related to their lives — a power at the back 
of things generally, but not occupying every single event and e-tperience of their 
existence. To David and all the great saints of the world, God was everything and 
everywhere in his life. God had anointed him for every work and every office ; and 
every event was a manifestation of his love and righteousness and power. The con- 
sciousness of such a past is very grand and elevating. Our life is rich or poor 
accordingly. Sense of God in common life and duties. 

III. Whether the life has been righteous or wicked. (Ver. 20.) We turn 
our eyes from a life that has been ill spent, and are filled with reproach and sorrow. 
If we know that we have lived a wicked life, we know that we are unworthy and 
guilty, and are self-condemned. Whether David wrote this psalm before or after his 
sin with Bathsheba, we cannot say ; but he affirms his righteousness in the most 
emphatic way. " He has kept the ways of the Lord, and has not wickedly departed 
from him." Such a retrospect is full of deep power and sense of triumph. 

IV. Whether a man has achieved his objects ob not. (Vers. 37, 38, 48.> 
Darid was a king, and had been in many wars and troubles ; but he had, through God, 
triumphed over all his difficulties and foes. How many of us fail, or only partly 
succeed, in the things we aim af, because we have been profane and faithless I 

V. Whether we have a future to anticipate, as well as a past to- 
remember. To some the past is all ; they have no future. But David had a bright 
future as well as a glorious past. " In thy presence is fulness of joy," etc. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XIX. 
The nineteenth psalm ia one of meditative 
praise. The psalmist, looking abruaJ over 
the wliole world, finds two main subjeds for 
his eulogy— first, the glorious fabric of the 
material creation (vers. 1 — 6); and, secondly, 
the Divine Law which God has given to 
man (vers. 7 — 11). Having thus poured 
out his heart in praise and thanksgiving to 
God, he turns his eye inward upon liimself, 
and finds many shortcomings (ver. 12). 
The thought of these leads him to prayer, 
and so the hymn concludes with a few 
short petitions (vers. 12 — li). 

Ebythmically, the divisions correspond 
to the changes in the thought. There is 
first a stately movement, continued for six 
verses, devoted to the glories of the uni- 
verse; tiien a livelier strain in longer 
(mostly double) lines, praising tlie Law of 
the Lord, and extending to five verses only ; 
finally, a conclusion in short, broken lines, 
limited to three verse*. 



The psalm ia generally allowed to be 
David's, and is declared to be his by the 
title. There are no internal indications by 
which to assign it a date. 

Ver. 1. — The heavens declare the glory ot 
God; literally, the heavens are recounting the 
glory of God— of El, "the Mighty One" — 
the God of nature (see Eom. i. 20). David 
is perhaps carrying out his declared inten- 
tion (Ps. xviii. 49) of "praising God amoni; 
the heathen," and therefore takes their 
standpoint — the ground of nature. And tha 
firmament showeth his handywoik, (On 
" the firmament," see Gen. i. 6, 20.) It is the 
entire atmosphere enveloping the eartli, 
in which the clouds hang and the birds 
move. Like the starry heavens above, this, 
too, "showeth," or rather, "proolaimeth," 
God's handiwork. 

Ver. 2. — Day unto day uttereth speech ; 
literally, poureth out speech, as water is 
poured from a fountain. Each day bears 
its testimony to the next, and so tlie stream 
goes on in a flow that is never broken. 
And night unto night showeth knowledge. 
Dr. Kay compares St. Paul's statement, 
that " that which may be knouitt of God " ii- 



P8. XIX. 1 — 14.J 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 



129 



manifested to man through the creation 
^Bom. i. 19, 20). A certain superiority 
seems to be assigned to the night, "as 
tliough the contemplation of the starry 
firmament awakened deeper, more spiritual, 
thoughts than the brightness of day." 

Ver. 3. — ^There is no speech nor language, 
where their voice is not heard; rather, 
there U no tpeeeh, there are no itords; their 
voice is not heard; i.e. the speech wtiioh 
tliey utter is not common speech — it is 
without sound, without language; no articu- 
late voice is to be heard. (So Ewald, Hup- 
feld, Perowne, Kay, Hengstenberg, Alex- 
ander, and our Revisers.) 

Ver. i. — Their line is gone out through 
all the earth. It ia much disputed what 
"their Kne" means. The word used, qav 
(1(5), means, ordinarily, a " measuring-line " 
(Ezek. xlvii. 3; Zeoh. i. 16, etc.), whence it 
comes to have the further sense of a termi- 
nus or boundary ; that which the measuring- 
line marks out. It is also thought to have 
signified an architect's rule; and, hence, 
anything regulative, as a decree, precept, 
or law (see Isa. xxviii. 10). The LXX. 
translated it in this place by (f flijyyor, " a 
musical sound ; " and Dr. Kay supposes 
"the regulative chord," or "key-note," to 
be intended. Perhaps " decree " would be 
in this place the best rendering, since it 
would suit the "words" (milUm) of the 
aecond clause. The 'decree" of the 
heavens is one proclaiming the glory of 
God, and the duty of all men to worship 
him. And their words to the end of the 
world. Though they have neither speech 
nor language, nor any articulate words, yet 
they have " words " in a certain sense. 
Millim is said to be used of thoughts just 
shaping themselves into language, but not 
yet uttered (Kay). In them hath he set a 
tabamaole for the sun. God has made the 
heavens the sun's dwelling-place, the place 
wliere he passes the day. There is, perhaps, 
a tacit allusion to the Shechinah, which 
dwelt in the tabernacle of the congregation. 
Ver. 5. — Which is as a bridegroom coming 
<out of his chamber ; literally, and he is as a 
bridegroom. The bridegroom went forth to 
niei t the bride in glorious apparel, and 
" preceded by a blaze of torch-light " (Kay). 
The sun's "chamber" is where he passes 
the night — below the earth; from this lie 
bursts forth at morning in his full gloVy, 
•cattering the darkness, and lighting up 
his splendid "tabernacle." And rejoioeth 
as a strong man to run a race (comp. Judg. 
T. 31, "As the sun when he goetli forth in 
his might "), The Prayer-book Version, if 
less literal, better conveys the spirit of the 
original. 

Ver. 6.— His going forth is from the end 
of the heaven. The poet, like other poets, 

FSALMS. 



describes the phenomena as thty appear to 
him. He does not broach any astronomical 
theory. And his circuit (i.e. his course) 
unto the ends of it ; i.e. he proceeds from 
one end of the heavens to the other. And 
there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. 
Many things are hidden from the light of 
the sun, but nothing from its "heat," which 
is the vital force whence the whole earth 
receives life and energy. 

Vers. 7 — 11. — The transition from the 
glories of the material universe to the "law 
of the Lord " is abrupt and startling. Some 
go so far as to say that there is no con- 
nection at all between the first and second 
parts of the psalm. But it is the law and 
order that pervades the material universe 
which constitutes its main glory; and the 
auiilogy between God's physical laws and 
his moral laws is evident, and generally 
admitted (see tlie great work of Bishop 
Butler, part i.). 

Ver. 7. — The Law of the lord is perfect. 
Whatsoever proceeds from G.-~d is perfect in 
its itind ; his " Law " especi^ Uy — the rule 
of life to his rational creatures. That 
salvation is not by tlie Law is not the fault 
of the Law, but of man, who cannot keep it. 
" The Law " itself " is holy, and the com- 
mandment holy, and just, and good " (Bom. 
vii. 12). Converting (rather, as in the 
margin, restoring) the soul. The word 
employed, mSshibah, is used of restoring 
from disorder and decay (Ps. Ixxx. 19), 
from BOiTow and afHiction (Ruth iv. 15), 
from death (1 Kings xvii. 21, 22). The 
Law, by instructing men, restores tliem 
from moral blindness to the light which ia 
theirs by nature (Bom. i. 19), and, as a 
further consequence, in many cases, restores 
them from sin to righteousness. The testi- 
mony of the lord is sure. 'Eduth — the word 
translated "testimony" — is employed espe- 
cially of the Decalogue (Bxod. xxv. 16, 21, 
22, 26; Numb. ix. 15; xvii. 23; xviii. 2, 
etc.); but may be regarded as one of the 
many synonyms under which the whole Law 
may be spoken of (see Ps. oxix. 2, 14, 22, 
24, 88, etc.). The Law is "sure"— 1.«. 
fixed, firm, stable — in comparison with the 
fieeting, sliiftiug, unstable judgments of 
human reason. Slaking wise the simple; 
i.e. enlightening their moral judgment. 

Ver. 8.— The statutes of the Lord are 
right, rejoicing the heart ; rather, the 
precepts of the Lord are right. Another of 
the many synonyms under which the Law 
may be spoken of (see Dr. Kay's preface 
to the hundred and nineteenth psalm). 
God's precepts "rejoice the heart" of the 
godly. They are not felt as stern com- 



130 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[pS. XIX. 1 — 14 



manda, bnt as gracious intimations of what 
God desires man to do for his own good. 
The commandment of the lord is pnre ; i.e. 
spotless, clean, without fcult (comp. ver. 7, 
" The Law of the Lord 's perfect "). En- 
lightening the eyes ; i.e. giving light to the 
intellect. 

Ver. 9. — The fear of the Lord is olean, 
enduring for ever. Hengstenberg explains 
" *li£ ^^^^ "^ ^^^ Lord " in this place as 
" the instruction afforded by God for fearing 
him." And certainly, unless we adopt 
some such explanation, we shall find it 
difficult to account for the intrusion of the 
clause into its present position. The Law, 
the testimony, the statutes (or precepts), 
the commandment (vers. 7, 8), and the 
judgments (ver. 9), are external to man, 
objective; the fear of the Lord, as com- 
monly understood, is internal, subjective, a 
"settled habit of his soul." It is not a 
thing of the same kind with the other five 
nominatives, and appears out of place 
among tliem. Hence it seems best, with 
Professor Alexander, to adopt Hengsten- 
berg's explanation. I'he Law, viewed as 
teaching the fear of God, is undoubtedly 
" clean " — t.e, pure, perfect — and " endures 
for ever," or is of perpetual obligation. 
The judgments of the Lord are true and 
righteous altogether. In "judgments" we 
have another of the recognized synonyms 
for the entire Law (Ps. cxix. 7, 18, 43, 52, 
62), which is from first to last " exceeding 
righteous and true " (Ps. cxix. 138, Prayer- 
book Version). 

Ver. 10. — More to be desired are they 
than gold, yea, than much fine gold. (For 
the difference between "gold" (3ni) and 
"fine gold" (td), see the ' Homiletic Com- 
mentary on Job,' p. 458.) God's Law is a far 
greater good to man, and therefore far more 
to be desired, than any amount of riches ; 
much more must it be preferable to honey 
and the honeycomb. 

Ver. 11. — Moreover hy them is thy ser- 
vant warned. This verse is a sort of connect- 
ing link between the second and the third 
parts of the psalm. Tnrough its subject- 
matter, which is still the Law of the Lord, 
it belongs to the second part; but metri- 
cally, and by the introduction of the person 
of the psalmist (" thy servant "), it belongs 
to the tliird. David feels that to him it is 
the crowning excellency of the Law, that it 
teaches, instructs, or "warns" him. And 
in keeping of them there is great reward, 
Kot only the reward promised in Exod. xv. 



26, or "the recompense of the reward" laid 
up for men in heaven, but a present reward 
"in the act of keeping them" (Kay>, 
Obedience, like virtue, is its own reward. 

Vers. 12 — 14. — A consideration of the 
Law cannot but raise the thought of trana- 
gressiou. Man " had not known sin but by 
the Law" (Bom. vii, 7), and he cannot 
contemplate the Law without being re- 
minded of possible disobedience to it. The 
psalmist's thoughts aie led in thiis direc- 
tion, and he ends witL an earnest prayer 
against "secret sins" (ver. 12), against 
" presumptuous sins " (ver. 18), and against 
sins of word and thought (ver. 14), ad- 
dressed to "God his Strength [or, 'his 
Eock'] and his Eedeemer." 

Ver. 12.-^010 can understand his errors? 
rather, lolio can discern (or, perneive) hit 
errors f i.e. all of them. Who will not 
overlook some, try as he iD*y ts search oat 
his heart? Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults. Those wliioh are bidden from me, 
which I cannot discern. 

Ver. 13. — Keep back thy servant also from 
presumptuous sins (comp. Exod. xxi. 14; 
Numb. XV. 30; Deut. xvii. 12). Wilful, 
intentional, deliberate sins are intended — 
Bucli as cut off from grace. They are called 
"presumptuous ones," being "personified 
as tyrants who strive to bring the servant 
of God into unbecoming subjection to them " 
(Hengstenberg). Let them not have do- 
minion over me (comp. Ps. cxix. 133 ; Horn, 
vi. 14). Then shall I be upright; or, 
" blameless " (iiiafios, LXX.). And I shall 
be innocent from the great transgression. 
There is no article in the original. Trans- 
late, and innocent of great transgression (see 
the Revised Version). 

Ver. 14. — Let the words of my mouth, anS 
the meditation of my heart, be acoeptablfr 
in thy sight. Nor let my doings only bo 
righteous ; let the door of my lips be kept, 
that 1 utter no evil word, and the recesseB 
of my heart be purged, that I think no evil 
thought. Lord, my strength; literally, 
my Mock Qys), as in Ps. xviii. 1. And my 
Bedeemer (comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 35 ; and see 
Gen. xlviii. 16; Exod. xv. 13; Lev. xxv. 
48; Euth iv. 4. Job six. 25; Isa. Ixiii. 9>. 
As applied to God, the word " Redeemer " 
(ht(\i) always means a " Deliverer " from 
sin, or death, or danger. 



HOMILBTIOS, 

Vers. 12, 13. — 2%e sainft prayer against sin. " Gleaasethou me." Natural theology, 
reveJation, spiritual experience, — these are the three successive spheres of thought 



PS. xn.. 1—14.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 131 

through which this wondrously beautiful psalm leads us. God in nature; God in 
Scripture ; God in the heart and conscience to which he manifests himself. And in 
this last sphere, reading the psalm with Christian eyes, we can see what the inspired 
psalmist " desired to see, but saw not " — Ood in Christ. First (as in Ps. viii.), David 
lifts up his eyes to the sky ; and as he beholds the scany host in its silent unswervin':; 
march, the moon walking in brightness, marking, as she waxes and wanes, the lapse of 
days and months ; the sun coming forth in morning splendour, accomplishing his 
appointed journey, and leading the seasons in his train, — the royal singer sees in 
all this a perpetual revelation of the glory of God, his wisdom, power, goodness, and 
unchanging law. Whether men attend to it or not, the revelation is there. 

" What though no real voice or sound," eto. 

Then the psalmist's mind rises to contemplate a higher region, in which a nobler 
law than the laws of nature reveals God's glory — the region of thought, duty, spiritual 
life. Compared with this, all outward beauty and order are but a passing shadowy show. 
" The Law of tiie Lord," eto. (ver. 7). Lastly, conscience opens the windows of the 
psalmist's own inmost soul, and lets the light of this glorious and perfect Law shine in. 
" In keeping . . . reward " (ver. 11). Yes. But is that reward mine ? Have I kept 
this glorious and perfect Law? If I have not wilfully broken and presumptuously 
despised it, yet has not my best obedience come immeasurably short ? "Who can 
understand his errors?" And then the lofty and almost jubilant tone of the psalm is 
subdued into lowliness, and it closes with prayer, " Cleanse," etc. In these closing 
verses there is progress and climax. (1) Secret faults, from which the psalmist prays 
to be cleansed ; (2) presumptuous sins, from which he prays to be kept ; and (3) great 
transgression, of which he trusts God will hold him guiltless. 

I. Seoeet sins. Perhaps St. Paul had this passage in his mind (Eom. ii. 12, 16). 
There are two sorts of sin, widely diflferent, which may be called " secret, sins." (1) 
Sins which the offender practises secretly, and carefully keeps secret ; (2) sins into 
which we fall unawares, and which are a secret even from ourselves. Of both kinds 
those solemn words are true (Ps. xc. 8). Not seldom, the searching light of the great 
day is anticipated, and a hidden course of sin brought to light, to the confusion and 
ruin of the sinner. Of all the sad sights that meet the eye, and well-nish break the 
heart of the Christian pastor, incomparably the saddest is when one who has lived in 
honour and esteem among his fellow -Christians, perhaps far on in middle life, or even 
in old age — active and prominent as a Christiau worker ; alas ! in some oases even 
in the Christian ministry — is suddenly discovered to have been secretly leading a 
dishonest, impure, or intemperate life (like a tree, hollow at the heart, suddenly 
uprooted). Such cases not merely grieve ; they astound. They give terrible point and 
emphasis to the question, " Who can understand errors ? " (for, you observe, the 
word " his" is inserted). Who can unravel the deceitfulness of sin, or comprehend its 
folly, or picture the inward anguish of a life of " secret sin," hidden under a surface 
of apparent godliness and Christian activity ? Evidently, however, it is the other kind 
of sins of which the text speaks — sins which God sees in us, though we see them not 
in ourselves. This is clear, firstly, because of the tone of intense sincerity pervading 
this psalm ; secondly, because the word here rendered " cleanse " means " to absolve," or 
" set free from guilt." It is the same rendered " innocent " in ver. 13 (Revised Version, 
"clear"). We must include, however, the idea of actual inward cleansing, by the 
Holy Spirit, of the thoughts, desires, and affections, from which such sins spring ; 
because, wherever God bestows pardon, he gives grace to" follow after holiness." Tiat 
such sins are sins, and need God's forgiveness, is plain from the fact that we blame 
ourselves on discovering them. "I was wrong ; I did not see it : I meant to do right, 
but I see I was very wrong." We failed to see what a larger exercise of charity, or 
humility, or sympathy, or care and attention, would have enabled us to see. We 
judged too harshly, hastily, ignorantly. We were absorbed in some agreeable duty, 
and neglected a more urgent but uninteresting one. How often we bitterly blame 
ourselves for what at the moment we never thought wrong ; perhaps even prided our- 
selves upon ! If we ourselves often make this discovery, what a multitude of sins 
hidden from our forgetful memory and imperfectly enlightened conscience, must lie 
naked and open to him who sets " our secret sins in the light of his countenance " 
(Heb. iv. 13) ! What need to pray, " Cleanse," etc. ! 



132 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xix. 1—14. 

II. Here ia, secondly, a class of sins reganling which the psalmist prays, not to be 
pariioned for having committed, but to be " kept back " — withheld, restrained altogether 
from committing them: " phesomptuous sins." The best commentary here, because 
the one we may suppose the psalmist to have had in mind, is in the Law of Moses 
(Numb. XV,, especially vers. 27 — 31). These are the sins of which St. John says that 
the true child of God does not commit sin (I John iii. 9). He has fully taught that 
real Christians do commit sin, and need forgiveness (1 John i. 9, 10 ; ii. 1). But not 
wilful sin — sin "with a high hand" (1 John v. 18). A chiH of God knowingly and 
perversely disobeying God, despising God's Law, defying Divine justice, practically 
denying the Lord that bought him, and doing despite to the Spirit of grace, is aa 
impossible supposition — a practical contradiction. Yet, how significant is it, thai 
David prays to be "kept back" from even such sins — restrained by a power not his 
own ! Ho even sees peril of sinking into abject bondage : " Let them not have 
dominion over me ! " These are the sins of which our Lord speaks (John viii. 34). 
The more willingly and wilfully a man sins, the more does he forge fetters for himself, 
and become " tied and bound." With profound humility and knowledge of his own 
heart, the psalmist feels that he has in himself no security. " Is thy servant a dog ? " 
said Hazael (2 Kings viii. 13) ; but he did it (Prov. xxviii. 26 ; 1 Cor. x. 12 ; Ps. 
cxix. 117). 

III. Great tbansgbbssion. What the psalmist humbly prays, he confidently 
hopes. That he may "absolved," "held guiltless," or (as ver. 12) "cleansed." 
This cleansing, as it regards sins actually committed, is what St. John calls being 
cleansed by " the blood of .lesus Christ" (1 John 1. 7); St. Paul (Rom. v. 9), "being 
justified by his blood ; " St. Peter (1 Pet. i. 2), " sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ." 
To forgiveness, the idea of practical holiness, actual purity, is added by the word 
"upright;" literally (as Revised Version), "perfect;" namely, with that perfection 
of which Scripture so often speaks — integrity ; whole-hearted sincerity. What may 
we understand by "great transgression," from which the psalmist hopes to be clear? 
It seems to correspond to the " sin unto death " of which St. John speaks (1 John v. 
16, 17). Hence was drawn the famous attempt to classify sins : (1) "mortal," or 
" deadly ; " (2) " venial," capable of forgiveness. The fatal mistake is in trying to 
judge of sins apart from the person who sins. What is a sin of ignorance in one may 
be a presumptuous sin in another. The sin of which one repents and finds forgiveness 
may in another be a sin against so much light and grace that it is impossible to renew 
to repentance (Heb. vi. 4, 6) — " a sin unto death." Let us not pry into that dark 
abyss ; but seek to keep far from its fatal brink. Only remember and be sure of this— 
sorrow for sin and desire for pardon and purity are a sure proof that no unpardonable 
sin has been committed. God " pardoneth and absolveth all them that truly repent 
and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel " — ^the message of his grace and love in Christ 
Jesus. To every one — whatsoever his sins may be — who can truly make this prayer 
his own, the Saviour answers as of old, " I will : be thou clean." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The voice of Qod in his works. There is enough in this psalm for 
twenty discourses. But in this department of the ' Pulpit Commentary ' it is not our 
province to dwell on specific texts, however attractive, but to indicate how by a 
honiiletic exposition of the psalm as a whole, it may be brought home to us for every- 
day life in the continuous unfolding of the Scripture. At the same time, the two divisions 
of the psalm are so entirely distinct that they call for separate treatment, as they open 
up to the preacher entirely different branches of thought and instruction.* There is 
no reason to question the Davidio authorship of the psalm, but it is so couched that 
from its contents there is nothing by which we can infer either its authorship or date ; 
and it so speaks to man as man, that it is of equal value by whomsoever or whenso- 
ever it was penned. We have in its first six verses a rehearsal of the voices of God 

' No expositor can well afford to overlook the mass of quotations on this psalm in 
gpurgeon's ' Treasury of David ; ' but he will need to exercise judgment in the use 
tliereof. 



PS. XIX. 1—14.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. lSi> 



in the firmament above. And we gather from the forms of expression that the writer 
was accustomed to speak of natural phenomena in the language uf his day. In his 
view the firmament of heaven spread out as a hemisphere above the "arth, like a 
splendid and pellucid sapphire, in which the stars were supposed to be fixed, and over 
which the Hebrews believed there was a heavenly ocean. The Bible was not meant to 
teach science, but to teach God. Science has to do with the matter, order, and laws of 
the creation. In religion we have to do with the great Author of all. And while 
we find the writer far enough away from our present conceptions of wiiat the heavens 
are, we find he is one to whom God bad spoken as Jehovah, the great I am — and who 
had been taught God's Law to man as well as God's utterances in nature. And as 
God's voices to us have become clearer than they were in the psalmist's time, by his 
revelation in Christ Jesus, so the "lory of his works has become amazingly clearer 
through the discoveries man has made therein ; and he will fall very far short of a 
suitable setting forth of the truths of this first half of the psalm, who does not utilize 
the recent discoveries of science as a pedestal on which to set, in clearer and fuller ways, 
Jehovah's glory 1 The expositor is bound to show how gloriously science helps religion, 
in furnishing him with new material for setting forth the greatness of God ! An 
unfolding of the verses before us will lead us along several lines of thought, with which 
we propose to deal cumulatively. 

I. There abb nattbal objects and facts hebe bpboified. The heavens. The 
firmament. The sun. The orderly succession of day and night. In regard to each of 
these, science helps religion. And grand as was the scene la olden time to the 
natural eye, and with all the imperfections of ancient knowledge, the grandeur is unspeak- 
ably vaster now, owing to discoveries which have since been and are still being made. 
(The expositor of this psalm needs to read up to date in astronomical researches.) 

IL Among them there is incessant activity. " The heavens declare," etc. Their 
activity is not conscious on their part, but it is nevertheless real. Lit;ht is ever 
acting on the vegetable world, and helps to open the petals of the flower, to give 
blossom its colour, and fruit its sweetness. Thus there is a reciprocal relation 
established between the sunbeam and the plant. So also is there between the stars 
above us and the mind of man. And though they utter not a word (ver. 3, Hebrew), 
they are sounding forth a message to the soul of man. " Their line is gone out," etc. 
(ver. 4). The word " line " is one of much interest. It meant, first, any cord or string ; 
then a string stretched out so as to emit a musical sound ; then the sound emitted by 
the string ; then a full musical chord. 

" For ever tinging, as they shine, 
' The hand that made us is Divine I "* 

m. These activities abb wondbouslt varied. The four verbs used here are all of 
them exceedingly expressive. The heavens are telling the glory of God, recounting 
it to us as in the pages of a book ; the firmament is showing his handiwork, setting it 
before our eyes as in a picture; day unto day welleth forth speech, pouring it out as 
from a fountain ; night unto night breaiheth out knowledge, breathing it out gently so 
that the attentive listener may hear. " During the French Revolution, it was said to a 
peasant, ' I will have all your steeples pulled down, that you may no longer have any 
object by which you may be reminded of your old superstitions.' ' But,' replied the 
peasant, ' you cannot help leaving us the stars.' " ' 

IV. With all this variety of expression, they tell of a cbbatino power. 
" The glory of God ; " " The firmament showeth his handiwork." When this is said, thers 
are two points involved — one implied, the other expressed. It is implied that man 
has the faculty of understanding these varied forms of expression. Surely a perceived 
object implies a perceiving subject, and a message addressed implies the existence of 
those by whom it can be understood. The question of the origin of things will, must, 
come up ; quite irrespectively of method, there will be the question of cause. The old 
design argument is valid as ever, though it may need to be thrown into a different 
form. That which it requires mind to understand, must a fortiori require the 
equivalent of mind to bring into being. Prom nature's framework, power, wisdom, 
benevolent adaptation, order, etc., are manifest. Even the objection raised from the 
' Bates, ' Oyclopsedia,' quoted by C. H. S. 



13 1 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xix. 1— 14. 

•xistence of waste! seeds, abortive organs, rudimentary and undeveloped possibilities, 
comes to nought when it is remembered that no atom of matter is wasted, but, if 
unused at one mumunt, is worked up again in other collocations. The advance if the 
most cultured thought at the presenc time is remarkable. The old atheism is cow out 
of date; and so, intellectually, is even the old agnosticism. It is behind the times. 
The latest developments of Darwinism honour God.* But while on the grcund of 
knowledge and culture, intellect must admit the existence of " a Power above us," it is 
only the lowly, devout, and lo) al spirit that will see Grod in all things, and enjoy all 
things in God. 

V. God's message from the heavens is responded to in holt bono. Whoso 
forgets the title of the psalm will miss much of its beauty and glory. It is meant for 
the choirmaster. It is to be set to music, and uttered in song. Poetry, music, song, 
are the audible response of man to the inaudible voices of the day and of the night. 
Through the stars, God speaks to man without words ; with hia voice man speaks to 
God. Thus the universe is one grand antiphony. God's music delighting man ; 
luan's music adoring God. The heavens speak to us of God ; we respond to the God 
of heaven. 

Note: Although we do not wish here to anticipate unduly the teaching of the 
second half of this psalm, yet we may be permitted to remark that, glorious as the 
music of the heavens is to those who have ears to hear, yet there is another message 
from the eternal throne, whioli alone tells us the thoughts God has towards us, and 
which, when understood and received, does touch our hearts and move our tongues to 
louder, sweeter, tenderer song than ever nature's glory could inspire. — C. 

Vera. 8 — 14. — The voice ef Jehovah in his Word. The Prophet Isaiah, in Ms forty- 
fifth chapter, and in the eighth and ninth verses, refers both to the work of God'l 
handa in the world which he has created, and to the words of his lips in the promises 
he has made ; and in both cases it is said, " not in vain." " Not in vain " is the earth 
formed; "not in vain "is the promise uttered. In both there is a Divine aim and 
purpose. That antithesis between the works and the Word of God is more ancient 
than Isaiah's day. It goes back to the time of Moses, who in the ninetieth psalm 
speaks to God as the Ever-living One, the Franier of the earth, aud yet the Eefnae 
of his people. And between Moses and Isaiah, in this nineteentli psalm we have the 
like distinction drawn. Its first six verses refer to God's works in the world, the 
rest, to his words in the Word.' Seven lines of exposition are required for their 
unfolding. 

1. The heavens bpbak of God; the Word declabes Jehovah. It is too 
Commonly supposed that the use of the several words "Elohim" and "Jehovah" 
indicates a difierence either of date, of document, or of authorship. There does not 
seem to ns to be any adequate ground for such ^stinctions. As we in one aud the 
same sermon or tract may use a dozen different names for God, why may it not have 
been so of old ? * The word " Elohim " indicates God as the God of nature. The word 
" Jehovah" points to him as the revealed God of our fathers. And it is from our own 
revealed God that the Word proceeds, from the depths of his heart ; it is far mora 

' See the dosing chapter of Mr. Wallace's recent and valuable work on ' Darwinism ' 
(1889); Mr. Fisk's 'Excursions of an Evolutionist,' eh. xi. ; the introduction to Dr. 
Wilson's admirable work on 'Evolution; ' and the Eev. W. Arthur's most powerful woikg 
on ' Eeligion without God,' and ' God without Eeligion.' There is a masterly volume by 
the Eev. Dr. Chapman, M. A., on ' Pre-organic Evolution, and the Biblical Idea of God ' 
(Clark : 1891). Professor B. Watts's ' Reign of Causality ' has some very powerful and close 
reasoning on this subject. The student will find a helpful summary of the views of ancient 
and modern philosophers on the idea of cause, in Eev. J. E. Thomson's 'Dictionary of 
Philosophy,' pp. 201, et teq. 
' On the different styles of writing in this psalm, see 'Cambridge Bible.' 
" In conversation with a learned Jew, the writer stated the views here given, and 
asked him, " Is there any reason, in your judgment, why this should not have been the 
case ? " The answer was, " On the contrary, there is every reason why it should have 
been so. We Jews vary the name of God according to the conception of him which wa 
wish at the time to convey." 



PS. XIX. 1—14.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 135' 

than any works of his hands. Hence the change of the word " God " to the word 
"Jehovah." 

II. Jehovah, thb bevbaled God, has put before us priceless material fob our 
USE. Tliere are six various terms to indicate this. Law ; or the great body of truth 
in which God would have his people instructed. Testimony ; or the Divine declaration 
as to what he is, has done, is doing, and will do. Statutes; or precepts, which 
indicate specific duty. Commandments; or rules for the regulation of the entire lile. 
Fe-ar ; i.e. that fear of him, so repeatedly enjoined, and which in an infantine age was 
the predominant view of duty towards God. Judgments ; the right-settings. In the 
Divine declarations pronounced against sin and in favour of righteousness. Let us 
put all these together, and lo! how rich are we in having all these voices from the 
eternal throne ! But how much richer still are we in having the words of the New 
Testament economy superadded to those of the old ! 

III. The words of Jehovah are as remarkable for quality as for vabiktt. 
The very names given to them are inspiring: "perfect," "sure," "right," "pure," 
" true," " righteous," " standing fast." These several terms may be gatliered up into 
three — true in statement, right in direction, everlasting in their duration. Even so. 
Jn the words of God we have absolute truth. In the precepts of God we have perfect 
directories for life and duty. And we know that, change what may, time is on our 
side, for " the Word of the Lord endureth for ever." Note : The words of God in the 
Bible are the only ones to which these epithets apply. Then it will be a very 
serious mistake if in school education or family training we ever allow the Bible to be 
crowiled out or set on one side. For we must note — 

IV. That the words of God are addressed to the innermost part of cub 
NATURE. (Ver. 7, " the soul.") Although this word, in Hebrew, is very frequently 
used in as free and popular a sense as it is with us, yet, on the other hand, it ofteu 
denotes the highest part of our nature — even that which pertains to spirit, conscience, 
and to the regulation of the moral life of man. Such is the case liere ; as, indeed, 
the marvellous eflfects of the Divine Word (as pointed out under the next heading) 
plainly indicate. So much is this the case, tbat the Word is regarded even here as 
" dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow," and as a " discerner 
of the thoughts and intents of the heart." The Old Testament conceptions of man and 
of sin are very deep and very solemn.* As the late Dr. Duncan, Professor of Hebrew, 
rightly remarked,* "The Hebrew language is peculiarly rich la religious and moral 
terms, though scanty enough in others. The reason is evident — it chronicled a 
revelation." 

V. The EFFECT of God's words abb as marvellous as thexb contents and aim. 
Some six of these are specified in the psalm. And one other is illustrated by its writer. 
The six effects referred to are : 1. Converting the soul. Restoring it, calling it back 
from its wanderings, and causing it to return to God and home. 2. Making loise tha 
simple. Where the words of God are read, studied, appropriated, by an honest and 
upright heart, they will lead in the way of understanding, and make wise unto salva- 
tion." 3. Rejoicing the heart, by their disclosures of God's glory, grace, wealth, and love. 
To those who drink in the Word, God is their "exceeding Joy." 4. Enlightening 
the eyes. This may mean either illumination or refreshment,' restoring life and 
fainting energies (cif. 1 Sam. xiv. 24, 29). The former meaning, " illumination," is 
triply true; lor God's commandments enlighten a man concerning God, duty, and 
himself. There is nothing like the searching Word to reveal to us what we are. 
5. Warning is another effect. The exhortations to good and the dissuasion from evil 
are standing menaces of the peril of refusing the one and choosing the other. 6. 
Reward. No one can follow the commandments of God without ensuring a rich, 
ample, constant recompense. 

Another effect of the Word of God is illustrated by the writer of this very psalm, 
who shows us the influence it had upon him. It awoke from him an earnest, prayer- 
ful response, awakened by the sight of himself which the commandment gave. The 

> See 'Synonymes of the Old Testament,' by Bev. B. B. Girdlestone, ohg. iv., v., vL 

• See his Life, by J. Brown, p. 406. . t. , 

• See an interesting remark on this phrase in Mr. Fausset'g 'Studies in the PBalms, 
leot V. p. 25 ; and also in Perowne, in loc. 



130 THE BOOK OF l-CJALMS. [iS. xix. 1— 1\ 

prayer is threefold — against involuntary, secret, and presumptuous sins. It is: 

1. Cleanse me, which has a double meaning of " Prunouaoe me clean, and keep me so." 

2. Keep me back. It is a prayer that the restraining grace of God may keep in 
subjection a wayward and impulsive nature. 3, Accept me. (Ver. 14.) It is an earnest 
prayer that at the moment the Word reveals his guilt, the grace of God may cover it 
with the mantle of forgiving love, and receive him in spite of all his guilt. And to 
this prayer there is appended an earnest plea. The praying one invokes two of the 
names of God in which the Old Testament Siiints were wont most to delight, " My Eock " 
and "my lledeemer." The word translated "Eedeemer" is specially nuticeable. It is 
Ooel.^ (For illustrations of the use of the former word, see Deut. xxxii. 4, 31 ; 2 Sam. 
xxii. 32 ; Pss. Ixii. 2, 6, 7 ; Ixxiii. 26 ; Isa. xxvi. 4. Of the latter, see (in Hebrew) 
Numb. XXXV. 12, 19, 21, 24, 25, 27; Job xix. 25; laa. xli. 14; xliii. 14; Ix. 16; 
Ixiii. 16.) Note : (1) How unspeakable is the mercy that, though our guilt might well 
make us dread the approach to a holy God, yet his grace is such that we may flee to 
him and find deliverance there 1 The same Word which unbares our sin also reveals 
his grace. (2) The revelation of God through the stars will not sufBoe for us; we 
want the word of promise too. (3) Those who most luxuriate in the Word should 
also, more than others, luxuriate in the works of God. (4) Those who accept both 
know perfectly well that nothing in the book of nature can run counter to the book 
of grace. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — Nature as a preacher. Mark — 

I. The grand subject. " The glory of God." 

II. The splendid audience. " All the earth." 

in. The faithful delivery. Marked by truth, freshness, constancy, impartiality 
(vers. 1 — 4). Other preachers cannot continue by reason of death. Hence there is 
change. One succeeds another. But this preacher goes on without break or weariness 
from day to day and age to age, bearing witness for God (Rom. i. 20; Acts xiv. 17). 

IV. The diverse results. Minds vary. Where there is freedom o( thought, there 
will be difference of opinion. When Paul preached at Athens, " some mocked, and 
others said, We will hear thee again on this matter. Hbwbeit certain men clave unto 
him, and believed" (Acts xvii. 32 — 34). And so it is here. Some hear, and others 
hear not. Some recognize God's presence and working, and give him praise, and 
others deny that in all they see there is anything more than the evolution of matter, 
and the play of cause and effect. 

V. The necessity of the Word. Nature can teach, but only such as are 
susceptible. It can proclaim the glory of God, but only to such as have already been 
brought to the knowledge of God. Our minds have been darkened and deadened by 
sin. Nature cannot tell us how sin is to be taken away. It is dumb as to a Saviour. 
It cannot inspire hope. It cannot convert the soul. Hence the necessity of the Word 
— of the Law by which is the knowledge of sin, and the gospel jwhieh reveals to us a 
Saviour. It is those who have been brought to the knowledge and love of God through 
Jesus Christ who are best able to appreciate the service of nature. — W. P. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — The Word of God. This passage may be regarded as teaching three 
things concerning the Word of God, or the Bible. 

I. What it is. Six names are used, and six different statements are made with 
regard to the Bible. 1. It is " the Law of the Lord," and, as such, it is "perfect." 
2. It is "the testimony of the Lord," and, as such, it is "sure." In it God speak& 
witli solemn earnestness and insistance, and what he says may be trusted. 3. It is 
" the statutes of the Lord ; " and the statutes of the Lord are " right." The way of 
duty is clearly and unmistakably marked out. 4. It is the " commandment of the 
Lord." It is not mere counsel or instruction, but has all the authority and awfulness 
of " commandment." And as such it is " pure," clear as crystal, illuminating as the 
light. 5. It is "the fear of the Lord." This may stand for religion (Prov. xv. 33; 
cf. Deut. xvii. 19), and as such it is " pure and undefiled." It is " our reasonable 
service." 6. Lastly, the Bible is spoken of as " the judgments of the Lord." This 

' See article by present writer in 'Pulpit Commentary' on 'Deuteronomy,' p. 820; also 
Geikie's ' Hours with the Bible,' iii. 14; vi. 306. 



e». xjx. 1— 14.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 137 



refers to the administration of the Law. God's "judgments," being the execution nf 
his will, must be ''true." Based upon the eternal principles of right, they must 
themselves be eternal. 

II. What the Bible does. 1. " It converts the soul " (Ps. xxiii. 3 ; 1 Tim. i. 15). 
2. It "makes wise the simple" (Ps. cxix. 130; Acts xvi. 31). 3. It "rejoices the 
heart" (Ps. cxix. 162; Acts viii. 39). 4. It "enlightens the eyes" (Ps. xvi. 11; 
Eph. i. 18, 19). 5. It "endureth for ever" (Ps. c. 5 ; 1 John ii. 14—17). What U 
here stated as doctrine is elsewhere illustrated as fact. It is, as we believe the doctrine, 
that we shall become witnesses to the facts (1 Cor. vi. 11 ; 1 Pet. i. 23 — 25). 

III. What the Bible deserves. We have it in our hands. We have heard its 
character, and the claims made in its behalf, and what is our response ? The language 
employed by the psalmist fitly expresses what our feelings and conduct should be, 
how we should treat God's most Holy Word. 1. It deserves to be valued more than 
gold. 2. It deserves to be loved and delighted in as " sweeter than honey and the 
honey-comb." 3. It deserves to be studied and obeyed with increasing devotion; for 
thereby our minds are enlightened, and our lives illumined, and great is our reward in 
purity and peace and the love of God. And if we have learnt its preciousness ourselves, 
we shall surely labour to malie it known to others, that they also may be enriched by 
its treasures and blessed with its joys. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Ood's revelation of himself in nature and in his Word. In nature 
it is continuous. Day utters speech unto day, night unto night. It is speechless; it 
has a language, but it is not articulate. It is universal. Gone out tiirough all the 
world, aud through all time. In his Word it h is a converting power — power to make 
wise, to rejoice the heart and enlighten the eyes. It endures for ever; unlike the 
firmament, and is entirely true aud righteous. 

I. A COMPABISON OF THESE TWO REVELATIONS. 1. Both reveal Ood's glory. The 
heavens reveal his glory by day and by night. But our solar system is but tlie glory 
of a single point of light, when compared with the glory of all the systems that fill 
infinite space. But quality rather than quantity is the test of the glory of any work. 
To redeem and reclaim a world of souls from the ruin of sin transcends the work of 
creating and sustaining all the suns and the stars of the universe; and this is the 
glory of God's Word. 2. Both contain important instruction. "Day unto day 
uttereth speech " (ver. 2). " The testimony of the Lord is sure [or, ' true '], making 
wise the simple." To the devout mind nature suggests more than it directly teaches — 
the Sun of Eighteousness, the mighty Quickeuer and Joy of darkened souls. Christ 
the great Bridegroom, of the Church. But the Word uttered by prophets, Christ, and 
inspired men, expels our ignorance upon the topics most necessary to our highest well- 
being. They make us truly wise. 3. Both demand study and labour to enjoy their 
blessings. Great things can benefit us ouly by the exercise of earnest and inquisitive 
thought. La Place and Newton thus came to understand the science of the heavens; 
Milton and others, their poetry ; and David and others, their religion. We benefit by 
the Word in a similar way. Study leading to practice and experience will open its 
stores of truth to us. 

II. A CONTRAST OP THESE REVELATIONS. 1. The One Universal, the other partial. 
Every one not born blind has seen the heavens; there are millions who have never 
heard of Christ. God does sionie things by taking them entirely into his own hands; 
but he takes us as lellow-labourers in the work of making known his Word. 2. The 
one is full of great spiritual entrgies ; the other is not. Material things can do only 
material work ; nature cannot alter a depraved will or heal a wounded conscience. 
Spiritual forces must rouse spiritual natures like ours. Christ is the Word of God, and 
can give the highest deliverance and salvation which souls need. Makes us wise with 
the noblest wisdom, gives light to the mind. The one rejoices the senses, the other 
the heart. The mourner can be made to sing, the captive to leap for joy, the heart- 
broken to laugh with gladness, the penitent to receive peace. Nature can do nothing 
of this to any extent. — S. 

Vers. 11 — 14. — Man's relation to ths Divine Law. The former part of the psalm ii 
a comparison and a contrast between God's revelation of himself in nature and in hia 



138 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [rs. xix. 1—14. 



Law. Now the psalmist passes on to consider his own relation to the Divine Law; 
what light it throws upon his character and circumstances, and what rewards it 
bestows upon those who abide in the steadfast observance of it. 

I. What the Divine Law taught the psalmist. (Vers. 12, 13.) 1. His 
manifold sins and errors. " Who can understand his errors ? " Who can tell how 
often he offendeth? Our sins and mistakes are greater in number than we can under- 
stand or reckon. Our moral infirmity is greater than we can estimate. 2. That K* 
was largely am ignorant transgressor. "Cleanse thou me from the sins that I know 
not of." Arising from self-deception and self-ignorance. Others see in us what we 
cannot see in ourselves. The proud and covetous and unjust do not think themselves 
BO. Cleanse us from the pretence to virtues which we have not. 3. To pray for 
deliverance from the temptation to deliberate sins. That he might not commit pre- 
sumptuous, wilful sin. He does not ask for the pardon of such sins, but to be 
restrained from them. " If we sin wilfully after that we have come to the knowledge 
of the truth," etc. No sacrifice in the Jewish Law for such sins. 

II. The Law greatly rewards the steadfastly obedient. (Vers. 11., 14, 15.) 

1. By giving them an increasing spirit of consecration. " Let my words and medita- 
tions and actions be more and more acceptable in tby sight." Obedience leads to 
further obedience, and longs fur nothing short of being perfectly acceptable to God. 

2. By giving a more perfect consciousness of Ood's acquaintance with our thoughts and 
ways. The whole passage shows that, as well as the fourteenth verse. The disobedient 
think they cau hide their ways from God. "How doth God know?" The obedient 
know that all things are naked and open before him; and rejoice in the thought, 
because they are aimina; at what is acceptable to him. 3. By revealing God as a sure, 
faithful Redeemer from all evil. A rock is the image of faithful stability, and means 
that God will not swerve from his promise of redemption. The disobedient are the 
unbelievers ; they attribute their own mind to God, and so cannot trust him. — S. 

Ver. 14. — A lacriflce and a prayer. " Let the words of my mouth and the meditation 
of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, Lord, my Strength and my Redeemer." Let 
us look at this language — 

I. As OFEBRiNG A SACRIFICE. The thoughts and feelings of the soul uttered and 
unuttered. 1. The sacrifice is spiritual. Words and meditations. Man's heart is the 
most precious thing God has created — the jewel of the universe. The thoughts that 
come out of the heart and the words that utter them — these are the piecious treasures 
the psalmist offers before God. 2. The sacrifice is complete. The words of the mouth 
and the meditation of the heart indicate the whole man. This is the Christian view 
of man's priestly work — the presenting of body and soul as living sacrifices. Not a 
partial offering of one part of our lives, nor of the outward apart from the inward life, 
but the total consecration of our whole being. 3. This offering is not acceptable to God 
on its own account. It is acceptalile to God on account of the great expiatory .sacrifice, 
and because that has brought us into a new and peculiar relation with God. Intrinsi- 
cally, the offerirjg is not acceptable. For all man's words taken together, what are 
they? Our words when they utter our most religious thoughts, our truest deepest 
faith, our most rapturous love, our triumphant hope and praise, are unworthy of 
being thus ofi'ered. But when you add the words of every day and every employment, 
these are vain, proud, irreligious, sometimes blasphemous. An<i then our thoughts ! 
But God in Christ is pleased with our offering. A child's letter is pleasing to its 
father because it is his child's. 

II. As CONTAINING A PRAYER. Then what do they imply ? 1. That God alone can 
deliver him from the sins he prays against. From secret and presumptuous sin. A 
faith is implied that God would so deliver him. They may have a wider meaning. 
2. That Ood is the Inspirer of right words and right thoughts. " Make my words and 
thoughts such as shall be acceptable in thy sight." 

III. The warrant for offering both sacripioe and prayer. The psalmist felt 
that God was his Bock and his Salvation. Stability and deliverance are th« principal 
thoughts here. — S. 



PS. XX. 1—9.] 



THE BOOK OF ,SALMS. 



139 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XX. 



This psalm seems to have been composed 
for a special occasion, when David was about 
to proceed on an expedition against a 
foreign enemy. It is liturgical, and written 
to be recited in the court of the tabernacle 
by the high priest and people. The date 
of its composition is after the transfer of 
the ark from the house of Obed-edom to 
the city of David (2 Sam. vi. 12—19), as 
appears from ver. 2. The conjecture which 
attaches it to the Syrian War described in 
2 Sam. X. 17 — 19, is probable. There is no 
reason to doubt the authorship of David, 
asserted in the title, and admitted by most 
critics. 

The psalm divides into two portions — the 
first of five, and the second of. four verses. 
In the first part, the people chant the whole. 
In the second, the high priest takes the 
word, and initiates the strain (ver. 6), while 
the people join in afterwards (vers. 7 — 9). 

Ver. 1. — The Lord hear thee in the day 
of trouble. The people intercede for their 
king in a "day of trouble" or "distress," 
^\hen danger impends, and he is about to 
affront it. They are made to ask, first of 
1.11, that God will liear the king's prayers, 
^^llich are no doubt being silently offereii 
while they pray aloud. The Name of the 
God of Jacob defend thee. (On the force of 
the expression, "the Name of God," see the 
comment upon Ps. vii. 17.) " Jacob's God " 
— a favourite expression with David - is the 
God who made him the promise, "I will be 
with thee, and 1 will keep thee in all places 
whither thou goest" (Gen. xxviii. 15). 
" Defend thee" is scarcely a correct render- 
ing. Translate, exalt thee. 

Ver. 2. — Send thee help from the sanc- 
tuary. " The sanctuary " hers is un- 
doubtedly the holy place whioli David had 
established on Mount Zion, and in which he 
had placed the ark of the covenant. God's 
help was always regarded as coming 
especially from the place where he had 
" set his Name." In the original it is, 
" Send thy help " — the help thou needest 
and prayest for, And strengthen thee out 
of Zion; ratlier, support thee. 

Vtr. 3. — Eemember all thy offerings. 
(On David's offerings, see 2 Sam. vi. 13, 17; 
xxiv. 25 ; 1 Chron. xv. 26 ; xvi. 1 ; xxi. 28 ; 
xxix. 21.) It is not to be supposed, however, 
that David ever sacrificed victims with his 



own hand, or without the intervention of a 
priest. And accept thy burnt sacrifice; 
Selah. It is a reasonable conjecture tliat 
the " Selah " here marks a " pause," during 
which special sacrifices were offered, with a 
Tiew of entreating God's favour and pro- 
tection in the coming war (Heiigstenberg). 

Ver. 4. — Grant thee according to thine ewn 
heart ; i.e. whatever tliy heart desireth 
" in connection with this expedition, all that 
thou hopest from it, all that thou wouldst 
have it accomplish." And fulfil all thy 
counsel ; i.e. make all thy plans to prosper. 

Ver. 5. — We will rejoice in thy salvation. 
David's " salvation " is here his triumph over 
his enemies, which the people confidently 
anticipate, and promise themselves the 
satisfaction of speedily celebrating with joy 
and rejoicing. And in the Xame of our God 
we wUl set up our banners. Plant them, 
i.e,, on the enemy's forts and strongholds. 
The Lord fulfil all thy petitions. A com- 
prehensive prayer, re-echoing the first 
clause of ver. 1 and the whole of ver. 4, 
but reaching out further to all that the 
monarch may at any future time request of 
God. Tiie first part of the psalm here 
ends, and the people pause for a while. 

Ver. 6 — Now know I. The employment 
of the first person singular marks a change 
in the speaker, and is best explained by 
supposing that either the high priest or 
the king himself takes the word. The 
oft'ering of the solemn prayer (vers. 1 — 5) 
and of the sacrifices (see the comment on 
ver. 3) has been followed by a full convic- 
tion that the prayer is granted, and the 
triumph of David assured. What was 
previously hoped for is "now known." 
That the Lord saveth (or, hath saved) his 
anointed (com)). Ps. xviii. 50). He will hear 
him from his holy heaven; literally, from 
the heaven of his holiness. With the saving 
strength of his right hand. God will hear 
him, i.e., and, having lieard him, will help 
and defend him " with the saving strength 
of his right hand." 

Ver. 7. — Some trust in chariots, and some 
in horses. The enemies of David towards 
the north — Syrians of Zoliah, and Maachah, 
and Damascus, and Beth-Rehob — were 
especially formidable on account of their 
caval y and their chariots. David on one 
occasion "took from Hadarezer, King ot 
Zobah, a thousand chariols, and seven 
thousand horsemen " (1 Chron. xviii. 4). 
On another lie "slew of the Syrians seven 
thousand men which fought in chariots " 
(1 Chron. xix. 18). His own troops appear 
to have consisted entirely of footmen. But ■ 
we will remember the Name of the Lord our 



i40 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XX. 1 — 9. 



God. Our trust, ».e., shall be in the Lord, 
who has commanded our kinj^s "not to 
multiply horses " (Deut. xvii. 16). 

Ver. 8. — They are hrought down and 
fallen ; but we are risen, and stand upright. 
Confident of the result, the speaker repie- 
sents it as already achieved. He sees the 
enemy bowed down to tlie earth, and fallen ; 
he Bees the host of Israel erect and trium- 
phant. All stands out clearly before his 
visioa, as though he were an actual spectator 
of the fight. 

Ver. 9. — Save, Lord ! This punctuation 
is adopted by Delitzsob, Kay, Professor 



Alexander, Heno;st6iiberg, and ourEevisera; 
but is opposed by Rosenniuller, Bishop 
Horsley, Bwald, Hupfeld, Cheyne, and the 
' Speaker's Commentary.' It has the Hebrew 
Masoretio text in its favour, the Septuagint 
and Vulgate against it. Authorities are thus 
nearly equally balanced on the point ; and 
we are at liberty to translate either, " Save, 
Lord : may the King hear us when we call I " 
or, " O Lord save the king : may he hear ua 
when we call (upon him) I " On the whole, 
perhaps, the former is preferable (see the 
arguments of Professor Alexander, ' Com- 
mentary on the Psalms,' p. 94). 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Ver. 5. — The tafegua/rds of prayer. " The Lord fulfil all thy petitions." An 
amazingly bold wish 1 Especially if you read it in the light of ver. 4, " Grant thee 
thy heart's desire ! " It might be the worst wish we could express — even for a good 
man — that Grod would grant him all he desires. It is written of the rebellious, 
ungrateful Israelites, " He gave them their own desire." But it was their ruin (Pa. 
Ixxviii. 29). We may be conscious of desires springing up in our own heart, even 
dwelling deep there, which, though we do not know them to be wrong, we ourselves 
would scarcely venture to put into our prayers. Nevertheless, this bold wish i8 
not larger than our Saviour's promise to prayer (Matt. xxi. 22 ; John xiv. 13, 14). 
The text, therefore, suggests — 

I. God's infinite powee to answer pbateb. Nature, ■with its innumerable 
forms, mighty forces, all-comprehending laws, undisclosed secrets, is his. He designed, 
createil, controls it. All hearts and lives are in his hand. All holy creatures do his 
will. With God all things are possible (Rom. viii. 28). To some minds, amazing 
difBculty and doubt beset this glorious fact, that God hears and answers prayer. The 
special stumbling-block, the objection most frequently urged, is that God world by 
law — governs all nature by unchanging law. Of course he does. So does man work 
by law ; and, instead of governing, is governed by, the laws of nature. What then ? 
This does not hinder men from answering prayer — granting, every minute, the requests 
of children, friends, customers, clients. Can anything, seriously considered, be more 
absurd than to suppose that God cannot do what he has enabled us to do? — that he 
has so made his universe that he cannot manage it ; though, so far as our needs 
require, we can ? Or is it anything less than childish narrowness of thought to suppose 
that, because we do not understand how the thing asked for can be done — the healing of 
a disease, e.g., or averting a danger, or giving a prosperous wind to a ship, or converting 
a sinner — therefore Ood does not know how to effect it ? If there is one lesson the 
discoveries of modern science should teach, it is that our ignorance is not the measure 
of possibility. It is no business of ours to scheme how God can grant our prayers ; 
only to see to it, as far as we can, that they are such as he can wisely, justly, and for 
our true welfare, grant. Infinite power, guided by infinite wisdom and love, sufiSces. 
This brings us to speak of — 

II. The limits and safeguards op prater. " All thy petitions " would be too 
bold and ra^h a wish, were there no tacit limitation, no fence of safety in the back- 
ground. W'e cannot possibly be certain what is best for ourselves, even in the near 
future ; still less how the granting of our petition would affect others. Much more 
ignorant are we of far-off results. Many a Christian looks back on the unwise prayers 
he offered, with shuddering thankfulness that his request was denied. Yet, at the time, 
it seemed so reasonable. In this ignorance we should not dare to pray — the hazard 
would be too great — if we knew that God wouU give what we asked, whether it were 
wise or foolish, right or wrong. " With God aX. things are possible ; " but it is certain 
he will do nothing but what is wise and good. He will not grant his child's request to 
his ruin, or to the breaking off of his own gracious purpose (Ps. cxxxviii. 8). It ij 



P8.XX. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALM& 141 

ours to ask, hia to judge. Therefore we may ask boldly, never forgetting, " Not as I 
will, but as thou wilt." 

III. The plea and wabrant of cub pbaters is the all-pbev ailing inteb- 
OEssiON OF Christ. The title "Anointed" (ver. 6) — "Messiah" — though often 
applied to David and his descendants, suggests a higher application (as in Fs. ii. 7, 8). 
So the best Jewish as well as Christian interpreters (comp. John ii. 41, 42). His 
prayers must always be in perfect accord with both the mind and the will of God, his 
wisdom and his goodness. When he says to the weakest disciple, " I have prayed for 
thee " (Luke xxiL 32), that disciple cannot perish. Our weak, unworthy prayers are 
mighty and acceptable in his Name (John xv. 7 ; xvi. 23, 24). The glory of heaven is 
waiting to fulfil his prayer (John xvii. 20 — 24), 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Prayer for IsraePt king whoa going forth to battle : a national lenwm. 
In this psalm, as indeed in the rest, there are most suggestive verses, which might be 
elaborated into useful discourses.' But in this division of the Commentary we refrain 
from dealing with isolated texts. We desire rather to show how the whole psalm may 
be used by the expositor of Scripture as the basis of a national sermon in a time of 
impending war. No doubt, as Mr. Spurgeon remarks, it has been used by court 
preachers and pressed into the service of unctuous and fulsome flattery. There is, 
however, another kind of abuse to which it has been subjected, even that of an extreme 
spiritualizing, in which the words are made to convey a meaning which there is no 
indication that they were ever intended to bear. No commentator seems to have set 
forth the bearing of the psalm more clearly and accurately than that prince of 
expositors, John Calvin. We have no clue, indeed, to the precise occasion on which 
the psalm was written ; but we can scarcely be wrong in regarding it as a prayer to be 
said or sung in the sanctuary on behalf of the king when he was called forth to defend 
himself in battle against his enemies. And inasmuch as the kingship of David was a 
type of that of the Lord Jesus Christ, the psalm may doubtless be regarded as the 
prayer of the Church of God for the triumph of the Saviour over all his foes. It is 
■aid, " Prayer also shall be made for him continually," and those words are being 
fulfilled in the ceaseless offering of the petition, " Thy kingdom come." At the same 
time, there is such deep and rich significance in the psalm when set on the strictly 
historical basis, that to develop it from that point of view will occupy all the space 
at onr command. The scenes here brought before us are these : * Israel's king is 
•ummoned to go forth to war ; sanctaary service is being held on his behalf; a prayer 
is composed, is set to music, and delivered to the precentor, to be said or sung on the 
occasion ; after sacrifices have been offered, and the signs of Divine acceptance have 
been vouchsafed, the Levites, the singers, and the congregation join in these words of 
supplication. Obviously, there is here assumed' a Divine revelation; the aid of 
Jehovah, the covenant God of Israel, is invoked ; he is called, " Jehovah our God." The 
disclosures of God's grace in the wondrous history of their father Jacob are brought to 
mind. They, as a people, have been raised above reliance on chariots and horses alone. 
The Name of their God has lifted thera up on high, "as in a fortress where no enemy 
can do harm, or on a rock at the foot of which the waves fret and dash themselves in 
imputent fury." * They know of two sanctuaries — one in Zion (ver. 2), the other " the 
heaven of Gud's holiness" (ver. 6) ; they know that God hears /rom the latter, tvhen his 
people gather in the former. Hence the prayer is sent up from the sanctuary below to 
that above. We, as Christians, have all Israel's knowledge, and more. The revelation 
the Hebrews had through Moses is surpassed by that in Christ. And although, as a 

■ Forrest's edition of Dr. Forbes's 'Studies on the Book of Paalnu' (1888), pp. 256, 257, 
•nd Dr. Maolaren's 'Life of David as lefleoted in the Pualms,' contain hints worth noting 
«n this psalm. 

* See Bishop Perowne's interesting arrangement of the veitei of this psalm. 

* See our introdnotory homily on the several classes of psalms. 

* So Feiowne. 



142 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [P8. xx. 1— 9. 

" geographical expression," no nation now has the pre-eminence over any other as 
before God, yet any praying people can get as near to God nc t as ever Israel did. 
All devout souls have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. Hence, 
when any trouble — especially that of war — befalls them, they may betake themselves 
to their God, and plead with him on behalf of their emperor, their king, their president, 
their state. And the psalm before us is truly a grand one for preachers to use at such 
emergencies, that they may cheer a people's heart, quicken the people's prayers. The 
abuse of the psalm by some courtiers, who feared man rather than Gi)d, is no reason 
why the preachers of any day should leave such a psalm unused, still less is it a reason 
why they should refuse to preach national sermons at all. For a long time. Non- 
conformists were bo treated, that some of their preachers almost lost the national 
esprit de corps. But it is to be hoped that that is passing away ; for on the basis of a 
psalm like this, some lines of thought may be so expounded and applied from the 
pulpit as to cause times of national peril and anxiety to be most fruitful in spiritual 
elevation and power. 

I. It is an anxious time FOK ant people when the head of THBIB state 18 

CALLED FORTH TO BATTLE. (See 2 Ohron. XX. 1 — 3.) The interests at stake in the 
conflict itself, and for the promotion of which it is eutered upon, must press heavily on 
the nation's heart. The fearful bloodshed and unspeakable suffering and distress in 
private life, which any battle involves, must bring anguish to many mothers, wives, and 
children ; many a home will be darkened, and many a heart crushed, through the war, 
however large the success in which it may ultimately result. 

II. When wabs are entered upon pbbfobcb, fob a bioht object, the people 

MAT LAT BEFORE THEIB GoD THE BORDEN THAT IS ON THEIB HEARTS. (2 Ohron. 

XX. 6 — 15.) There is a God. He is our God. He has a heart, tender as a fathtjr's, 
and a hand gentle as a mother's ; while, with all such pitying love, he has a strength 
that can speed worlds in their course. Nothing is too large for him to control ; nought 
too minute for him to observe. And never can one be more sure of a gracious response 
than when, with large interests at stake, a people are united as one in spreading before 
the throne of God their case with all its care. If " the very hairs of our head " are all 
numbered, how much more the petitions of the heart ! 

III. At such TIMES THE INTENSEST 8TMPATHIE8 OF Tl£E PEOPLE SATHEB BOmTD 

THBIB ABMT AND THEIB THRONE, (Ver. 5.) " We will rejoice in thy deliverance," etc. 
Whatever may have been the sentiment in bygone times, we now know that the kinf 
is for the people, not the people for the king. Hence his victory or defeat is theirs. 
The soldiers, too, who go forth loyally and obediently to the struggle, with their lives in 
their hands, leaving at home their dear ones weeping as they leave them lest they 
should see the loved face no more, how can it but be that a nation's warmest, strongest 
sympathies should gather round them as they go to the war ? 

IV. The Name of God is a btronoeb defence to such a people than all 
MATERIAL FORCES CAN COMMAND. (Vers. 6, 7.) This is so in many senses. 1. God 
himself can so order events as to ensure the victory to a praying people, however stroni' 
and numerous the foes. 2. An army sent out with a people's prayers, knowing that it 
is so sustained, will fight the more bravely. 3. To the generals in command, God can 
give, in answer to prayer, a wisdom that secures a triumphant issue. 4. All chariots 
and horsemen are at his absolute disposal, and he can cause them all to vanish in an 
hour. The army of Sennacherib. The Spanish Armada. History is laden with 
illustrations of Divine interposition (Ps. cvii. 43). 

V. When the people tbustinqlt lay the whole matter before God, thbt 

MAT PBACBPULLT LEAVE IT TO HIM AND CALMLY AWAIT THE RESULT. (Of. Ver. 8.) 

When once their affairs are rolled over on God, they are on his heart, and will be con- 
trolled by his hand cm their behalf. Hence the wonderfully timely word of Jahaziel 
(2 Chron. xx. 15), " The battle is not yours, but God's." Such a thought may well 
inspire the people with the calmness of a holy courage, and may well lead them 
patiently to wait and see " the end of the Lord." Note : By such devotional use of 
national crises, they may become to a nation a holy and blessed means of grace- 
whereby the people at large may learn more of the value and power of prayer than in 
many a year of calm, and may be drawn more closely together for ever through a 
fellowship in trouble and in prayer. — C. 



pg. XX. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 148 

Ver. 1. — "The day of trouble" Such a day comes sooner or later to all. Nations 
have their "day of trouble," when they are visited with pestilence, famine, or war, or 
torn by internal strifes. Individuals also have their " day of trouble " (Job v. 6, 7). 
Trouble is a test. It shows what manner of persons we are. Happy are we, if, like 
the king and people of this psalm, trouble brings us nearer to God and to one another 
in love and service ! The day of trouble should — 

I. Dbite the soul to God. In prosperity there are many helps, but in adversity 
there is but one. God is the true Befuge. His ear ig ever open, and can " hear." Hia 
hand is ever stretched out, and can "del'end." His resources are infinite, and he can 
" strengthen us out of Zion." The name here given to God, " the God of Jacob," is 
richly suggestive. It holds out hope to the sintul ; for God was very merciful to Jacob. 
It assures comfort to the distressed ; for God was with Jacob, to keep him during all 
his wanderingti. It encourages trust, for God had a gracious purpose with Jacob, and 
made all the trials of his life contribute to his moral advancement. " Happy is he 
who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God 1 " (Ps. 
cxlvi. 5). 

II. Bbino aUi the good togbtheb in holt bebyios. In face of a common 
danger, there is a tendency to unite. So " Pilate and Herod were made friends " (Luke 
xxiii. 12). So Jehoshaphat and the King of Israel entered into alliance (1 Kings xxii. 
2). So, in a nobler way, God's people come together for mutual edification and 
comfort, and to call upon the Name of the Lord (Mai. iii. 16). The Jews had the 
temple and the sacrifices, and the high priest to plead for them. But we have greater 
privileges. For us our great High Priest, "having offered one sacrifice for sin for 
ever, sat down on the right hand of God ; from henceforth expecting till his enemies 
be made his footstool " (Heb. x. 12, 13). We have common dangers and needs, and 
can do much to help one another. When David was in trouble in the wood of Ziph, 
Jonathan went down to him, and strengthened his hands in God. When Peter was in 
prison, and in peril of death, " prayer was made without ceasing of the Church imto 
God for him " (Acts xii. 5). When the Jerusalem Christians were in sore straits, the 
sympathies of their fellow-Christians in happier circumstances were called forth in 
their behalf (Rom. xv. 26). So when the truth is assailed, and the interests of the 
kingdom are endangered, it is the duty of all true lovers of Christ to band together, 
and by prayer and holy effort to " contend for the faith once delivered to the saints." 

III. Stbengthen oub attachment to the supbeme pbinoiplbs op bight. 
There are many things dear to us which we may have to defend, but we must make a 
difference. " The day of trouble " is a searching and a sifting time. In drawing near 
to God, and by mutual warnings, we find out what is really of the highest value ; what 
we may let go, and what we should keep ; what we may safely relinquish, and what we 
should fight for to the last gasp ; what is only of temporary or of secondary importance, 
and what is essential and more to be valued than all worldly and personal advantages, 
or even life itself (Dan. iii. 16—18 ; Acts iv. 18—20). 

IV. FbEFABK fob the OBLEBBATION op the coming VIOTOBT or GOOD OVEB 

ETiii. Waiting upon God gives hope. Praying and working inspire confidence. 
Imagination, kindled by the thought of God's Name, portrays in glowing colours the 
near deliverance. There is something very inspiriting in the " I know " of the 
psalmist. Job says, " I know " (Job xix. 25) ; Paul says, " I know " (2 Tim. i. 12) ; 
and so we may join with the psalmist in saying, " Now know I that the Lord saveth 
his anointed." We are too apt to think only of our troubles ; but let us rather 
" remember the Name of the Lord." We are too ready to wish the defeat of our 
opponents, but let us rather seek the vindication of truth and the triumph of right, 
and, if God will, the transformation of foes into friends, so that they, as well as we, 
may share in the joys of the great day. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 9j — Help from ihe sanctuary for the hattle of life. A liturgical psalm, which 
was sung on behalf of the king, who was about to go forth to battle. It was chanted 
in alternate voices by the congregation and the priest or Levite who led the choir. As 
the king stands within the sanctuary, offering his sacrifice, the crowd of worshippers 
in the spacious courts lift up their voices in the prayer of the first five verses ; then 
the answering chant of the priest or leader from vers. 6 to 8 ; then all join in the 



lU 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[i*. XXI. 1—13. 



prayer of the ninth verse, "God save the kingl" Help from the sanctimry for the 
lattle of life. Influences to be gathered there. 

I. A BENSB OF God's helpful eblations to us. (Vers. 1, 2.) He hears in 
trouble, defends us in danger, and strengthens us for connict ; and thus helps us by 
means of the worship of the sanctuary. It is thus be remembers our offerings and 
accepts our worship. 

II. God qbants the desires and fulfils the couvselb wmoH abe inspibed 
IN his service. (Ver. 4.) " If we ask anything according to his will, we know that 
he heareth us." 

III. Wb can win the battle only so fab as we realize that it is God's 
BATTLE. (Ver. 5.) " In the Name of our God must we set up our banners." He is 
the Captmn of our salvation, and if we are loyal to him we shall rejoice in • victorious 
cause. 

IV. Tbue faith in God is assured of viotoby befobb the battle is fouoht. 
(Ver. 6.) " I know whom I have believed, and . . . that he is able to keep that," etc. ; 
" Thanks be unto God, who giveth us the victory 1 " " Who shall separate us from the 
love of Christ ? " 

V. "RiOHT IS might" to all who hate been taught of GK)d. (Vers. 7, 8.) 
They do not trust in material strength, but in the justice of their cause, i.e. in the 
power of God, and not in chariots and horses. God, therefore, is not, in any historical 
war, on the side of the strongest battalions. " They are brought down and fallen ; but 
we are risen, and stand upright." 

VI. The persistent and final oby of t.he tbue wobbhippeb is fob thb 
salvation of Gk»D. (Ver. 9.)— 8. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXI. 



Fs. XXI is generally regarded as a companion 
composition to Fs.zx, being the thanksgiving 
after the victory for which the preceding 
psalm was the supplication. It consists of 
three parts: (1) a direct thanksgiving to 
Ood, offered by the people on behalf of the 
king (vers. 1 — 7} ; (2) an address to the king, 
auguring for him future successeB on the 
ground of his recent victory (vers. 8 — 12) ; 
and (3) a brief return to direct praise of God 
in two short ejaoulatory sentences. Fart 1 
is interrupted by a pause (" Selah ") at the 
end of ver. 2, when thank-offerings may have 
been made. The Davidical authorship, as- 
serted in the title, is not seriously disputed. 

Ver. 1. — ^The king shall joy. The future 
is used to give the idea of continuance, 
" The king rejoices, and will go on rejoicing." 
In thy strength, Lord; i.e. in the strength 
that thou puttest forth to help and protect 
him (comp. Fs. zx. 6). And in thy salva- 
tion how greatly shall he rejoice ! God's 
"salvation" had been confidently antici- 
pated (Fs. xz. 5, 6, 9), and has now been 
experienced. 

Ver. 2. — Thon hast given him his heart's 
desire (comp. Fs. xx. 4, " Grant thee accord- 
ing to thine own heart"). And hast net 



withholden the reqneet ef Us llpi. " Out 
of the abundance of the heart the month 
speaketh." The deliverance from his ene- 
mies, which David had earnestly desired in 
his heart, he had also devoutly requested 
with his lips (Ps. xx. 1, 5). Selah. The 
pause here may have been for the presen- 
tation of a thank-offering. 

Ver. 3. — For thon preventest him with the 
blessings of goodness ; t.e. thou givest him 
blessings before he asks, and more than he 
asks. " The blessings of goodness " is pleo- 
nastic, sinoe a blessing cannot be otherwise 
than a good. Thou settest a crown of pure 
gold on his head. It is remarked that 
David, as the result of one of his wars, did 
actually take the crown of the conquered 
king, which was a crown of gold, from off 
the king's head, and place it upon his own 
head (2 Sam. xii. 30) ; but this is scarcely 
what is intended here. As Hengstenberg 
observes, "The settiug on of the crown 
marks the bestowment of dominion," not in 
one petty case only, but generally, and is 
scarcely to be altogether separated from the 
promises recorded in 2 Sam. vii. 12 — 16. 

Ver. 4.— He asked life of thee, and thon 
gavest it him,>ven length of days for ever 
ard ever. The "life" intended cannot be 
ordinary human life, since in David's case 
this certainly did not continue "for ever 
and ever." We must understand the 
psalmist to have asked for continuance in 
his posterity, and this was guaranteed hiia 



PS. XXI. 1 — 13.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



145 



in the message which God sent him by 
Nathan (2 Sam. vii. 18, 16). In the full 
sense the promise was, of course. Messianic, 
being fulfilled only in Clirist, the God-Man, 
who alone of David's posterity "liveth for 
ever." 

Ver. 5. — His glory ia great in thy salva- 
tion. David's glory exceeds that of all 
other living men, through the " salvation " 
which God vouchsafes him. That ealvation 
is partly temporal, consisting in deliverance 
from his foes; partly of an unearthly and 
spiritnal character, arising out of his rela- 
tionship to the coming Messiah. It is from 
the latter point of view, rather than the 
former, that it is said. Honour and majesty 
hast then laid upon him. 

Yer. 6. — For thou hast made him most 
blessed for ever ; literally, for thou settegt 
him to he hlee$ings for ever. Thou makest 
him, i.e., to be a perennial source of blessings 
to men. As all mankind were blessed in 
Abraham (Gen. xii. 3 ; xviii. 18 ; xxii. 18), 
i.e. in his seed, so were they all blessed in 
David's seed. Ihou hast made him exceed- 
ing glad with thy countenance ; i.e. with 
thy favour and protection, so frequently 
and so markedly extended to bim. 

Ver. 7. — For the king trusteth in the 
Lord. This is at once the ground and the 
result of God's favour to him. God favours 
David because of his trust, and David trusts 
in God because of his favour. The result 
is that, through the mercy (or, loving-kind- 
nest, Revised Version) of the Most High he 
shall not be moved (comp. Pss. xv. 5 ; oxii. 6). 
The words appear to denote a conviction, 
as Professor Alexander says, that David 
" would never be shaken from bis standing 
in God's favour." This conviction we may 
well conceive him to have felt, and to have 
regarded as one that might fittingly be ex- 
pressed by bis subjects, in whose mouth he 
placed it. But such a conviction is not 
always borne out by events, and David 
confesses elsewhere, that, at any rate, once 
in his life, after he had said, "I shall never 
be moved," God " hid away his face from 
him," and he "was troubled" (Ps. iix. 
6,7). 

Vers. 8 — 12. — In this second portion of 
the psalm, the people address themselves 
to David, anticipating future glories for 
him. " Having shown what God would do 
for bis anointed, the psalm now describes 
what the latter shall accomplish through 
Divine assistance " (Alexander). Past suc- 
cess is taken as a guarantee of victory over 
all other enemies. 

Ver. 8. — Thine hand shall find out all 
thine enemies; i.e. "shall reach them, at- 

P.SALMS. 



tain them, punish them " (comp. 1 Sam 
xxxi. 3). Thy right hand (the hand ot 
greater power) shall find ont those that 
hate thee; and, ot course, puuisb cbem 



Ver. 9. — Thou shalt make them as a fiery 
oven in the time of thine anger. Some sup- 
pose a reference to tiie event mentioned in 
2 Sam. xii. 31, "He (David) made tliem 
(the Ammonites) to pass through the briek- 
Itiln ; " but the expression " fiery oven " 
is probably not intended to be taken 
literally, but metaphorically. Severe suffer- 
ing is continually compared in Scripture to 
confinement in an oven or furnace (see Dent. 
iv. 20 ; 1 Kings viii. 51 ; Isa. xlviii. 10 ; 
Jer. xi. 4 ; Ezek. xxii. 18, 20, 22 ; Mai. iv. 
1). A nd we may best understand the pre- 
sent passage to mean simply that in the 
time of bis anger David would subject such 
of his enemies as fell into his hands to 
very terrible sufferings. (See, ae showing 
what extreme severities David did some- 
times inflict on captured enemies, 2 Sam. xii. 
31 which is to tlie point, as also is 1 Kings xi. 
15, 16.) The Lord shall swallow them up 'm. 
his wrath, and the fire shall devour them. 
The metaphor is followed up, with the 
addition that what was previously attri- 
buted to David alone is here declared to 
have the sanction of God. 

Ver. 10. — Their fruit shalt thou destroy 
from the earth ; i.e. their offspring or pro- 
geny. Joab, by David's orders, remained 
in Edom " until he had cut off every male " 
(1 Kings xi. 16). And their seed from 
among the children of men. The second 
clause, as so often, re-eohoei the first, 
without adding anything to it. 

Ver. 11. — ^For they intended evil against 
thee. Their destruction is brought upon 
them by their own selves. They plot 
against the people of God, and thus provoke 
God to anger, and cause him to deliver 
them into their enemy's hand. It does not 
matter that they can effect nothing. The 
" intention " is enough. They imagined a 
miscbievons device, which they are not able 
to perform. The inability is not so much 
from a deficiency of strength in themselves, 
as from the opposition offered to their 
schemes by God. The best-laid plans are 
powerlesi, if God wills to ba£3e them. 

Ver. 12. — Therefore shalt thou make 
them turn their back ; literally, their neck 
(comp. Ps. xviii. 40). The meaning is 
simply, "Thou shalt put them to flight." 
When thou shalt make ready thine arrows 
upon thy strings against the face of them. 
The Authorized Version, by supplying 
"when" and "thine arrows," expresses 
what the psalmist has left to the intelli- 
gence of the reader. The psalmist says, 
" Thou shalt put them to flight ; thou shalt 



146 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XXI. 1 — \i. 



make ready upon thy stringa against the 
face of tliem," no doubt meaning that the 
discharge of arrows would produce the 
hasty flight, but not saying it. 

Yer. 13. — ^Be thou exalted, lord, in tUne 
own strength. The psalm, as already re- 
marked, ends, ai it began, with the praise 



of God. "Be thou exalted" means, "Be 
thou lifted up, both in thyself, and in the 
praises of thy people" (oomp. Pss. xviii 46; 
xlvi. 10). So will we sing and praise thy 
power. We, at any rate, will do our part to 
exalt thee. Our tongues shall ever sing of 
the great deeds thou doest for us. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 2. — 2%e triumplt of victory. " Thou hast given him his heart's desire." We 
seem to hear in this psalm the trumpets and harps and shawms of the temple, and 
iubflant voices of Levites praising God for some great victory. Joy-bells are rung and 
Te Dewn laudamus chanted because the king has come home in triumph. The psalm 
is closely connected with the preceding one. Th^e we see the king going forth to 
war, consecrating his banner and trusting his cause to God. The Church prays, 
"The Lord hear thee . . . grant thee according to thine own heart" (Ps. xx. 1 — 4). 
Here it triumphs in victory, and praises Gk)d as the Hearer of prayer. Whether the 
psalm refers to some special victory of David or any of his successors; or whether it 
be applied to Christ and his kingdom, the practical spiritual lessons we may draw 
from it are the same. One of the greatest Jewish commentators says, " Our ancient 
doctors interpreted this psalm of King Messiah ; but against the heretics (Christians) 
it is better to understand it of David " (Bashi, quoted by Perowne). Take up briefly 
the leading thoughts which the text naturally suggests. 

I. Dgsibe is thi mainspbino of lifb. Could the infinite multitude of de.sires, 
good or bad, transient or constant, noble or base, loving or selfish, which at this 
moment agitate human hearts, all cease, and be replaced by dull apathy, hope and effort 
would die. The whole busy drama of life would come to a dead stand, like an engine 
stopping when the fire is burnt out. Because so many of these desires are either 
wrong or ill-regulated, the word " lust " — often used in our English Bible, originally 
meaning simply " pleasure " or " desire " — ^has come to have an ill meaning. St. James 
puts his finger on these ungoverned discordant desires as the source of all the strife 
that disturbs the world (Jas. iv. 1, 2). If all hearts submitted their desires to reason 
and God's law, the world would be one vast peace society. Vexatious litigation and 
unfair competition would be unknovm. 

II. Therefore oub heart's desire is the test op dub chabacteb. Not what a 
man says and does, but what he would like to say and do, if he could and dared, decide 
his character. " As he thinketh in his heart, so is he." From the momentary wish, 
too unreasonable or too languid to stir us to action, to the deep steadfast purpose which 
rules a life, our desires mark us for what we are, and mould us to what we shall be. 
Find what it is you deeply and habitually desire, and you have the key to your 
characters (Prov. xix. 22). 

III. Desibe IB THE SOUL OP PBATBR. If we do not present to God our heard 
desire, we do not pray. Words without desire are not livino; prayer, only a dead form. 
Desire without words may be the truest, highest kind of prayer (Rom. viii. 26). Here 
is the peril of even the best forms of prayer. Their benefit is that they help to put 
our best desires into better words than we could find for ourselves ; and by the power 
of association, as well as aptness, quicken our desires and instruct us what we ought to 
desire. Their danger is that we may mistake form and habit for life and spirit — a danger 
not confined to set forms. Extempore prayer may be as heartless and lifeless as a 
Tartar prayer-mill. Our own private prayers may degenerate into dead forms. Every 
earnest Christian (I suppose) is aware of this danger. When men came to our Saviour, 
his question was not " What have you to say f " but " What vnlt thou that I should 
do unto thee ? " What is thy heart's desire » 

IV. The whole world of human desire is open to God's bte. Heart-secrets are 
no secrets to him (Jer. xvii. 9, 10). The silent wish that flashed to the surface of 
consciousness, soaring up into light, or plunging, like a guilty thing, into darkness — 
Gk)d saw it ; sees it still. The passionate longing, so timid yet so strong that the 
heart would die sooner than betray it, is to him as though proclaimed with sound of 



rs. XXI. 1—13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa J47 

trumpet. No wisli so sudden, strange, ambitious, as to take him by surprise. No 
lawful desire but he has provided for its satisfaction, either in creatures or in his own 
uncreated fulness. And unlawful desires are lo, not because he forbids anything really 
good for us, but because they mean our harm, not happiness. This perfect Divint 
knowledge of all our desires, and of the wisdom or unwisdom of granting them, is not 
•confined, remember, to the moment when we become conscious of them, or present 
them in prayer. They are foreseen. For the most part — perhaps, if we knew all, in 
every case — an answer to prayer implies preparation. Our prayer for " daily bread " il 
answered out of the fulness of last year's harvest — the fruit of all harvests since corn 
was first reaped and sown. This abyss of Divine foreknowledge utterly confounds our 
intellect ; yet to doubt it would be to doubt if God is God. Why then, with this 
boundless knowledge — foreknowledge — of all our desires and the conditiong of their 
fulfilment, has Ood appointed prayer f Why does his Word show it to us as the 
very heart of religion? Partly, we may venture to say, because God delights to 
answer prayer. If not, it would scarcely be true — at least intelligible — that "God is 
love." Partly because blessings are doubly, nay, tenfold, precious when they come in 
answer to prayer; a strong help to faith, a spur to hope, an assurance of God's love, 
and powerful motive to love (Prov. xiii. 19). But supremely (I venture to think) in 
order that what is deepest, innermost, strongest, in our nature — our " heart's desire " 
— should bring us closest to God ; make us intensely feel our dependence on him ; be 
consecrated, being offered to him in prayer. 

V. Thank God, our heart's desires — how large, lofty, pure, reasonable, soever— 
ARE KOT THE MEASURE OF God's GIVING ; do not ciroumscrlbe his willingness, any 
niore than his power. He is " able to do exceeding abundantly," etc. (Eph. iii. 20). If 
men's desires are like the sea, his mercy is the shore. His chiefest, " his unspeakable 
Gift" came in answer to no desire of human hearts or prayer from human lips. " God 
so loved " a prayerless, "thankless, godless " world, that he gave his only begotten Son." 
This Qift has given us a new measure of expectation (Rom. viii. 32). What is more vital, 
it has opened a new fountain of desire in our hearts, and thereby enlarged, deepened, 
exalted, the whole scope of our life. Desire to be like Christ, to glorify Christ, to be 
with Christ, — these three give to life a new meaning, purpose, hope. If these be our 
heart's desires, they are secure of fulfilment, because they are in agreement with 
•God's most glorious Gift, his most merciful purpose, his most precious promises. Here, 
as everywhere, our Saviour has left us an example, that we should follow his steps. 
We know what the supreme consuming desire of his heart was John iv. 34. In the 
midst of life and usefulness, he longed for death ; not as an escapj from this world, but 
as the accomplishment of bis destined work (Luke xii. 50; John x. 17, 18). "For 
the joy," etc. (Hcb. xii. 2). In your salvation and mine he sees " of the travail of hia 
sour'(Isa. liii. 24). 

CoNOLUBiON. We are furnished mih. a. practical test — first, of our desires ; secondly, 
of our prayers. Our desires (we said) are the index to our character. Will they fit 
into our prayers? Are they such that we can come with boldness to the throne of grace 
through the blood of Jesus, and say, " Lord, all my desire is before thee " (Ps. xxxviii. 
^ ; Isa, xxvi. 8) ? Prayer (we said) is living, real, worth offering, only as it is the 
utterance of our desires, the pouring out of our heart. Are our prayers such a true 
outbreathing of our " heart's desire " ? Suppose, when you have joined in some high- 
toned hymn, or prayed in the earnest words of some ancient saint, a voice from heaven 
were to ask, " Do you mean what you say ? " would it be for good or ill, here and 
hereafter, if God indeed granted your heart's desire? 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 
Vers. 1 — 13. — A royal thanksgiving for answers to prayer. (For a day of^ national 
thanksgiving.) We fail to see, in the structure of this psalm, sufficient indications of its 
being the counterpart of the preceding one, to lead us to call it a Te Demn, to be 
Bung on returning from battle as victor. It would equally well suit other occasions on 
which the grateful hearts of king and people desired to render praises in the house of 
Ood for mercies received ; e.g. ver. 4 would be equally adapted to the recovery of the 
king from sickness. Its precise historic reference it is, however, now impossible to 



148 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [m txi. 1— 13. 

ascertain; but this is of comparatively small importance. That the paalm is meant 
for a public thanksgiving is clear ; and thus, with differences of detail in application 
thereof according to circumstances, it may furnish a basis for helpful teaching on days 
of national rejoicing over the mercies of God. We must, however, carefully avoid two 
errors in opening up the hid treasure of this psalm. We must not interpret it as if 
its references were only temporal, nor as if we lost sight of the supernatural revelation 
and of the Messianic prophecies which lie in the background thereof ; nor yet, on the 
other hand, may we interpret its meaning as if the religious knowledge or conceptions 
of Israel's king were as aavanced as the thoughts of Paul or John. E.g. " His glciy is 
great in thy salvation." If we were to interpret this word " salvation " as meaning, 
primarily, the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, we should be guilty of an ana- 
chronism. Its first meaning is, rescue from impending trouble or danger. This, how- 
ever, may be regarded as prophetic of the trixmiph awaiting the Church's King ; but 
our exposition will be sure and clear only as we begin with the historic meaning, and 
then move carefully forward. The prayers and thanksgivings of a people cannot rise 
above the level of inspiration and revelation which marked the age in which they 
lived. We, indeed, may now set our devotions into another form than that which is 
represented by vers. 8 — 12 ; and, indeed, we are bound so to do. For since revelation 
is progressive, devotion should be correspondingly progressive too. So that if the 
remarks we make on the psalm are in advance of the thinkings of believers in David's 
time, let us remember that this is because we now look at all events and read all trut'a 
in the light of the cross, and not because we pretend to regard such ftilness of meanii^ 
as belonging to the original intention of the psalm. There are here six lines of expo- 
sition before us. 

I. Hebb is the beoall of a tiue or tboitble — or tboublk which oathebed 
BOUHD THE PEBBON OF THE KING. (Ver. 1.) We Cannot decide (nor is it important that 
we should) what was the precise kind of anxiety which had been felt. The word " life " 
in the fourth verse may indicate that some sickness had threatened the life of the 
king. The word "deliverance" and the allusions to "enemies" rather point to peril 
from hostile forces. Either way, when a monarch's life is threatened, either through 
sickness or war, the burden is very heavy on the people's heart. The first cause of 
anxiety was felt in Hezekiah's time ; the second, oftien and notably in the days of 
Jehoshaphat. 

II. The tbouble led to fbateb. We gather from the contents of the psalm that 
the specific prayer was for the king's life, either by way of recovery from sickness or of 
victory in war. Note : Whatever is a burden on the hearts of God's people may be 
laid before God in prayer. Prayer may and should be specific; and even though our 
thought, desires, and petitions in prayer may be very defective, still we may tell to God 
all we feel, knowing that we shall never be misunderstood, and that the answer will 
come according to the Father's infinite wisdom, and not according to onr defects ; yea, 
our God will do abundantly for us above all that we can ask or think. Hence we have 
to note — 

III. The pbayeb BBonanT an answeb. The trust of the praying ones was not 
disappointed (cf. vers. 2 — 7). The jubilant tone of the words indicates that the prayer 
had not been barely, but overflowingly answered. God's good things had gone far ahead 
of the petitions, and. had even anticipated the king's wishes and wants (ver. 3). " Life " 
had been asked ; and God had granted " length of days for ever and ever." This 
cannot refer to the personal earthly life of any human king; the meaning is that in 
the deliverance vouchsafed there had been a new confirmation of that "everlasting 
covenant, ordered in all things and sure," wherein God had promised to establish 
David's throne for ever (Pss. Ixi. 6 ; cxxxii. 11—14). Dr. Moll says,* " I find here the 
strongest expression of the assurance of faith in the personal continuance of the life of 
those who hold fast to the covenant of grace iu living communion with Jehovah." 
Yea, the old Abrahamic covenant has been again confirmed. " Thou hast made him 
to be blessings for ever " (see Revised Version margin). So that this deliverance thus 
celebrated in Hebrew song is at once a development of God's gracious plan, and the 
answer to a king's and a people's prayer 1 " Thou settest a crown of pure gold upon 
his nead" (ver 3; cf. 2 Sam. xii. 30). 

' See Schaffs Lange, ' Old Testament Psalms,' p. 162 ; and Pausset's ' Sfndies,' p. 109. 



PS. XXI. 1—13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 149 



IV. New AN8WBB8 TO PRATER INSPIRED NEW HOPE. (Ver. 7.) " Through the loving- 
kindness of the Most High he shall not be moved " (of. Pss. xxiii. 6 ; Ixiii. 7). He who 
proves himself to be our Refuge to-day, thereby proves himself our Refuge far every 
day. 

V. The PBOVIDBNTIAI, INTBRPOSITIONS IN ANSWER TO PRATER AFFORDED NEW ILLTT8- 

TBATI0N8 OF GJod'b WORKS AND WATS. (Vers. 8 — 13.) God is what he is. He remains 
" the same, yesterday, and to-day, and for ever." But he cannot seem the same to his 
enemies as to his friends ; the tame events which fulfil the hopes of his friends are the 
terror and dread of his foes. This general principle is always true : it must be (ver. 10) ; 
and side by side with the Divine provision for the continuance of good, there is the 
Divine provision for shortening the entail of evil (see Exod. xx. 6, Revised Version 
margin ; and Deut. vii. 9). But we are not bound in our devotions to single out others 
as the enemies in whose overthrow and destruction we could rejoice. At the same 
time. It is but just to the Hebrews to remember that they were the chosen people of 
Grod, and from their point of view, and with their measure of light, they regarded their 
enemies as God's enemies (see Fs. cxxxix. 22). The way David sometimes treated his 
foes can by no means be justified.* The views of truth which God's people hold are often 
sadly discoloured by the conventionalisms of their time; and David was no exception 
thereto. We may pray for the time when Zion's King "shall have put all enemies 
under his feet," and even praise him for telling u» that it will be so. But we may 
surely leave all details absolutely with him. 

VI. The evbb-unfoldino disclosures of what Ck)0 is mat well gall forth 
SHOUTS OF jotous SONS. (Ver. 13.) When we have such repeated illustrations of 
God's loving-kindness, mercy, and grace, we can feel unfeigned delight in singing of 
iuB power. What rapturous delight may we have in the thought that— 

" The voice which rolls the stars along 
Speaks all the promises ; " 

tluit the same Being who is most terrible to sin, is infinitely gracions to tb« sinner, and 
that to all who trust him he is their " exceeding Joy " I — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — " Let the children ofZion lejoyfvl mi their King." This psalm concerns 
the king. But the question is which king ? It may have been David. There is much 
that might apply to him. Perhaps on his recovery from some sickness, or on his 
return iirom some signal victory over his enemies, or on the occasion of his birthday 
or some great anniversary, David and his people may have rejoiced before the Lord 
witii the voice of joy and praise. But a greater than David is here. If the psalm in 
part is true of David, it finds its highest and most complete fulfilment in David's Son 
and Lord, and in the glorious salvation which he has accomplished /or Ms people. We 
know that Jesus is a King. As a King he was announced by Grabriel (Tiuke i. 32) ; as 
a King he was worshipped in his cradle by the Wise Men (Matt. ii. 11); as a King he 
was rejected by the Jews, persecuted by the chief priests, and crucified by Pilate 
(John xix. 19). And as a King he rose from the dead, was received up into glory, and 
now rules in power in heaven and upon earth (1 Tim. vi. 15). To this day and every- 
where Jesus receives royal honours — ^his people say as with one voice and one heart, in 
the words of the ancient hymn, " Thou art the King of glory, O Christ ! " The burden 
of this psalm may be said to be, " Let the children of Zion be joyful in their King." 

L Because of his favour with God. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Other kings have been 
honoured of God, but none like Jesus. From the cradle to the cross we find continual 
proof and token of the favour of God towards him (Luke ii. 52 ; ix. 35 ; John iii. 35 ; 
viii. 29). The secret was in the perfect accord between the Father and the Son, and 
the absolute and complete surrender of the Son to do his Father's wiU. What was 
said of the land of Israel, and still more tenderly of the house of the Lord, is true 
in the higher sense of God's dear Son, " Mine eyes and mine heart shall be there 
perpetually " (Deut. xi. 12 ; 1 Kings ix. 3). 

II. Because of the great salvation which he has accomplished. (Vers. 
1, 5.) 1. This salvation was very dear to Mm. It was " his heart's desire." 2. Thii 

• E.g. the Ammonites (2 Sam. xii. 31). He then sadly tamisb«d his golden orown 



150 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pa. xxi. 1— 13. 

salvation was obtained iy a stupendous sacrifice. " Life " (ver. 4). We may take the 
Bcece in the Garden of Gethsemane as the true interpretation of this passage (Matt, 
xxvii. 38 — 44). There we see Jesus in an agony. There we see him " asking life," 
thrice, with strong crying and tears. And there we see him submitting, with the truest 
faith and love, to the holy will of God, which decreed that he should die that sinners 
miglit be saved (Matt, xxvii. 53, 54; John x. 17, 18; Heb. ii. 14, 15). 3. This 
salvation has secured inestimable heneflts to mankind. (Ver. 6; 2 Cor. v. 14, 15; 
Ejih. i. 7; ii. 4— 6.) 

1 II. BBCAUBB or THE SURE TBIUMPH OF HIS CAUSE AND KINGDOM. (Vers. 7 13.) 

1. Certain. (Ver. 8.) Might here is right. .God's word is pledged, and what he has 
promised he is able to perform. The King's strength is still in God, and through him 
all I .pposition shall be overthrown. 2. GompHete. (Vers, 9 — 12.) The same power 
that is able to crush and confound the foe is arrayed in defence of God's people. The 
end is as the beginning — praise. It is like an anticipation of the song of Moses and 
the Lamb of the Apocalypse (Bev. xv. 3). — W P. 

Ver. 4. — Prayer. What is true of Christ is true, in a sense, of his people. Here we 
learn — 

I. The tbub nature op prater. It is the desire of the heart (ver. 2). This is 
frequently taught by doctrine and fact in Holy Scripture. Words are of the mouth, 
thouiihts are of the heart. " Words without thoughts never to heaven go." It is asking 
of God for things agreeable to his wUl. While there is real " asking," there is also 
loving trust and acquiescence. God's will is aye the best will. 

II. Some light as to the manner in which God answers prater. 1. By giving 
what is good. " Life." 2. • In a higher sense than we thought of. " For ever." 3. In 
such a way as shall he for the greatest benefit to others as well at to ourselves. "Bless- 
ings " (cf. Paul, " more needful for you," Phil. i. 24). Hence faith is confirmed. 
Our hopes as to the future are sustained. Our hearts are soothed amidst the disap- 
pointments and trials of life, by the assurance that all is well. We ask " life " for 
ourselves ; and God gives what he sees best. We ask " life " for our friends. Some 
child or loved one is in peril of death. We plead for him. We entreat that he may 
be spared. We continue with " strong crying and tears " to pray that his life, so 
precious and so dear, may be prolonged. But in vain. He dies. We are troubled. 
We mourn in bitterness of soul, as if God had forgotten to be gracious. But when we 
look at things aright, we find comfort. God has answered us in his own way. He 
knows what is best. Your little one has gone quickly to heaven. Your darling boy 
has been taken to a nobler field of service than earth. The " desire of your eyes " has 
been caught up into the glory of God. There they await us. Love never faileth. The 
fellowship in Christ endures for ever. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Thanksgiving for prayer answered. Close connection between this 
and the previous psalm — that a prayer for the king; this a thanksgiving that the 
prayer has been answered. The people speak to God (vers. I — 7) ; then (vers. 8 — 12) 
they speak to the king ; then in ver. 13 they speak again to God. The occasion of 
the psalm has been disputed. Some think it is a birthday ode; some, a coionation 
hymn ; and others, a thanksgiving for victory in battle. Let us lake it first — 

I. As A bibthdat ode. "He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even 
length of days for ever and ever." 1. 'This notwithstanding his sin. Which was 
thought in the Hebrew mind to forfeit length of days. His long life, therefore, was a 
special act of God's salvation (vers. 1, 4, 6). 2. His long life had been made a prosperous 
one. (Ver. 2.) His heart's desire had been granted him. How few can say this of a 
long life ! How few feel that they have grasped the greatest good in life 1 

II. A coronation hymn. (Vers. 3, 5.) " Thou forestallest, or surprisest him with 
choicest blessings ; thou settest a crown of gold upon his head." " Honour and majesty 
hast thou laid upon him." 1. This highest earthly honour was to represent God, He 
was God's vicegerent to the nation. 'The Lord's anointed, who stood on earth for God 
m heaven; the image of the invisible King. This ought to be the idea still of all the 
highest earthly offices — king, statesman, teacher. 2. But the grandest crown is that of 
supreme morcU influence. That is Christ's crown ; he is King of men, not by physicaj 



n, XXII. 1 — 31.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



161 



force, but by spiritual power. And this is our brightest crown when we can influence 
men supremely for their good. 

III. THANKsaivma for victory in battle. (Vers. 8 — 12.) This may be the 
bearing of the whole strain of the psalm. Then from his previous victories it is 
prophesied in the eighth and following verses that he shall gain the victory in all 
future battles. 1. Trust in Ood is the source of all our strength in our conflicts. This 
is the victory that overcometh the world, even your faith — not a passive, but an active 
faith. 2. Former victories show us that we can, if we vjill, conquer in all future 
conflicts. By taking unto us " the whole armour of God." — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXII. 

Thxbb i( no psalm which has raised lo 
much contioverBy as this. Admitted to be 
Messiauio by the early Hebrew oommenta- 
toTS, it is by some understood wholly of 
David ; by others, applied to the Israelite 
people, or to the pious part of it ; by others 
again, regarded as an ideal representation 
of the Bufferings of the righteous man, and 
the effects of them; and by one or two 
eccentric critics, explained as referring to 
HezeMah or Jeremiah. Against the view 
that David means to describe in the psalm 
his own dangers, sufferings, and deliverance, 
it is reasonably urged that David was at 
no time in the oironmstanoes here described 
— he wag never without a helper (ver. 11) ; 
never "despised of the people" (ver. 6);; 
never itripped of his clothes (ver. 17) ; never 
in the state of exhaustion, weakness, and 
emaciation that are spolien of (vers. 14 — 
17) ; never pierced either in his hands or 
feet (ver. 16); never made a gazing-stook 
(ver. 17); never insulted by having his 
garments parted among his persecutors, or 
lots oast upon his vesture (ver. 18). The 
suppositions that the nation is meant, or the 
pious part of it, or an ideal righteous man, 
are negatived by the impossibility of apply- 
ing to them the second portion of the psalm 
(vers. 22 — 313, ^^id the consideration that 
abstractions of the kind suggested belong 
to the later and not the earlier phases of 
a nation's poetry. The only explanation 
which remains is that traditional in the 
Christian Church, that David, full of the 
Holy Ghost, was moved to speak in the 
Person of Christ, and to describe, not his 
own sufferings and perils and deliverance, 
but those of his great Antitype, the Messiah, 
which were revealed to him in vision or 



otherwise, and which he was directed to 
put on record. The close correspondence 
between the psalm and the incidents of the 
Passion is striking, and is admitted on all 
hands, even by Hupfeld, and it is a corre- 
spondence brought about by the enemies of 
the teaching of Christ, the Jews and the 
Bomans. Beferences indicative of the pro- 
phetic and Messianic character of the psalm 
are frequent in the New Testament. Note 
especially the following : Matt, xzvii. 35, 
46; Mark xv. 34; John zix. 24; Heb. 
U. 12. 

The psalm is composed, manifestly, of 
two portions — the complaint and prayer 
of a sufferer (vers, 1 — 21), and a song of 
rejoicing after deliverance (vers. 22 — 31). 
According to some critics, the first of these 
two portions is also itself divided into two 
parts — each consisting of two strophes (vers. 
1 — 10 and vers. 12 — 21), which are linked 
together by a single ejacalatory verse (ver. 
11). A further analysis divides each of tlie 
three strophes of ten V(!rBes into two strophes 
of five; but there is certainly no such 
division in the second strophe of ten, since 
vers. 16 and 17 are most closely connected 
together. 

The composition of the psalm by David, 
though not universally admitted, has in its 
favour a large majority of the critics. The 
imagery is Davidioal ; the sudden transition 
at ver. 22 is Davidical; the whole paalm 
"abounds in expressions which occur 
frequently, or exclasively, in psalms 
generally admitted to have been composed 
by David " (' Speaker's Commentary '). 
David's authorship is moreover distinctly 
asserted in the title, and confirmed by the 
"enigmatic superscription," which is • 
Davidical fancy. 



152 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[p8. xxn. 1 — 31. 



Ver. 1. — My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me % Not a cry of despair, but a 
cry of loving faith, "My God, my God — 
Why hast thou for a time withdrawn thy- 
self?" It is remarkable that our Lord's 
quotation of this passage does not follow 
exactly either the Hebrew or the Chaldee 
paraphrase — the Hebrew having 'azab- 
thatii for sdbacthani, and the Chaldee 
paraphrase metul ma for lama. May we 
not CI include that it is the thought, and not 
its verbal expression by the sacred writers, 
that is inspired ? Why art thou so far firom 
helping me, and from the words of my 
roaring ? It is very doubtful whether our 
translators have done right in supplying 
the words which they have added. The 
natural translation of the Hebrew would 
be, Far from my talvation are the words of 
my roaring. And this rendering yields a 
suifieiently good sense, viz. "Far from 
effecting my salvation (or deliverance) are 
the words of my roaring ; " i.e. of my loud 
complaint. Our Lord's " strong crying and 
tears" in the garden (Heb. v. 7) did not 
produce his deliverance. 

Ver. 2. — my God, I cry in the daytime, 
bnt thoti hearest not ; rather, thou anawerett 
Hot; i.e. thou dost not interpose to deliver 
me. And in the night season, and am not 
silent (see Matt. xivi. 36 — 44 ; Mark xiv. 
34—39 ; Luke xxii. 41—44). 

Ver. 3.— But thou art holy. Still God is 
holy ; the Sufferer casts no reproach upon 
him, bnt "commits himself to him that 
judgeth righteously" (1 Pet. ii. 23). O 
thou that inhabiteet the praises of Israel. 
God is seen enthroned in his sanctuary, 
where tlie praises and prayers of Israel are 
ever being offered up to him. If he hears 
them, he will assuredly, in his own good 
time, hear the Sufferer. 

Ver. 4. — Our fathers trusted in thee. It 
sustains the Sufferer to think liow many 
before him have cried to God, and trusted in 
him, and for a while been seemingly not 
heard , and yet at length manifestly heard 
and saved. They trusted in thee, and thou 
didst (ultimately) deliver them. 

Ver. 5. — They cried unto thee, and were 
delivered. If they were delivered because 
they cried, the Sufferer who cries " day and 
night " (ver. 2) can scarcely remain unheard 
for ever. They trusted in thee, and were 
not confounded; or, were 7wt pat to shame 

(o& KaTTiffX^V^fif^OLV, LXX.). 

Ver. 6. — But I am a worm, and no man 
(coinp. Job XXV. 6; Isa. xli. 14). Tlie 
worm is a symbol of extreme weakness 
and lielplessness — ^it is naturally despised, 
derided, trodden upon. A reproach of men, 
and despised of the people (comp. isa. 
xlix. 7; liii. 3; and for the fulUlment, see 
Matt. xxviL 39). How deeply Christ was 



"despised of the people" appeared most 
evidently when they expressed their desire 
that, instead of him, a murderer should be 
granted to them (Acts iii 14). 

Ver. 7. — All they that see me laugh me 
to sooru; i^^iivKriipiaiv lu, LXX. (comp. 
Luke xxiiL 35, " The people stood behold- 
ing ; and the rulers also with them derided 
him (i^efivKT'fiptCoi')"'). They shoot out the 
lip, they shake the head, saying (see Matt. 
xxvii. 39; Mark xv. 29: "They that 
passed by railed on him, waggitig their 
lieadi," where the expression of the 
Septuagint is again used). 

Ver. 8. — He trusted on the Lord that he 
would deliver him. This is a translation 
of the Septuagint Version rather than of 
the Hebrew text, which runs. Trust in the 
Lord (literally. Boll [thy care] upon the 
Lord) : let him deliver him. Let him deliver 
him, seeing he delighted in him. St. 
Matthew has put it on record that this 
text was actually cited by the scribes and 
elders who witnessed the Crucifixion, and 
applied to our Lord in scorn (Matt xxvii. 
43). They quoted apparently from the 
Septuagint, but with an iuaoouraoy common 
at the time, when books were scarce, and 
persons had to depend on their memory of 
what they had occasionally heard read. 

Ver. 9. — But thou art he that took me out 
of the womb (comp. Job x. 8 — 11). God'i 
creatures have always a claim upon him 
from the very fact that they are his 
creatures. Every sufferer may appeal to 
God as his Maker, and therefore bound to 
be his Helper and Preserver. Thou didst 
make me hope when I was upon my 
mother's breasts. Thou gavest me the 
serene joy and trust of infancy — that happy 
time to which man looks back with such 
deep satisfaction. Bvery joy, every satii- 
faotion, came from thee. 

Ver. 10. — I was cast upon thee from the 
womb. In a certnin sense this is true of 
all ; but of the Holv Child it was jnoit true 
(Luke ii. 40, 49, 52). He was "cast" on 
God the Father's care in an especial way. 
Thou art my God from my mother's belly. 
The Child Jesus was brought near to God 
from his birth (Luke i. 35; ii. 21, 22). 
From the first dawn of consciousness God 
was liis God (Luke ii. 40, 49). 

Ver. 11. — Be not far from me. The 
considerations dwelt upon in vers. 3 — 5, 
and again in vers. 9, 10, have removed 
the sense ol desertion expressed in ver. 1 ; 
and the Sufferer can now confidently oaU 
on God to help him. "Be not far from 
me," he says, for trouble is near. The 
time is come when aid is most urgently 
required. Por there is none to help; 
literally, not a helper. David himseU 
had never been in suoh straits. He had 



PS. XXII. 1 — 31.] 



THE BOOK OF PSA ;MS. 



153 



always had friends and followers. Under 
Saul's peiseuution he had a friend in 
Jonathan ; he was supported by his father 
and his brethren (1 Sam. xxii. 1) ; in a short 
time he found himself at the head of four 
hundred (1 Sam. xxii. 2), and then of six 
hundred men (1 Sam. xxv. 13). In 
Absalom's rebellion there remained faithful 
to him the priestly tribe (2 Sam. xv. 24) 
and the Gibborim (2 Sam. xv. 18), and 
others to the number of some thousands 
(2 Sam. xviii. 4). But he whom David 
prefigured, his Antitype, was deserted, was 
alone — "All the disciples forsook him and 
fled" (Matt. XX vi. 56)— he was truly one 
that " had no helper." 

Ver. 12.— Many bulls have compassed 
me. The Sufferer represents the adver- 
saries who crowd around him under the 
figure of "bulls"— fierce animals in all 
parts of the world, and in Palestine 
particularly wild and ferocious. "Bulls 
and . bu£faloeB are very numerous," says 
Canon Tristram, "in Southern Judsea; 
they are in the habit of gathering in a 
circle around any novel or unaccustomed 
object, and may be easily instigated into 
charging with their horns " (' Natural 
History of the Bible,' p. 71). Strong bulls 
of BashaH have beset me roond. Bashan, 
the richest pasture-ground of Palestine, 
produced the largest and strongest animals 
(Ezek. xxxix. 18). Hence "tlje kine of 
Bashan " became an expression for powerful 
oppressors (Amos iv. 1). 

Ver. 13.— They gaped upon me with their 
mouths. One metaphor is superseded by 
another. Fierce and threatening as bulls, 
the adversaries are ravenous as lions. 
They "gape with their months," eager to 
devour, r^y to spring on the prey and 
crush it in their monstrous jawi. As a 
ravening and a roaring lion. The tumult 
and noise made by those who demanded 
our Lord's death are noted by the evange- 
list, irtpura&s eKpa(ov — Sipv$os ^/kstoi (Matt, 
zxrii. 23, 24). 

Ver. 14. — I am poured out like water 
(comp. Ps._lviii. 7; 2 Sam. xiv. 14). The 
exact meaning is uncertain; but extreme 
weakness and exhaustion, something like 
utter prostration, seems to be indicated. 
And all my bones are out of joint. The 
strain of the body suspended on the cross 
would all but dislocate the joints of the 
arms, and would be felt in every bone of 
the body. Sy heart is like wax; it is 
melted in the midst of my bowels. The 
proximate cause of death in crucifixion 
is often failure of the heart's action, the 
supply of venous blood not being sufficient 
to stimulate it. Hence palpitation, faint- 
ness, and final syncope. 

Ver. 15. — My strength is dried up like 



a potsherd. All strength dies out under 
the action of the many acute pains which 
rack the whole frame, and as little remains 
as there remains of moisture in a potsherd. 
And my tongue cleaveth to my jaws. An 
extreme and agonizing thirst sets in — the 
secretions generally fail — and the saliva 
especially is suppressed, so that the mouth 
feels parched and dry. Hence the cry of 
suffering which was at last wrung from 
our Lord, when, just before the end, he 
exclaimed, "I thirst" (John xix. 28). And 
thou hast brought me into the dust of 
death, " The duat of death " is a periphrasis 
for death itself which is so closely associated 
in our thoughts with the dust of the tomb 
(see below, ver. 29; and comp. Pss. xxx. 
10; civ. 29; aud Job x. 9; xxxiv. 35; 
Eooles. ilL 20 ; xii. 7, etc.). 

Ver. 16. — For dogs have compassed me. 
"Dogs" now encompass the Sufferer, 
perhaps the subordinate agents in the 
cruelties — the rude Boman soldiery, who 
laid rough hands on the adorable Person 
(Matt, xxvii. 27 — 35). Oriental dogs are 
savage and of unclean habits, whence the 
term "dog" in the East has always been, 
and still is, a term of reproach. The 
assembly of the wioked have enolosed me ; 
or, a band of wicked ones have thut me in. 
The " band " of Boman soldiers (Mark xv. 
16) seems foreshadowed. They pierced my 
hands and my feet. There are no sufficient 
critical grounds for relinquishing (with 
Hengstenberg) this interpretation. It has 
the support of the Septuagint, the Syriao, 
the Arabic, and the Vulgate Versions, and 
is maintained by Ewald, Beinke, Bohl, 
Moll, Kay, the writer in the 'Speaker's 
Commentary,' and our Bevisers. Whether 
the true reading be hdaru (nna) or Jcdari 
C^KS), the sense will be the same, hSari 
being the apocopated participle of the verb, 
whereof kaaru is the 3rd pers. plu. indie. 

Ver. 17. — I may tell all my bones. Our 
Lord's active life and simple habits would 
give him a spare frame, while the strain of 
crucifixion would accentuate and bring Into 
relief every point of Ids anatomy. He might 
thus, If so minded, "tell all his bones." 
They look and stare upon me (comp. Luke 
xxiii. 35, "And the people stood behold- 
ing"). 

Ver. 18. — They part my garments among 
them, and cast lots upon my vesture. It 
has been well observed that " the act here 
described is not applicable either to David 
or to any personage whose history Is re- 
corded In the Bible, save to Jesus " (' Speaker's 
Commentary,' vol. iv. p. 221). Two evan- 
gelists (Matt, xxvii. 35 ; John xix. 24) note 
the fulfilment of the prophecy in the conduct 
of the soldiers at the crucifixion of Ohrist. 
The circumstance is reserved for the finaJ 



154 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. XXII. 1 — 3L 



touch in the picture, since it marked that 
all was over ; the Victim was on the point 
of expiring ; he would sever need his clothes 
again. 

Yer. 19. — ^But be not thou far from me, 
Lord (oomp. ver. 11). The special trouble 
for which he had invoked God's aid having 
been minutely described, the Sufferer reverts 
to his prayer, which he first repeats, and 
then strengthens and enforces by requesting 
that the aid may be given speedily, my 
strength, haste thee to help me. Eyaluth, the 
abstract term used for " strength," seems to 
mean " source, or substance, of all strength." 

Ver. 20. — Deliver my soul from the sword. 
"The Bword" symbolizes the authority of 
the Komau governor — that authority by 
which Christ was actually put to death. 
If he prayed, even on the cross, to be de- 
livered from it, the prayer must have been 
offered with the reservations previously 
mede in Gethsemane, "If it be possible" 
(Matt. xxvi. 39); "If thou be willing" 
(Luke zxii. 42); "Nevertheless not as I 
will, but as thou wilt." The human will in 
Christ was in favour of the deliverance ; 
the Divine will, the same in Christ as in 
his Father, was against it. Uy darling — 
literally, my only one — from the power of 
the dog. By " my darling " there is no 
doubt that the soul is intended, both here 
and in Ps. xxxv. 17. It seems to be so 
called as the most precious thing that each 
man possesses (see Matt. xvi. 26). " The 
dog " is used, not of an individual, but of 
the class, and is best explained, like the 
" dogs " in ver. 16, of the executioners. 

Ver. 21. — Save me from the lion's mouth 
(comp. ver. 13). Either the chief persecn- 
tors, viewed as a class, or Satan, their insti- 
gator, would seem to be intended. For thou 
hast heard me from the horns of the uni- 
corns; rather, even /rom the horniofthe wild 
oxen katt thou heard me. The conviction 
suddenly comes to the Sufferer that he is 
beard. Still, the adversaries are round 
about him — the "dogs," the "lions," and 
the " strong bulls of Bashan," now showing 
as ferocious wild cattle, menacing him with 
their horns. But all the Sufferer's feelings 
are changed. The despondent mood has 
passed away. He is not forsaken. He has 
One to help. In one way or another he 
knows himself — feels hinjself — delivered ; 
and he passes from despair and agony into 
a condition of perfect peace, and even exul- 
tation. He passes, in fact, from death to 
life, from humiliation to glory ; and at once 
he proceeds to show forth his thankfulness 
by a burst of praise. The last strophe of 
the psalm (vers. 22— 31) is the jubilant song 
of the Bedeeojer, now that his mediatorial 
work is done, and his life of suffering 
» finished " (John xix. 30). 



Ver. 22. — I will declare thy Name unto my 
brethren. The thought of the brethren is 
uppermost. As, when the body was re- 
moved, loving messages were at once sent 
to the disciples (Matt, xxviii. 10 ; John xx. 
17), so, with the soul of the Bedeemer in 
the intermediate state, the "brethren" are 
the first care. God's Name, and all that he 
has done — the acceptance of the sacrifice, 
the effectuation of man's salvation — shall 
be made known to them (see Heb. ii. 9 — 
12). In the midst of the congregation will 
I praise thee. He will join with them in 
praising and adoring his Father, so loon 
as circumstances allow (compare the 
Eucharist at Emmaus, Luke xxiv. 30). 

Ver. 23. — Ye that fear the Lord, praise 
him; all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify Turn; 
and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel. 
" All Israel : " all the people of God are 
called upon to join in the praise which the 
Son will henceforth offer to the Father 
through eternity. The praise of God is to 
be joined with the fear of God, according to 
the universal teaching of Scripture. 

Ver. 24. — For he hath not despised nor 
abhorred the affliction of the afflicted. The 
Father might seem by his passivity to dis- 
regard his Son's affliction; but it was not 
really so. Every pang was marked, every 
suffering sympathized with. And the 
reward received from the Father was pro- 
portionate (see Isa. liii. 12, " Therefore will 
I divide him a portion with the great, and 
he shall divide the spoil with the strong ; 
because he bath poured out his soul unto 
death ; " and Phil. ii. 8—11, "He became 
obedient unto death, even the death of the 
cross; wherefore God also hath highly 
exalted him, and given him a Name which 
is above every name : that at the Name of 
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in 
heaven, and things in earth, and things 
nnder the earth; and that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, 
to the glory of God the Father "). If either 
hath he hid his face from him ; but when he 
cried unto him, he heard. 'There was no 
real turning away, no real forsaking. Every 
cry was heard, and the cries were answered 
at the fitting moment. 

Ver. 25. — My praise shall be of thee in 
the great congregation. The phraseology 
is that of the Mosaic dispensation, with 
which alone David was acquainted. But 
the fulfilment is in those services of praise 
where, whenever Christ's disciples are 
gathered together, there is he in the midst 
of them. I will pay my vows before them 
that fear him. " Vows," in the strict sense 
of the word, are scarcely meant; rather 
" devotions " generally. 

Ver. 26. — The meek shall eat and be satis- 
fied. In the Eucharistic feasts of Christ's 



P8. XXII. 1 31.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



155 



kingdom it is " the meek " especially who 
shall eat, and be sati^iKed, feeling that they 
have all their touls lonsr for — a full banquet, 
of the very crumbs of which they are not 
worthy. They shall praise the Lord that 
seek him. The service shall be emphati- 
cally one of praise. Your heart shall live 
for ever. The result shall be life for ever- 
more ; for the body and blood of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, worthily received, preserve 
men's bodies and souls to everlaaiius life. 

Ver. 27.— All the ends of the world shall 
remember and turn unto the Lord. The 
Geutilcs from every quiirter shall come into 
the new kingdom, remembering him whom 
they had so long forgotten, Jehovah, the 
true God. And all the kindreds of the 
nations shall worship before thee. Pleo- 
nastic. A repetition of the idea contained 
in the preceding clause. (For the fulfilment, 
the histoiy of missions must be consulted.) 

Ver. 28. — For the kingdom ii the Lord's 
(oomp. Pes. xcvi. 10 ; xcvii. 1). Christ has 
taken the kingdom, and even now rules on 
the earth — not yet wholly over willing 
subjects, but over a Church that is ever ex- 
paudiii^ more and more, and tending to 
becojue universal. And he is the Governor 
among the nations. Not the Governor of 
one nation only, but of all. 

Ver. 29. — All they that be fat upon earth 
shall eat and worship. The Christian feast 
is not for the poor and needy only, like 
Jewish sacrificial feasts, but for the "fat 
ones" of the earth as well — the rich and 
prosperous. As Hengstenberg observes, 
" This great spiritual feast is not unworthy 
of the presence even of tliose who live in 
the greatest abundance : it contains a costly 
viand, which all their plenty cannot give — 



a viand for which even the satisfied are 
hungry ; and, on the other hand, the most 
needy and most miserable are not exclu led " 
(' Commentary on the Psalms,' vol. i. p. 
396). All they that go down to the dust shall 
bow before him; i.e. all mortal men what- 
soever — all that are on their way to the 
tomb — shall bow before Christ, either will- 
ingly as his worshippers, or unwillingly as 
his conquered enemies, made to lick the 
dust ut his feet. And none can keep alive 
his own soul. Life is Christ's gift ; the soul 
cannot be kept alive except through hiin, 
by his quickening Spirit (John vi. 53, tiS). 

Ver. 3.J. — A seed shall serve him. The 
Churcli is founded on a rock, and the gates 
of hell shall not prevail against it. So long 
as the world endures, Christ shall always 
have worshippers— a "seed" which will 
" serve " him. It ihall be aoconnted to 
the Lord for a generation. If we accept 
this rendering, we must understand that the 
seed of the first set of worshippers shall be 
the Lord's people for one generation, the 
seed of the next for anotiier, and go on. But 
it is suggested that the true meaning is, 
" This shall be told of the Lord to genera- 
tion after generation " (so Hengstenberg, 
Kay, Alexander, and our Eevisers). 

Ver. 31. — They shall come, and shall 
declare his rigiiteousness unto a people that 
shall be born, that he hath dons tiiis. One 
generation after another shall come, and 
shall report God's righteousness, as shown 
forth in Christ, eacn to its successor — a 
people yet to be born — telling them that 
God "has done this; " t'.e. effected all that 
is here sketched out, and so accomplished 
the work of redemption. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 4. — A pedigree of faith and piety. " Our fathers trusted," etc. The BiMe takes 
great account of pedigree. Yet not on those grounds in which men commonly glory 
— rank, title, wealth, fame ; but in the line of faith and piety. These words wsntain— 

I. A THANKFUL REMEMBftANCE. It is no Small honour and blessing to spring from 
a godly stock. Those who have not this happiness in family lineage may yet claim 
it by adoption. A true Christian has all past generations of God's people as spiritual 
ancestors (Gal. iii. 29 ; Bom. iv. 16, 17). 

II. A HOLT EXAMPLE, powerfully moving to faith, prayer, and holiness (Heb. vi. 12 ; 
xii. 1 ; 2 Tim. i. 3 — 5). Noblesse oblige. 

III. A HUMBLE CLAIM ON God's FAITHFULNESS. Bccause : 1. The trust and prayen 
of God's people in past generations were not for themselves only, but for their 
children (Gen. xvii. 18, 20). Ancestral prayers are a rich inheritance. 2. God's 
promises have regard to the children of his people (Ps. ciii. 17, 18 ; Acts ii. 39 ; iii. 25). 

IV. An encoubagembnt to faith. The experience of those who have gone before 
us, the consenting testimony of so many generations, and so innumerable a multitude 
of believers, to the truth of the Bible, the power of prayer, the reality of God's grace, 
the fulfilment of his promises, is no small or feeble aid to our faith (Ps. xxxiv. 4 — 8 ; 
Heb. xi. 32—40). 

Conclusion. 1. We inherit the past. The wise thoughts, immortal words, noble 



156 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. xxii. 1— 31, 

deeds, holy lives, fervent prayers, toils, and sufferings of those who have gone before 
us, are a great treasure and trust, of which we shall have to give account. 2. We are 
making the future. What pattern, work, prayer, memory, that they will " not willingly 
let die," are we handing down to our successors ? 

Ver. 28. — God's supreme dominion over aM nations. "The kingdom is the Lord's," 
etc. The second clause of this verse defines the meaning of the first. God's supreme 
dominion, in right and in fact, is over all nations. He reigns and he rules. There is 
a wide view of God's kingdom, as embracing the universe (Pss. oiii. 19 ; xciii. 1 ; xovii. 
1). There is also a spiritual view, in which the kingdom consists of individuals, ruled 
not by force, hut by truth, love, and the Spirit of God (Luke xvii. 21 ; John xviii. 36). 
Nations have no place here. None the less, God's government of nations is a sublime 
fact and undoubted truth, holding a prominent place in Scripture. " All authority la 
heaven and earth " (Matt, xxviii. 18) must include this. The nations are prosused 
as Christ's inheritance (Ps. ii. 8), and are to he blessed in him (Gal. iii. 8). 

L God OOVEBNS the nations by his ALL-OONTBOLLHra, WISE, JUST, AllTD UEBCirUIi 

PBOVIDENCB. This is one main lesson of the whole of Old Testament history — 
specially enforced in Jer. xviii. 7 — 10; i. 10; Gen. xv. 16, etc.; Deut. ix. 4. The 
ordered succession of empires, in Nebuchadnezzar's and Daniel's visions, emphatically 
enforces the same truth (Acts xvii. 26). The history of our own nation is a marvellous 
example, only second to that of Israel. 

XL The authority of national qoyebnment bests on Divine authobity. (Bom. 
xiii. 1 — 6.) No human being can claim authority over another human being ; no 
majority, any more than a single despot, over a minority or a single citizen, but by 
Divine ordinance. This is not merely revealed in Scripture, but imprinted and 
inwoven in human nature. 

ni. Nations, AS mhoh as individuals, abe bound by God's Law. Human laws 
lack sanction when they contradict justice ; they may be enforced, but cannot be 
reverenced. Government which outrages mercy, virtue, truth, purity, equity, denies the 
very end of its existence, and forfeits allegiance. On this ground of natural right, the 
American colonies revolted. " Natural right" is but another name for God's justice. 

rv. National life and chabaoteb, which are very far wider than government 
or state action, are within the province of Divine government ; either conform to or 
disobey God's Law and revealed will. Private, family, social, morality ; religion ; trade 
and industry in every branch ; amusement and society; education; literature; art, — 
are all favouring or hindering the formation of a " righteous nation " (Isa. xxvi, 2 ; 
Fs. cxliv. 15). (This touches the great question of state religion. Are the aims and 
means of the Church and of the state the same ? It is possible to have an established 
Church, yet an irreligious nation ; or many Churches, all free, yet a religious nation.) 

v. These wobds abe prophetic op what shall yet be. (Ps. Ixiii. 8, 11, 17 ; Bev. 
xi, 16.) Christ holds the sceptre of providence as well as of grace (Eph. i. 22); and 
" he must reign " (1 Cor. xv. 25). 

Conclusion. Practiced lessons. 1. The character of a nation depends on the 
character of its individual citizens. A truly Christian nation would be one the bulk 
of whose citizens are personally real Christians. Its laws, institutions, and policy 
would then be moulded by principles learned from God's Word. 2. Public duty, 
political, municipal, etc., far from being inconsistent with the Christian calling (as 
some teach), is, when rightly performed, religious — part of the service we owe to God. 



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOBS. 

Vers. 1 — 31. — From darkness to light ; or, the song of the early dawn. This is 
one of the most wonderful of all the psalms. It has gathered round it the study of 
expositors of most diverse types — from those who see in it scarcely aught but a 
description beforehand of the Messiah's suffering and glory, to those who see in it 
scarcely any Messianic reference at all, and who acknowledge only one sense in which 
even the term " Messianic " is to be tolerated, even in the fact that light gleams forth 
•fter the darkness. 'Both these extreme views should be avoided, and we venture t« 



PS. xxn. 1— 31.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 157 



ask for the careful and candid attention of the reader, as we more along a specific path 
in the elucidation of this psalm. The title of the psalm is significant ; literally, it reads, 
"To the chief musician [or, 'precentor'] upon Aijeleth Shahar [or, 'the hind of the 
morning, 'margin], A Psalm of David." We accept the heading, here and elsewhere, " a 
Psalm of David," unless adequate reason to the contrary can he shown. But what can 
he the meaning of the expression, " the hind of the morning " ? A reference to Fiirst's 
Lexicon will he found helpful.' The phrase is a figurative one, and signifies, " the first 
light of the morning." In this psalm we see the light of early mom breaking forth after 
the deepest darkness of the blackest night. Hence the title given above to this homily. 
But then the question comes — Whose is the darkness, and whose is the light ? We 
reply — Primarily, the writer's, whoever he may have been, whether David or any 
. fher Old Testament saint. For the psalm is not written in the third person, as is 
the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. There is no room here for the question, " Of whom 
speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man?" In Isa. liiL the 
reference is to another; in this psalm the wail is declared to be the writer's own. Yet 
we have to take note of the fact that in the New Testament there are some seven or 
eight references to this psalm in which its words and phrases are applied to the Lord 
Jesus Christ. There are other phrases in the paalm which were literally true of our 
Lord, but yet are not quoted in the New Testament.' We do not wonder at Bishop 
Perowne's remark,* " Unnatural as I cannot help thinlcing that interpretation is which 
assumes that the psalmist himself never felt the sorrows which be describes ... I hold 
that to be a far worse error which sees here no foreshadowing of Christ at all. Indeed, 
the coincidence between the sufferings of the psalmist and the sufferings of Christ is 
so remarkable, that it is very surprising that any one should deny or question the 
relation between the type and the antitype." To a like effect are the devout and 
thoi^htful words of Orelli,* " What the psalmist complains of in mere figurative, 
though highly coloured terms, befell the Son of God in veritable fact. Herein we see 
the objective connection, established of set purpose by God's providence, which so 
framed even the phrasing of the pious prayer, that without knowledge of the sttppUant 
it became prophecy, and again so controlled even what was outward and seemingly 
accidental in the history of Jesus, that the old prophetic oracles appear incorporated 
in it." There is no reason to think, on the one hand, that the writer was a mere 
machine, nor yet, on the other, that he fully knew the far-reaching significance of the 
words he used.* And this leads us to a remark which we make once for all, that there 
are two senses in which psalms may be Messianic — direct and indirect. 1. Direct. 
In these the reference is exclusively to the Messiah ; every phrase is true of him, and 
of him alone, and cannot be so translated as not to apply to him, nor so that it can, as 
a whole, apply to any one else. The fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, and also the second 
and hundred and tenth psalms are illustrations of this. 2. Indirect. In these the first 
meaning is historical, and applies to the writer himself; but many phrases therein 
have a second and far-reaching intent ; of these the fullest application is to him who 
was David's Son and yet David's Lord. The psalm before us is an illustration of this 
indirect Messianic structure; and this not only, perhaps not so much, because in tliL' 
first writing of the words the Spirit of God pointed forward to Christ, as because our 
Lord himself, having taken a human nature, and shared human experiences, found 
himself the partaker of like sorrows with the Old Testament saints, plunged into like 

> Pages 71, a, and 1370, 6. 

* Of. ver. 1 witli Matt. xzviL 46 : vers. 7, 8 with Luke zxiii. 35 and Matt xxvlL 89, 43 ; 
ver. 15 with John xix. 18 ; ver. 18 with John xix. 23, 24 and Luke xxili. 34 ; vers. 22, 2S 
with Heb. ii. 11, 12. See the admiiable appendix to the ' Variorum Bible ' (1880), pp. 20, 
21, and (1893), pp. 26, 27. 

* Perowne on the Psalms, 6th edit., p. 254. 

* 'Old Testament Prophecy,' English edit. (T. and T. Clark), p, 175. "Late in the 
Middle Ages, Jewish Mass&ra scholars approved an unsuitable reading in the Psalter (Ps. 
zxii 17, Hebrew), in order thus to take away from Christians the ground of a favourite 
Messianio interpretation " (Ewald, ' Bevelation, its Nature and its Becord,' p. 386, Clark). 

' See 1 Pet, i 10 — 12 ; the introductory chanter to the present writer's work, ' To the 
Light through the Cross ' (Dickinson) ; also Maclaren, Kirkpatrick, Pausset. aod Forbes 
hereon. 



158 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxii. 1— 31. 



horrible darkness, which found expression in the very same words, " My God, m j 
God, why hast thou forsaken mer"^ Mr. Spurgeon, indeed, admits some possible 
application to David himself, but says that believers will scarcely care to think of his 
sufferings ; they will rather fasten their gaze on those of their Lord. That is true, in 
a very touching SL-nse. At the same time, we shall lose much of the comfort the psalm 
is adapted to afford, if we do not look very distinctly at the sufferings of David, in 
order to see, with equal distinctness, how completely our Lord shared his" brethren's" 
sorrows, darkness, and groans, when he took up their burdens and made them his own.* 
Let us therefore deal with this psalm in a twofold outline — first, as it applies to the 
writer ; and then as it it taken up by the Lord Jesus, and made his own (with such 
exceptions as that named in the first footnote below). 

I. Israel's kino passes THBOnaH deepest dabknebs to the liqht. Here let us 
answer by anticipation a remark with which we have frequently met, to the effect 
that we cannot fasten on any incident in the career of David which would lead to such 
extreme anguish as that indicated here. Who that has any knowledge of the horrors 
to which sensitive souls are liable, could laise any difficulty over this ? Far more 
depends on subjective condition than on outward incident. Why, the saints of God 
now do pass through times of indescribable anguish, of which no outward incident 
affords even a glimmer of explanation. " The heart knoweth its own bitterness." Let 
the outer occasion have been whatsoever it may, here at any rate is : 1. A saint in 
terrible darkness. In the midst of his woe, he remembers his transgressions,^ and it 
may have been, as is so often the case, that the writer attributes bis anguish to his 
numberless transgressions (ver. 1, LXX.). The details of his intensity of sorrow are 
manifold. (1) Prayer rises from his heart day and night without relief (ver. 2). (2) 
He is despised (vers. 6 — 8). His enemies laugh and mock. (3) His foes, wild, fierce, 
ravenous, plot his ruin (vers. 12, 13). (4) His strength is spent with sorrow (ver. 
15). (5) There are eager anticipations of his speedily being removed out of the way 
(ver. 18). (6) And, worst of all, it seems as if God, his own God, whom he had trusted 
from childhood (vers. 9, 10), had now forsaken him, and given him up to his foes. How 
many suffering saints may find solace in this psalna, as they see how God's people have 
suffered before them ? Surely few could have a heavier weight of woe than the writer 
of this plaintive wail. 2. The woe is freely told to Ood. There may be the stinging 
memory of bygone sin piercing the soul, still the psalmist cleaves to his God. (I) The 
heart still craves for God ; even in the dark ; yea, the more because of the darkness. 
(2) Hence the abandonment is not actual. However dense the gloom may be, when 

' It would be by no means wise or safe to say that every phrase, even in the first verse, 
would apply to our Saviour. The last clause is thus given in the LXX. : Maxpciv avh t^s 
uoiTTipias /iov 01 \6yot twv vapaTTTatfidTav fiov I Vulgate, Longi a salute tnea verba deliiy 
torum meorum, " Far from my deliverance are the words of my transgressions." Thus we 
find that, according to the translation given in the Septuagint, and accepted by the 
translators into the Vulgate, the psalmist regards Ids own transgressions as a part of the 
weight of anguish which presses upon him, and, indeed, as accounting for it. No such 
confession could possibly suit our Lord ; nor can his anguish in using this first verse, even 
in part, be accounted foi', save as he had made tlie burden of the world his own. But when 
we hear his cry of agony, and remember that the quotations in the New Testament from 
the Old Testament are generally from the LXX. nither than from the Hebrew, how 
startlingly touching and striking are the words, ■ Who was in all points tempted like as 
we are, yet without ein'" I as if the sacred writer, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, would 
remind us that our great Higli Priest, having been in all things made like unto his 
brethren, could make their most agonizing cries his own, save the acknowledgment of sin I 
The psalm will thus become more and more precious to us as we avoid the theory of an 
exclusively Messianic meaning on the one hand, and Gheyne's heartless criticism on the 
other. 

^ On this psalm, Perowne, Orelli, and Calvin may be read with great advantage and 
profit. It is very painful to read Oheyne on this psalm ; we cannot understand his 
references to Orelli, nor can we verify his statements as to Calvin's opinions. A striking 
exposure of some of Cheyne's inaccuracies will be found in an able article by Mr. Waller, 
in the Theolor/ical Monthly, April, 1889. 

' See first footnote above, and LXX. We venture to call in question the statement that 
the LXX. are clearly wrong. 



w. XXII. 1—31.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 159 

the soul can cry, " My God," we may be sure the cry is not unreciprocated. (3) Such 
a cry will surely be heard. Fast deliverances assure us of this. Yea, even ere the 
wail in the dark is over, the light begins to dawn. " One Sunday morning," said 
Mr. Spurgeon, in an address at Mildmay Hall, June 26, 1890, reported in the 
Christian of July 4, " I preached from the text, 'My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me?' I could not tell why I should be made to preach it. I felt while 
preaching as if I were myself forsaken. On the sabbath evening, there came into the 
vestry a man of about sixty, whose eyes were bright with a strange lustre. He took 
my hand, and held it, and cried. He said to me, ' Nobody ever preached my experience 
before. I have now been for years left, deserted, in a horrible gloom of great darkness ; 
but this morning 1 learned that I was not the only man in the darkness, and I believe 
I shall get out 1 ' 1 said, ' Yes ; /have got out ; but now I know why I was put in." 
That man was brought back from the depths of despair, and restored to joy and peace. 
There was a child of God, dying in darkness. He said to the minister who spoke with 
him, ' Oh, sir, though I have trusted Christ for years, I have lost him now. What 
can become of a man who dies feeling that God has rlesprted him?' The minister 
replied, ' What did become of that Man who died saying, " My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me ? " Is he not on the highest throne of glory even now ? ' The man's 
mind clianged in a moment, and he began to say, 'Father, into thy hands I commend 
my spirit;' and he died in peace." 3. The light dawns at last. The "everlasting 
covenant" does not fail; it has been "ordered in all things," and remains sure and 
steadfast; and oftentimes, even while the saint is on his knees, he will scarce have 
ended his groaning ere his sigh is turned to a song (of. Ps. xxvii. 12 — 14). Hence 
the last ten verses of the psalm are as joyous as the others are sad. " The darkest 
hour is before the dawn," and the brightness of morning shall chase away the gloom 
of night. So it is here. (1) The saint who takes his groans to God alone, shall yet sing 
his praises in the assemblies of the saints. Having told the rest to his God, he will 
" give others the sunshine." (2) The rehearsal of this story shall be the joy of other 
hearts in day to come (vers. 25 — 27). (3) The outcome of all will be that God will 
viudicate his own honour, and that the generation yet unborn will praise him and 
declare his righteousness. 

II. WOEDS OP A SUFFBEINO SAINT ABB APPROPRIATED BY A SCPPERINO SaVIOUK. 

The Lord Jesus Christ, in all things " made like unto his brethren," takes up words 
from this psalm into his own lips. If we were dealing only with the Messianic aspect 
of the psalm, we should open it up in the following order : (1) The Saviour's suffering. 
(2) The Saviour's inquiry : " Why ? " (3) The Saviour's joy. Since, however, we are 
seeking to expound the psalm in hofh its aspects, we rather indicate four lines of thought, 
the pursuing of which will throw light on the wonder of the appropriation of the words 
of a suffering saint by a suffering Saviour ; while some look at the fierce cry with 
which this psalm begins as intended to set forth the woes of the coming Messiah, that 
cry seems to us far more touching when we find that our dear Eedeemer uses the words 
of an ancient sufferer as his own I • Observe : 1. There is no depth of sorrow through 
which the saint can pass, but Jesus understands it all. How many causes of woe are 
enumerated here 1 But in all points Jesus felt the same. The writer endured (1) the 
cutting remarks of many ; (2) weakness ; (3) reproach and scorn ; (4) the plotting of 
foes ; (5) the treachery of friends ; and, worst of all, (6) the sense of separation form 
God. Every one of these forms of hardship and ill pressed sorely on Jesus ; and though 
we may meditate continuously and with ever-deepening wonder' on each of them, yet 
all the rest fade away into insignificance compared with the anguish that arose from 
the hiding of the Father's face. Every trouble can be borne when the Father is seen 
to smile; but when his face is hidden in a total eclipse, what darkness can be so 
dreadful as that ? There was, as it were, a hiding of the face from him (Isa. liii. 3).' 

' "By the deepest of all sympathies, the sufferings of Messiah became the sufferings of 
the Church, and she cries out, with her suffering Lord, 'My God, my God, why hast thou 
forsaken me ? ' " 

* For a series of devout reflections on the whole psalm, the remarks of Mr. Spurgeon 
thereon will be found helpful. 

" See the present w!-*.ers exposition of Isa. liii., in 'To the Light through tlie Cross' 
(Dickinson). 



160 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xra. 1— 31. 

Let those saints of God who have to pass through seasons of prolonged mental anguish 
remember that, however severe the conflict may be, the Saviour has passed through one 
still more terrible than theirs. 2. If even the taint asks " why 1 " even so did the Saviour. 
The "why?" however, applies only to the opening words — to the lading of God's 
face. There may be mystery therein, even when (as in the case of eveiy saint) there 
are transgressions to be bemoaned. But our Saviour has an unfathomable woe, " yet 
loithout sin." The " why ? " then, imperatively requires an answer. In the fire, at 
the faggot, and at the stake, martyrs have sung for joy. Why is it ihat at the moment 
of direst need the sinless Sufferer should have felt aught so dreadful as abandonment by 
God ? Not that the abandonment was real. The Father never loved the Son more 
than when he hung bleeding on the cross. But our Saviour endured the sense of it. 
Why was this ? He did not deserve it. But he had laden himself with our burden. 
" The Lord hath laid on him the iniquities of us all." Nor do we know that we can 
put the pith and essence of the atonement in fewer words than these : (1) sin separates 
from God ; (2) Jesus bore our sin ; therefore (3) Jesus endured the sense of separation. 
We can understand that, coming as Man into the midst of a sinful race, all the suffer- 
ing which a holy nature must endure in conflict with sinful men would be his. But 
the sense ot desertion by God while doing his Father's will can only be accounted for by 
the amazing fact that " he sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins." 3. Inpassing 
through his manifold experience of sorrow, the Saviour learned to suffer with the saint, 
and was being made perfect as the Captain of salvation. (Heb. ii. 10 ; v. 2, 7, 8, 9.) 
Our Saviour was (1) to lead many sons unto glory ; (2) to be One who could sympathiz^ 
soothe, and succour in every case of woe (Heb. ii. 18) ; (3) to be One who by his sympa- 
thetic power could inspire his hosts ; and (4) to teach them that, as they were destined 
to follow him in his heavenly glory, they must not be surprised if they have first to 
follow him in the pathway of woe. " The disciple is not above his Master, nor the 
servant above his Lord." Objection : " But how can the sympathy of Jesus with me 
be perfect ? He was without sin, and I am not. So the parallel fails." Good people 
who urge this objection forget that it is the presence of sin in each of us which makes our 
sympathy with each other so imperfect. Because Jesus was without sin, he can draw 
the line exactly between defects that are due to infirmity and such as are traceable to 
sin. The second he forgives ; the first he pities. Is not this the very perfection of 
sympathy f 

III. The words op the saint embegiho fkom bis oloom are appropriate to 
THE Saviour in his exaltation and triumph. With the Saviour, as with the 
psalmist, the darkest night was the prelude to the brightness of day. 'The brightness 
which marks the last ten verses of the psalm is a declaration that the kingdom of David 
shall be established for ever and ever, and that, though David may have to pass 
through fire and flood, his kingdom shall abide through age after age ; and thus we 
find the phraseology of these verses applied to the after-career of David's Son and 
David's Lord in Heb. ii. 11, 12. Whence five points invite attention. The Holy Ghost, 
inditing the psalmist's words so that they forecast the issue of Messiah's sufferings as 
well as his own, shows us our Saviour (1) emerging from the conflict ; (2) joining with 
his people in songs of rejoicing; (3) declaring the Father's Name to his " brethren ; " 
(4) gathering home the severed tribes of mankind; (5) bringing in the victorious 
kingdom (vers. 21 — 31). It is not, it is not for nought that the Messiah endured all 
his woe (Isa. liii. 11 ; Heb. xii. 1, 2 ; Phil. ii. 11). It behoved him to suffer, and then 
"to enter into his glory." And as with the Master, so with the servant. "If we 
suffer, we shall also reign with him." He hath said, " Where I am, there shall also my 
servant be." Following him in sharing his cross, we shall follow him in sharing his 
crown. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 31. — A struggle from the gloom of adversity to peace and Joy. It was said 
among the heathen that a just man strugtrling with adversity was a sight worthy of 
the gods. Such a sight we have here. We see a truly just man struggling from the 
gloomiest depths of adversity upwards to the serene heights of peace and joy in God. 
Three stages may be marked. 

I. The wail op desertion. (Vers. 1 — 10.) Suffering is no " strange thing." It 
comes sooner or later to all. Always, and especially in its severer forms, itis a mystery 



w. XXII. 1—31.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 161 

We cry, "Why?" " Why am I thus ? " " Why all this from God to me ? " God's ser- 
vants who have been most afflicted have most felt this mystery. So it was with Abra- 
ham, when " the horror of great darkness fell upon him," (Gen. xv. 12). So it was with 
Jacob, in that night of long and awful wrestling with the angel (Gen. xxxii. 24). So it 
was with Moses and the prophets (Isa. xl, 27). So it was with the psalmist here. 
Hia sufferings were intensified by the sense of desertion (vers. 1, 2). He cried to God, 
but there was no answer. He continued day and night in prayer, and yet there was 
no response. And yet he will not give up his trust in God. He tries to calm himself 
by remembrance of God's holiness and love, and by the thought of God's gracious 
dealings with his people. But, alas 1 this only aggravated his pain. The cuntrast was 
sharp and terrible. " Our fathers trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them. But 
1 am a worm, and no man." It seemed to him that the desertion, which he felt so 
keenly, was equally apparent to others. But i_stead of pity, there was scorn ; instead 
of sympathy, there was reproach. Lowered in the estimation of others, he was lowered 
also in bis own. All this seemed irreconcilable with a right relation to God. He 
cannot understand, but no more can he reproach. The bond of love is strained, but it 
is not ruptured. Like Job, he is ready to say, " Though he slay me, yet will I trust 
in him." How thankful should we be for such revelations I They not only teach us 
patience, but they help us in the time of our trial to draw nearer in loving concord 
with Jesus and his saints. 

IL The pbateb of trust. There is a time to speak. Speech helps to unburden 
the heart. But the psalmist does not cry for help till he has reached a calmer mood, 
and so far encouraged himself by recollection of God's love and kindness in his life 
from the first (vers. 9, 10). He looks to the past, that he may be braced to look at 
the present. Then, in sight of all the distresses and perils that surrounded him, he 
cries mightily to God (vers. 11 — 18). His faith is sorely tried, but it does not fail. 
Even with things waxing worse and worse, with enemies many and fierce, with 
strength weU-nigh worn out, with death staring him in the face (ver. 18), he renews 
his ))athetio cry, " Be not far from me, Lord : my strength, haste thee to help 
me " (vers. 19—21). 

III. The soNa or vtctokt. The capacity of the soul is wonderful. It can sink 
very low, and it can rise very high. It has been said of prayer — 

■' What changes one short hour 
Spent in thy presence has availed to make I " 

And we see this here. Fear is turned to praise (vers. 22 — 24). Loneliness gives place 
to the joys of. " the great congregation " (vers. 25, 26). Individual sufferings are for- 
gotten in the glad vision of the triumphs of Messiah, and the glory and blessedness 
of his kingdom (vers. 27 — 31). Who is there who loves the Lord, whose heart does 
not rejoice in foretaste and foresight of these good times, and with renewed ardour 
pray, "Thy kingdom come"?— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — The cry of despair itritggling with the cry of faith. The wriwr was 
apparently an exile, still in the hands of his heathen captors. His extreme peril, the 
obloquy and scorn to which he was exposed as a professed worshipper of Jehovah, his 
imminent death, are touched on with a tenderness and a power which have made the 
language familiar to us in another application — as used by Ohrist in the agonies of the 
cross. It is the cry of despair struggling with the cry of faith. 

I. The CRT OF despair. That God had forsaken him. 1. Had forsaken him for 
a long time. (Vers. 1, 2.) It was not a temporary eclipse, but aeeuicd a permanent 
desertion. 2. That this abandonment was somehow consistent with Ood^s faithfulness. 
(Ver. 3.) There was no doubt it did not arise from caprice, but from holiness. That 
made the darkness very dark. 3. It arose from his personal unworthiness. (Vera. 
4—6.) God had rescued his fathers ; but he was a worm, and aot a, man, unworthy 
of deliverance, despised of meu. " Fear not, thou worm Jacob." 4. A contrast to 
Ood!s former care of him. (Vers. 9, 10.) Not easy to analyze the contents of such a 
consciousness. But in general,. " It is the sense of the Divine mercy, care, and support 
gone ! " 

II. But there is in the background, faith stbuoolino aqainst this despaik. 

PSALMS. M 



162 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [i-s. xxii. 1—31. 

1, Et still can say, " My Ood." Repeatedly (vers. 1, 2). No unbelief could dissolve 
that tie. 2. Faith will not let go its hold upon his " holiness," however dark its aspect 
towards him now. (Ver. 3.) God cannot be far from a man who retains the sense of 
his holy faithfulness. 3. Ee is suffering in the righteous cause— for Ood's sake. (Vers. 
6 — 8.) As Christ was. There is more than a gleam of hope for him here. 4. Ood 
had brought him into the world, and cared for him in helpless infancy. (Vers. 9, 10.) 
These are the grounds of persistent faith battling against the sense of desertion and 
despair; and they are all-sufficient for us in our darkest hours. "We can but trust; 
we cannot know." — S. 

Vers. 11 — 21. — Prayer in suffering. The persecuted exile continnes to speak 
of his sufferings, hut seems to rise up out of the despair of the first verse into the 
faith Implied in prayer. Much of the suffering here described, if not productive, 
was at least typical, of the suffering of Christ. An argument is still going on in the 
sufferer's mind as to whether God had finally forsaken him or not. He has been trying 
in the first ten verses to argue down the feeling, but has not yet succeeded ; and now 
he breaks out into prayer, driven by the urgency of the crisis into which he has 
come. 

I. The argument or the pbater. The general argument is stated in the eleventh 
verse. Trouble was near, and there was none to help; it had come to the last 
I extremity with him, and not to help now would be completely and finally to forsake. 
The particulars of the argument are : 1. The strength and fury of his persecutors. 
(Vers. 12, 13, 16.) They are compared to bulls and lions, the most formidable beasts 
a man can encounter. Further on his enemies are compared to wild dogs, that have 
enclosed and surrounded him. So that there is no escape except by the hand of God. 

2. Ee has lost all strength of hody and courage of heart. (Vers. 14 — 17.) He sees no 
human means of escaping death. Severe trials from man and the Divine desertion 
(ver. 15) have " laid him in the dust of death." 3. The last act of indignity, previous 
to his death, has been accomplished. (Ver. 18.) They strip him, and cast lots for his 
garments. So that this is a cry for deliverance, uttered in the very jaws of death 
itself. Of course, tlie psalm was written after the experiences it describes. 

IL The pkaybk itself. It was begun at the eleventh verse, and now again breaks 
forth with full power (vers. 19 — 21). 1. Ee cries to the Infinite Strength to make haste 
to help him. This looks back to the second verse, where he complains, " Thou 
answerest me not ; " and, if help is to cdme, it must come at once, for he is in the very 
article of death. 2. Ee is alone and unfricided among rufhhts enemie?. " My darling," 
equivalent to " my lovely person ' (\ tr. 20). Utterly and solely dependent on God, as 
we shall be in dying. 3. The cry ends with an expnmion of assured confidence. 
(Ver. 21, " Thou hast answered me.") " Thou hast heard me." At last he sees 
deliverance at hand, and knows that his prayer has been heard, and he has been 
delivered from death. — S. 

Vers. 22 — 31. — CoTitequences of deliverance. In this last part the sufferer depicts 
the happy consequences of his deliverance, which he anticipates in faith, and, lifted up 
in spirit above the present, beholds, as if it were already present. 

I. The psalmist's deliverance shall be a cause of KBJoicniG to all Isbabl. 
(Vers. 22 — 26.) 1. Ee will inspire the whole congregation with the tidings. We 
cannot and ought not to keep to ourselves the great fact of our salvation. "Go home 
to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee," etc. 2. 
The good tidings were th'it Ood had answered the cry of one who was in the very jaws of 
dsath. (Ver. 24.) And if he had heard one, the unavoidable conclusion was that he 
would hear all who cried to him. The psalmist's experience showed that God's mercy 
was universal ; that was the suppressed premiss of this argument. 

If. The knowledge op God's redeeming grace shall extend to heathen 
NiriONs. (Vers. 27, 28.) This is to be rejoiced in. 1. Because the heathen have 
greater need of it than the Church. The Church (Israel) have already some knowledge 
of it ; but the heathen are sunli in deeper sins and sorrows, and have no knowledge of 
God's redeeming grace. 2. It is God's will that the heathen should know and receivt 
his grace. He saves one man or one nation, in order that they should make his work 



PS. XXIII. 1—6.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



163 



known to other men and other nations. He is to be made known as "the Governor 
among the nations." 

III. All classes, whether happy ob miserable, shall welcome this know- 
CiBDOB. (Ver. 29.) 1. The great spiritual /east will be enjoyed hy those who live tn 
outioard abundance. Because here is food for which even the satisfied are still hungry, 
which their plenty cannot supply. All guests are poor here, and God is rich for all. 
2. It is a fountain of life to those ready to sink in death. They shall bow before and 
worship him. 

IV. The present aok sends forward the glad tidings to posterity. (Vers. 
30, 31.) See how God's work, beginning with a single individual, propagates itself by 
its effecis upon the mind, spreading, first among those nearest to him ; then, through 
them, to those remote, among the rich and poor, the living and the dying ; and on 
through the ages with ever-increasing power and influence. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXIIL 
This little psalm is an idyll of great beauty, 
describing the peace and calm delight 
which dwell with one whose trust is wholly 
in God. David's authorship, asserted in the 
title, is highly probable ; but we cannot fix 
the poem to any special period in his life- 
time; we can only say tliat he is beyond 
the days of boyhood, having already ene- 
mies (ver. 5), and that he lias known what 
it is to be in danger of death (ver. 4). But, 
when he writes, he is experiencing a time 
of rest and refresliment (vers. 1 — 3), nay, 
of prosperity and abundance (ver. 5). His 
thoughts are happy thoughts — he lacks 
nothing ; he has no fear ; God's mercy and 
goodness are with him ; and he feels assured 
that they will continue with him all the 
days of his life (ver. 6); he has but one 
desire for the future, viz. to dwell in the 
house of God — i.e. in the presence of God — 
for ever. 

Ver. I. — The Lord is my Shepherd. This 
metaphor, so frequent in the later Scriptures 
(Isa. xl. 11; xlix. 9, 10; Jer. zxxi. 10; 
Ezek. xxxiv. 6—19 ; John x. 11—19, 26— 
•28; Heb. xiii. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 25; v. 4; Eev. 
■Hi. 17), is perhaps implied in Gen. xlviii. 15, 
bat first appears, plainly and openly, in the 
Bavidical psalms (see, besides the present 
passage, Pss. Ixxlv. 1 ; Ixxvii. 20 ; Ixxviii. 
53; Ixxix. 14; Ixxx. 1 — ^psalms which, if 
not David's, belong to the time, and were 
written under the influence, of David). It 
is a metaphor specially consecrated to us 
by our Lord's employment and endorsement 
of it (John X. 11—16). I shall not want. 
The I^ayer-book Version brings out the full 
sense, "Therefore can I lack nothing" 
(comp. Deut. ii. 7 ; viii. 9 ; and Matt. vi. 
31—33). 



Ver. 2. — He maketh me to lie down in 
green pastures; literally, in grassy Sotiw 
steads — " the richer, oasis-like spots, where 
a homestead would be fixed in a barren 
tract of land " (Kay). He leadeth me beside 
the still waters; rather, waters of refresh- 
ment; ^ttI ifSaros afairaia-eats (LXX.). 

Ver. 3. — He restoreth my soul ; i.e. re- 
vives it and reinvittorates it when it is 
exhausted and weary (see the comment on 
Ps. xix. 7, where the same verb occurs). 
He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness. 
Which are also "paths of pleasantness amA 
peace" (Prov. iii. 17). For his Name's 
sake. To magnify his Name as a gracious 
and merciful God. 

Ver. 4. — Yea, though I walk through the 
valley of the shadow of death. A sudden 
transition and contrast, sue! i as David loved. 
The quiet paths of righteousness and peace 
remind the poet of the exact opposite — the 
dark and dismal way through the valley of 
the shadow of death. Even when so situated, 
he does not, he will not, fear. I will fear 
no evil, he says. And why ? For thou art 
with me. The same Protector, the same 
gracious and merciful God, will be still 
with him — leading him, guiding his steps, 
shepherding him, keeping him from evil. 
Thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff — 
i.e. thy shepherd's crook, and thy staff of 
defence — ^they comfort me. They make me 
feel that, however long and however dreary 
the way through the dark vale, I shall still 
have thy guidance and thy protection. 

Ver. 5.— Thou preparest a table before 
me in the presence of mine enemies. Another 
transition. The danger of death is past. 
David reverts to the thought of the tran- 
quil, happy, joyous time which God lias 
vouchsafed to grant him. He has " adver- 
saries," indeed, but they are powerless to 
effect anything against him. They have 
to look on with ill-concealed annoyance at 
his prosperity, to see his table amply 
spread; his condition such as men generally 



164 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. xxin. 1—6. 



•nTjr; his wealth typified by abundant oil — 
thoa anointest (or, makest fat, marginal 
rendering) my head with oU — great, his 
whole life full to overflowing with blessed- 
ness. Uy cup runneth over, he declares — 
is not only full to the brim, but runs over 
the brim — an expressive metaphor, indica- 
tive of a state of bliss rarely experienced in 
this life. 

Yer. 6. — Surely goodness and meroy shall 
follow me all the days of my life. The past 
ia an earnest of the future. As God's 
"goodness and mercy" have always fol- 
lowed him hitherto, David has no doubt 



that they will continue to cling to him 
while Ilia life continues. And I will dwell 
in the house of the Lord for ever (comp. 
Ps. xxvii. 4, " One thing have I desired of 
the Lord, that I will seek after ; that I may 
dwell in the house of tlie Lord all the days 
of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, 
and to inquire in his temple "). Such pas- 
sages are, of course, not to be understood 
literally; they express the longing of the 
soul for a sense of the continual presencs 
of 0od, and a realization of constant com- 
munion with him. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 1, — Hunum experience and Divine inspiration. "The Lord is my Shepherd." 
The few verses which compose this psalm would leave but a small blank on the page, 
if blotted out ; but suppose all translations which have been made of them into all 
languages, all references to them in literature, all remembrance of them in human 
hearts, could be effaced, who can measure the blank, the void, the loss ? To have 
written this short psalm is one of the highest honours ever put upon man. What 
libraries have these few lines survived? Yet they are as fresh as if written yesterday. 
They make themselves at home in every language. They touch, inspire, comfort us, 
not as an echo from three thousand years ago, but as the voice of a living friend. The 
child repeats them at his mother's knee ; the scholar expends on them his choicest 
learning; the plain Christian loves them for their simplicity as much as for their 
beauty; the Church lifts them to heaven in the many-voiced chorus; they fall like 
music on the sick man's ear and heart; the dying Christian says, "That is my psalm," 
and cheers himself with its words of faith and courage as he enters the dark valley. 
Mere poetic beauty could not confer or explain this marvellous power. The secret of 
it is twofold. These words are the language (1) of Auman experierux, and (2) of Divine 
inspiration. 

L HuuAir EXPBBiENOB. Thls is the utterance of weakness and of trust. In the 
Bible, as in the Person of our Saviour, the human and the Divine are found, not apart, 
but in closest union. God spake not merely by the lips or pens of the prophets, but 
by the men themselves (2 Pet. i. 21). Were an angel to say, " "The Lord is my 
Shepherd," this would bring no assurance to a frail, sinful human heart. A voice from 
heaven might declare, " The Lord is a Shepherd," or as promise, " The Lord is your 
Shepherd;" but only the voice of a brother man, weak and needy as ourselves, can 
speak this word, the key-note of the whole psalm, "my Shepherd." God could have 
given us a Bible written, like the tables of the Law, " with the finger of God ; " but 
he has spoken through the minds and hearts and personal experience of men of like 
passions with ourselves, making their faith, penitence, sorrow, joy, prayer, thanks- 
giving, the mirror and pattern of our own. This is the voice of personal experience. 
David is better known to us than any Bible hero except St. Paul. This psalm leads 
back our thoughts to his youth ; but it is no youthful composition — it bears the stamp 
of deep experience. The young shepherd might have sung of the famous past, or of 
the glorious future ; but the veteian king, looking back to his youth, sees in it a 
meaning he could not have seen then, and a light shining all along his path. 

II. iNsriEBD woBDS. Swect and deep as are these echoes from the depth of the 
past, they would never have reached us had they been no more than the words of • 
man, though a hero, a poet, a king ; they are the voice of God's Spirit in him. Hence, 
with that continuity -whioh. is one principal note of the inspiration of Scripture, we find 

this image taken up again and again, especially in five passages of signal importance 

two in the Old Testament, three in the New. 1. In Ezek. xxxiv. God is seen as the 
Shepherd of his people — the nation and Church of Israel. Hence the similitude passes 
on to the New Testament. Christ is the chief Shepherd, who employs under-shepherdi 



PS. rxiii. 1-6.] ■ THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 166 



to feed his flock (John xxi. 15—17; 1 Pet. v. 2—4). 2. In Isa. xl. 11 (as in th« 
psalm) Christ's tender care of individuals, even the youngest, is represented. 3 and 
4. In Luke xv. 3 — 7 and John x. 1 — 16 our Saviour appropriates this similitude to 
himself, as seeking and saving the lost, ruling and feeding each one who follows him, 
laying down his life for the flock, gathering "other sheep "into "one flock." 5. In 
Eev. vii. 16, 17 we see the Divine Shepherd gathering his whole flock in the safety, 
rest, and joy of heaven. 

Conclusion. Can you say, " The Lord is my Shepherd"? If not, the gospel has 
not yet fulfilled its mission in your heart and life. Observe, the warrant is not in 
yourself, but in your Saviour ; not, " I am one of Christ's flock," but, " He is my 
Shepherd," If you can say this, then you may fearlessly cast all your care on him, 
and finish the verse, "I shall not want" (1 Pet. v. 7 ; Matt. vi. 25, 26). 

Vers. 1 — i. — " 2%e Shepherd of Israel." To a countryman of David, an ancient 
Israelite, the shepherd with his flock was no poetical figure, but a most familiar object. 
From Carmel to Gilead, from Hermon to the pastures of the wilderness of Paran, the 
green hills of Canaan were covered with flocks. On these same hills and plains the 
forefathers of the nation — Abraham, Isaac, Israel — bad pitched their camps and fed 
their flocks, when as yet they could not call a rood of land their own. With us the 
shepherd's trade is a very humble calling. The shepherd, though he may tend the 
iheep as faithfully as if they were his own, is a hired servant, " whose own the sheep 
are not." We must dismiss all such associations if wo would understand either the 
poetry or the parables of Scripture. Abraham and his descendants were not the only 
wealthy chiefs who fed their own flocks and herds. In Homer's poetry, princes and 
princesses are seen tending their flocks, and kings and rulers are called, as in Scripture, 
" shepherds of the people." Eightly understood, it is an image of as great dignity as 
tenderness by which the Lord is spoken of as " the Shepherd of Israel ; " and each 
believer is encouraged to say, with David, " The Lord is my Shepherd." 

I. Divine ownership. (Ps. o. 3, Eevised Version.) This is a sublime contempla- 
tion, full of comfort, but also of awe. " I belong to God." God is the only absolute 
Owner. " The earth," etc. (Pss. ixiv. 1 ; xcv. 5 ; cxv. 16). We talk largely about our 
possessions — " My money, business, home ; my time, labour, life." All well enough 
— ^for he " giveth us all," etc. (1 Tim. vi. 17) — if only we never forget that all is his, 
that we belong to him. " Despotism " — q.d. absolute, unlimited, lordship — is a word 
of terror and degradation among men, because of the cruel, selfish, tyrannical use men 
have made of it. Doubtful if there lives a man who could safely be trusted with it. 
But in Divine lordship is no shadow of terror, except for the wilfully, wickedly 
disobedient, no taint of degradation, no suggestion of tyranny or arbitrary caprice. It 
would be absurd to suppose there can be a right to do wrong with God any more than 
with man. God's wisdom, love, righteousness, are a law to himself. That he is Lord 
of all is our safety, glory, joy. God must cease to be himself before he can inflict the 
lightest wrong on the weakest or un worthiest of his creatures. 

II. Divine goodness, compassion, tender and watchful oabb. Eeligion, worthy 
of the name, cannot subsist on the bare relation of Creator and creature, any more than 
flowers and fruit on granite ; it must be " rooted and grounded in love." The assurance 
that God cannot possibly inflict wrong might free us from the slavery of fear, which 
otherwise the thought of his absolute ownership might bring with ii, but would not 
suffice to fill our life with brightness and joy, our heart with trust and couiage. To 
feel in any measure the force and beauty of the similitude, and get into sympathy with 
the soul of the psalmist, we must get rid of all that is mean, hard, mercenary in our 
modem English notions, and dress our thoughts in the bright colours of Eastern life ; 
we must see the shepherd opening the well-guarded fold and walking at the head of 
his own flock, calling now one, now another, by its name, while the sheep willingly 
follow, for they know and love their shepherd's voice ; see him in dewy morning 
choosing their pasture, at hot noon leading them to some tranquil pool or hidden well, 
ever on the watch ; ready, like David, to do battle with lion, bear, or wolf, in their 
defence ; rather laying down his life than leaving them to perish (John x. 11). " The 
Lord is my Shepherd," etc. (vers. 1, 2). In vers. 3, 4 the tpirituai meaning shines 
through the figure, as in vers. 5, 6 it is laid aside altogether ; yet still the psalmisj 



16« THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xxni. 1— 6. 

speaks of tae " rod and staff." " Eod," the shepherd's crook, the reseived emblem of 
authority, guidance, aud discipline. " Staff," that on which one hans, emblem of 
Divine strength and support. (Only one word would be used of a real shepherd ; the 
two are employed for the full spiritual meaning.) All is not ease and brightness in 
the lives which God has in his wisest, tenderest care. Divine shepherding mean* more 
than green pastures and still waters; it sometimes means "the valley of the shadow 
of death." " Paths of righteousness " may be taken to iuclude both the way of duty 
and the leading of God's providence. In both, the riyht path must be, in the highest 
■ense, the safe path, but it may be the path of deadly peril and anguish (Ps. xxxiv. 19). 
Our lilessed Lord's own path led through Gethsemane to Calvary. " The valley of the 
shadow of death " must not be limited to mean only the actual approach and experience 
of death; it may stand for any crisis of danger, suffering, or weakness, bodily or 
spiritual. Travellers tell of a desolate gorge near Ispahan, " the valley of the angel of 
death." Through such a ravine, trackless, waterless, gloomy with overhanging preci- 
pices, where in every cleft wild beasts or robbers may lurk, the psalmist imagines 
himself led. But the Divine Shepherd is with him : this forbids fear. In Bunyan's 
glorious dream the valley is placed midway in Christian's pilgrimage — the image of 
fierce spiritual conflict (Ps. xviii. 5). The hardest trial that can befall the believer is, 
when tempted to doubt God's goodness, to deem himself forsaken. The answer to all 
doubt is, " Thou art with me " (Isa. 1. 10). The same trials are not appointed for all 
God's children. Faithful, whom martyrdom awaited in Vanity Fair, had sunshine 
all through the valley. But there is a point to which all paths converge. If we must 
not limit the figure, still less must we exclude that one application common to all, that 
experience in which we must be absolutely alone, unless we can say, " Thou art with 
nie." Death. Here, again, experience wonderfully varies. To some the approach of 
death is a valley of sunshine, not- shadow, or only such as falls from a summer cloud ; 
to some, a momentary passage — through before they know it; to some, dark and 
rough with long suffering; to a few (even real Cliristians), gloomy with spiritual 
conflict. Here, then, above all, we need (both for ourselves and others) that "highest 
application of this comforting image taught by our Lord himself (John x. 1 — 18, 
Ye—29). 

III. The Savioub's constant pbbsencb and redebmino qraoe. (Comp. Ters. 1, 
2 with John x. 9 ; vii. 37.) It is his to " restore the soul," to reclaim the lost sheep 
(Luke XV. 3 — 7), raise the fallen, refresh the weak, to lead in the path of duty (John 
viii. 12). But especially in times of urgent need is his presence to be claimed and 
felt. With Paul and his companions it was a veritable valley of the shadow of death, 
when " all hope . . . was taken away " (see Acts xxvii. 20, 23 ; again 2 Tim. iv. 
16, 17). Above all, in the hour and moment of death he has passed through it; he 
lias " the keys;" he alone can be with us. Gentle and tranquil often is the actual 
approach of death; weakness and unconsciousness prevent fear; but take away the 
yospel, take away Christ, and who in health and strength can calmly face death, and 
say, " I will fear no evil " ? You may be an unbeliever. Suppose the gospel not true, 
it does not follow there is nothing beyond death. But the believer has a right to say 
this — knows what is beyond (John xiv. 2 — i ; Eev. vii. 15 — 17). 

Ver. 6. — Goodness and mtrcy. " Surely goodness,'' etc. These two words, " good- 
ness" and "mercy," are to be taken together rather than over-curiously distinguished. 
Yet they are not mere synonyms. Goodness is the stream, mercy the fountain; 
goodness the open hand of God's bounty, mercy his loving heart. " Mercy " is not to 
be taken in the restricted sense in which we often use it, as contrasted with justice — 
goodness to the unworthy, pardon to the guilty. It is (in the Hebrew) the same word 
often beautifully Englished as "loving-kindness" {e.g. Ps. cvii. 43). "Goodness" 
reminds us that our nature is a bundle of wants; "mercy," that our deepest, highest 
need can be satisfied, not by all God's gifts, but only by himself. Faith here employs 
the great law of experience, and from the past infers the future. Consider (1) tht 
wealth of hope, (2) the blessedness of certainty, expressed in these words. 

I. The wealth op hope. 1. " All the days of my life " — days to come, as in days 
past. The course of thought in this psalm reminds us of a path which, a'ter crossing 
peaceful plains and narrow gorges, climbs the mountain, and from its top beholds the 



PS. XXIII. —16.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 167 



wide, glorious prospect bathed in sunshine. This is the privilege of faitL. only faith 
can see goodness and mercy in all God's past dealings, and foresee them in all to come ; 
for that varied fitness which Is one great feature of God's loving-kindness, implies a 
great mixture of rough wiiii smooth, dark and bright. The " restoring of the soul " 
implies wandering, and means chastening as well as forgiveness. The "rod and itaff" 
are needed in the dark valley ; the table is spread in the desert and amongst foes. A 
child can see that a cricket-ball is a globe ; but it needed much philosophy to convince 
men that this great world, which to ordinary vision is flat, is a globe too. So any eye 
can see goodness and mercy in health, wealth, prosperity, joy; but in sickness, poverty, 
bereavement, private or public calamity, we are ready to ask Gideon's question (Judg. 
vi. 13). It needs strong faith to be sure that " all the paths of the Lord are mercy 
and truth " (Ps. xxv. 10). To have David's bold hope, we need David's experience, 
submission, unreserved trust. 2. "And I will dwell ... for ever." This cannot 
mean the earthly tabernacle. David could not dwell there ; even a priest or Levite 
could not dwell there "for ever." He means the heavenly temple (Ps. xi. 4). How 
bright or dim his faith was we know not. But for us the way into the holiest is made 
plain (Heb. ix. 8, 24; x. 19, 20). 

II. Here is a olobious emphasis of cbrtaintt. "Surety;" " all the days ; " "I will 
dwell," or " I shall dwell ; " not simply " I choose and desire,"' but " I expect assuredly 
to dwell in my Father's house /or ever." Beyond the rough, weary, winding path 
lies rest ; beyond the conflict, peace. Thi mysteries and seeming contradictions of 
God's dealings, compared with his promises, cannot last long. Faith sees them vanish 
in the light of eternity. Whence this calm, exulting security? How can one whose 
life is "a vapour" (Jas. iv. 14), standing on a point which crumbles beneath his 
feet, ignorant what the next hour may bring, thus boldly challenge the hidden future 
of earthly life, the boundless future beyond ? The answer comes from the Divine 
Shepherd, the faithful Witness — " Because I live, ye shall live also " (John xiv. 1^3, 
19; xii. 26; 2 Cor. v. 1; Kom. viii. 35—39). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — TTie good Shepherd and his flock. This is one of the sweetest of all the 
psalms. That it was written by him who was raised from having care of a flock to be 
the king on Israel's throne, there is no reason for doubting, spite of all that destructive 
critics may say. No amount of Hebrew scholarship can possibly let any one into the 
deep meaning of this psalm. No attainments in English literature will ever initiate 
any student into the mysteries of a mother's love, and no attainments in Oriental 
learning will help any one to learn the secret of the Lord which is here disclosed. 
There is nothing to equal it in the sacred books of the East ; for none but the Hebrews 
have ever had such a disclosure of God as that in which the writer of this psalm rejoices. 
Every clause in this psalm is suggestive enough to he the basis of a separate discourse ; 
butin accordance with our plan in this section of the ' Pulpit Commentary,' we deal with 
it as a unity, indicating the wealth of material for perpetual use therein contained. 
We have presente'l to us — Four aspects of the Shepherd-care of Ood. 

I. God's Shephkbd-carb disclosed in revelation. Pur the Scripture doctrine 
of God's relation to his people as their Shepherd, the student may with advantage 
study and compare the following: Pss. Ixxiv. 1; Ixxvii. 20; Ixxix. 13; Ixxx. 1; 
xcv. 7 ; c. 3 ; cxix. 176 ; Isa. xl. 11 ; liii. 6 ; Jer. xxxi. 10 ; xxiii. 1 — 3 ; Eztk. xxxiv. ; 
Mioah vii. 14; Zeoh. xi. 16; xiii. 7; Matt. x. 6; xv. 24; xviii. 12; Luke xv. 4—6; 
John X. 1—16, 26—29; xxi. 16; Acts xx. 28; Heb. xiii. 20; 1 Pet. ii. 25; v. 4. 
These passages summarize Bible teaching on this theme for us. We may set it forth 
under the following heads : 1. Qod is related to men as their Shepherd. A purely 
absolute Being out of relation does not exist. To whatever God has made he stands 
in the relation of Maker. And when he has made man in his own image, after his 
likeness, he stands to such a one in a relation corresponding thereto ; and of the many 
names he bears to express that relation, few more tenderly illustrate his watchful cars 
than this word "shepherd." 2. This relation is manifested in Jesus Christ. (John x. 
I — 16.) He claims to he emphatically " the good Shepherd." The apostle speaks of 



168 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxiii. 1— 6. 

Mm M " the Shepherd and Bishop of . . . souls." 3. As the Shepherd, Jesus came to 
seek and save the lost. His mission on earth was emphatically for this. He regards 
men as his wealth, in which he rejoices ; and if they are not under his loving care he 
misses them — he is conscious of something lacking (Luke xv. 4 — 6). 4. Se has risen 
and ascended up on high as the great Shepherd qf the sheep (Heb. xiii. 20). 5. He 
now appoints under-shepherds to care for the flock. (Acts xx. 28.) 6. As the chief 
Shepherd, he will again appear. Then he will gather in and gather home all the flock 
(1 Pet. V. 4). 7. Only as he gathers men to himself as their Shepherd, do they find 
safety and rest, (1 Pet. ii. 25.) Till then they are homeless wanderers, perpetually 
in danger of stumbling " over the dark mountains." 8. When men return to him they 
find all they need in his Shepherd-care. (Pa. xxiii.) 9. This Shepherd-care is for each 
as well as for all. Each one may say, " He loved me, and gave himself up for me ; " 
" The Lord is my Shepherd." Let us not forget to note the Shepherd's individualizing 
care. 

IL God's Shephebd-oare exercised in act. The points of detail are set forth in thia 
psalm with exquisite tenderness ami beauty.* 1. Repose. " He maketh me to lie down 
in green pastures." In such a restless age as this, there is no thought which a believer 
has greater need to appropriate than this (see Mark vi. 31). As physically we must find 
time for sleep, however severe the pressure of work, so spiritually we must find time for 
repose. And God's gracious arrangements are planned with a view to this. •' He maketh 
me," etc. The good Shepherd says, "I will give you rest." When he gets back the 
wandering sheep he lays it on his own shoulders (Greek, see Luke iv. 5). The Master 
never expects his servants to be always on the stretch. He tells them to " rest awhile ; " 
and if they are heedless of this kind monition, he will himself call them out of the rush 
into the hush of life. It would be well if some Christians thought more of rest in 
Christ; their work would be richer in quality even if less in quantity. 2. Refreshment. 
" Still waters ; " literally, " waters of rest," or refreshment. The believer has no craving 
thirst : he can ever drink of the living stream, and therewith be refreshed (see John 
iv. 10; Rev. vii. 17). Dropping the figure, the truth here conveyed is that there shall 
be a constant supply of the grace of Christ, and of the Spirit of Christ (cf. John vii. 
37 — 39). 3. Restoration. (Ver. 3.) This may either mean renewing the strength 
when worn down, or bringing hack after wandering. We need not omit either thought, 
though the latter seems principally intended. 4. Leadership. (Ver. 3.) " Paths of 
righteousness," i.e. straight paths. This follows on the restoration. Having recalled him 
from " by-paths," the good Shepherd will lead him in the right way. The sheep can 
wander wide easily enough, but if they are to be kept in the right way, that can be 
only through the Shepherd's care. God guides by (1) his Word ; (2) his providence; 
(3) his Spirit. Sometimes, indeed, the way may be dark, even as death itself; still it 
is the right way (Ps. cvii. 7 ; Ezra viii. 21 — 23). 5. A living presence. " Thou art with 
me" (ver. 4). This means, " Thou art continually with me," not merely with me in 
the darkness, but with me always. The sunshine of the living presence of a Guide, 
Help, Friend, Saviour, is always on the believer's path ; and if the mingling of unbelief 
with faith did not dim the eyesight, he would always rejoice in it. 6. Discipline. 
(Ver. 4.) The rod and staff are special emblems of the Shepherd's care in tending and 
ruling the flock. The Shepherd chides ua when we rove, and uses sometimes sharp 
measures ere he recalls us. And this comforts us I Even so. The disciplinary dealings 
of our God are among our greatest mercies. 7. Ample provision. (Ver. 5.) The 
riches of God's love and life are the provisions on which we feed, and on which souls 
can grow and thrive; and these supplies are ministered to the soul through the 
invisible channels of God's grace, even while enemies prowl around. Yea, we are 
entertained as guests at the Father's board. The anointing oil is the token of the right 
royal welcome which the Host delights to give ! So rich, so abundant, are the mercies 
and joys which are vouchsafed, that our " cup runneth over " 1 

III. This Shephbrd-oare of God is accepted, and in it the needy one 

' Bishop Perowne's notes on this psalm are of special interest and value. Abundance of 
illustrations from Oriental customs will also be found in Dr. Thomson's ' Land and the 
Book,' and Van Lennep's ' Bible Oustoms in Bible Lands.' Dr. Stonghtou and othen 
have developed with great beauty the teachings of the psalm. We have space for only th« 
barest ontli^ 



P8. xxin. 1— 6.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 169 

SLOBiES. We can but hint. 1. Here is appropriation. " My Shepherd " (see John x. 
11, 27, 28). 2. Here is satisfaction. " 1 shall not want." 3. Here is loyalty. The 
psalmist not only coDsents to but delights in this Divine care, and has no wish but tn 
follow where the Shepherd leads. 4. Here is joy. This thought is (perhaps latently, 
but really) in the expression, " Thou art with me." The presence of God is life's 
exceeding joy. 5. Rere \s fearlessness. " I will fear no evil." Not even the darkest 
shade can make him fear, lor God is with him there. 6. Bere it recognition of the 
infinite grace of the Shepherd. (Ver. 3.) " For his Name's sake." Not for our sakes, 
but for his own ; having undertaken to be the Shepherd, he will for his own glory's 
sake do all that a shepherd's care demands. 

IV. The Shephebd-oabe op God is oelbbbated in song. The song has a three- 
fold significance. 1. It is a song of gratitude. " Goodness and mercy " mark every 
feature of the Divine treatment, and they will, to life's end. 2. It is a song of hope. 
The psalmist looks forward, without a moment's fear of the Shepherd ever leaving him 
(ver. 6). 3. It is a song and vow of consecration. " I will dwell in the house of the 
Lord for ever." To what extent David thought of a future state when he wrote these 
words, we cannot say. Yet his meaning is to some extent clear. The house of God 
was the place where God made his home and manifested himself to his people (see Ps. 
cxxxii. 13 — 16). And the writer says, " Where God makes his home, there shall be 
mine. He and I will never part company " (see Pss. Ixi. 4; xlviii. 14; Ixxiii. 24 — 26). 
It was not the house of God, but the God of the house, that was to be David's home — 
and the home of all the saints— /or ever and for ever I 

There is a picture by Sir Noel Paton, which is a marvellous illustration of this psalm. 
It is entitled, ' The Valley of the Shadow of Death.' It is worthy of prolonged study. 
In the foreground is a dismal and dark valley, through which a blasting wind has swept, 
laying low alike the warrior and the king ; the helmet of the one and the crown of the 
other lie useless on the ground. In the centre of the picture is the Lord Jesus, with a 
halo of glory over his head, a crown of thorns around his brow, and in one hand a 
shepherd's staff. On the left is a young maiden, whose lace bears traces of the terror 
she has felt in coming through the valley, and yet of radiant hope as she now sees the 
good Shepherd there. She grasps his hand ; he holds hers ; hia feet stand on a grave- 
stone, beneath which lie the remains of the fallen ; but where the Shepherd sets his 
feet, the tombstone is luminous with the words, " Death is swallowed up in victory ! " 
The very sight of that glorious picture weaned one from the vanities of the world, 
and drew her to Jesus ; and in the case of " an old disciple " it completely abolished 
the fear of death ! May we all, by faith, catch a glimpse of our Shepherd, and every 
fear will vanish quite away 1 — C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The good Shepherd. Dr. Arnold said that " amongst Christians, all 
looking upon the Scriptures as their rule of faith and life, there are particular passages 
which will most suit the wants of particular minds, and appear to them therefore full 
of an extraordinary measure of comfort and of wisdom." This is true. Most people 
have their favourite passages of Scripture. But it may be said of this psalm that it 
holds a peculiar position. It has for more than three thousand years been one of the 
most precious possessions of the Church. Jews and Christians alike hold it dear, and 
there are few, if they were asked, but would thankfully confess that of all the psalms, 
it was to them the sweetest and most precious. It is among the psalms what Daniel 
was, compared with other men, "greatly beloved." Why is this? Mucb, no doubt, 
depends upon association ; but apart from this there are reasons, in the psalm itself, to 
account for the high place which it holds in all hearts. Three may be mentioned. 

L Because it beings God before us in so endearing a chabaotke. He is liere 
represented as a Shepherd and a Host. The better we understand what this meaneth, 
the more will our hearts go forth to him in love and trust. He is all, and in all. Yea, 
each of us may say, " He is mine." 

IT. Because it gives us such a beautiful piotuee of the blessedness of God's 
PEOPLE. They are the sheep of his pasture, and the guests of his table. Here in this 
world they are ever under his good and gentle keeping, and when they depart hence, 
it shall be to dwell in his house for ever. " The psalmist describes himself as one of 
Jehovah's flock, safe under his care, absolved from all anxieties by the sense ef his 



170 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [Pb, ixin. 1—6. 

protection, and gaining from this confidence of safety the leisure to enjoy, without 
Batiety, all the simple pleasures which make up life — the freshness of the meadow, the 
coolness of the stream. It is the most complete picture of happiness that ever was or 
can be drawn. It represents that state of mind for which all alike sigh, and the want 
of which makes life a failure to most ; it represents that heaven, which is everywhere, it 
we could but enter it, and yet almost nowhere, because so few of us can " (' Bcoe Homo '). 
III. Because it is associated so closely with cub eblichous life. Though 
much of Scripture may be neglected, and almost unknown, this psalm is known and 
loved by all. We learnt it at our mother's knee, and we have cherished it fondly ever 
since. To young and old, to the rich and poor, to the people of various lands and 
tongues, it is equally dear. At home and in the sanctuary it is in constant use. In 
the time of our joy it has beeu the vehicle of our gladness, and in days of darkness it 
has brought us comfort. When weary it gives us rest; when lonely it gives us 
company ; when oppressed with sin and care it leads us to him who can restore our 
souls, and guide us safely through all difficulties and dangers, onward to the bright 
future. In itself it is exceedingly precious, but in the light of the gospel, and as inter- 
preted by our dear Lord and Saviour, its value is infinitely enhanced. Jesus "the 
Good Shepherd " is here, and his sheep hear his voice, and follow hica — to glory, honour, 
and immortality. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The power of reflection. The psalmist looks back over his life, and 
sings with grateful heart of God's love and care. We may use the psalm as bringing 
before us some of the changes and contrasts of life. 

I. ToDTH AND AGE. This psalm breathes the air of youth. It is the echo of the 
shepherd-life among the hills of Judah. But the psalmist vras now old. Still, he 
cleaves to God. Happy are they who have sought God early, and whose days from 
youth to ago are linked together by natural piety I ■ 

II. Helplessness and secumtt. What creatures are, when left to themselvea, 
more weak and silly than sheep? But under the shepherd's care they are saf«. 
So it is of the soul. Christ is the good Shepherd, and cares for his sheep. From 
fii'st to last, and through all changes and dangers, they are safe under his loving 
guardianship. 

III. Sorrow and joy. How sweet the picture of the flock feeding in " the green 
pnatures," and by the " still waters"! But there is another scene brought before us — 
the dark and terrible " valley of the shadow of death." So there are alternations in 
the Christian life. If there are lights, there are also shadows. If there are times of 
sweet rest and comfort, there are also times of struggling and of fear. Mark the order 
— God does not at once call us to face the dark valley. It comes not at the beginning, 
but near the end of the Christian's course. Christ's disciples who have been with 
him in " the green pastures," and whose souls have been " restored," when they have 
fallen into sin, by his gracious discipline, are the better fitted for meeting with trial, 
and for treading with fearless step even the dark valley itself. 

IV. Want and satisfaction. Always there is want on our part, and always there 
is supply with God. He who has God, the Possessor of all things, has everything. 
God is not only our Shepherd, but our Host, and the supplies of his table never fail. 

V. Tbansitokinbss and immostality. All things here are fading. Sheep and 
shepherds pass away. Joys and sorrows come to an end. Our life is but as a vapour. 
But we look to the things that are unseen and eternal. God's two angels, " goodness 
and mercy," not only abide with us here, but will bring us to the everlasting habitation. 
We shall dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. — W. F. 

Ver. 5. — A table prepared. First we may apply this saying to our daily bread. 
Every " table '' needs preparation. There is the material food, which may have come 
from far ; and there are the kind hands that have made it ready. But besides this, 
there is love of God. We recognize that God has to do with our "daily bread." It is 
a matter between him and us. "Thou" and "me." How greatly is every blessing 
enhanced, when it is taken as from the hand of God I Then circumstances may 
give a special significance to our commonest mercies; difficulties are overcome, 
and wants are supplied, in a way that surprises us, and that leads us to confess with 



PS. XXIII. 1—6.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 171 

grateful hearts the loving-kindness of the Lord. Again, we may apply this to our 
social pleasures. We are not made to live alone. We crave fellowship. How 
graciously does God provide for our needs ! We have not only the joys of home, 
but the pleasures of society. There are some who forget God amidst the stir and 
the seductions of life. They conduct their business and enjoy their pleasures " without 
God" (Isa. V. 8 — 12). But it is not so with the righteous. They desire to set the 
Lord always before them, and especially to acknowledge his goodness and mercy in the 
manifold social blessings which they enjoy. But chiefly should we apply the text to 
our religious privileges. The Word of God is as a " table " prepared tor us. Think 
how much had to be done and suffered before we could have the Bible as a book 
free to every one of us! Think also how much there is in this blessed book to refresh 
and bless our souls ! — a " feast of fat things." Public worship is another " table " sprea 1 
for U8. When the Lord's day comes round, what multitudes come together, and there 
is bread enough and to spare for them all ! More particularly it may be said that the 
Lord's Suppet is a "table" prepared by God for his people. Here we see his wise 
forethought. He saw what was needful, and designed this feast for the good of his 
people. Here we see his loving cave. His hand is seen in everything fiora first to last. 
The table is the Lord's table. The " bread" is his " body ; " the wine is " his blood ; " 
the voice that says, "Come, eat," is his voice. There is not only preparation of the 
table, but of the guests. When we think of what we were and what we are; of what 
we deserved and of what we have received, — it is with wonder, love, and praise that 
we say, " Thou preparest a table before me." We have •' enemies," but they have not 
prevailed. We can think of them with pity, and forgive them ; we can even pray for 
them, that they may be converted into friends, and, should they coutinue alienated ana 
hostile, we can face them without fear, because " greater is he that is with us, than all 
they tlaat are against us." The future is for ug bright with hope. The dark valley is 
behind, and the power of God before. The table below is the earnest of the table 
above. — W. P. 

Ver. 6. — •' All the days of my life." Life is made up of " days." Confidence in God 
gives — 

L Steenqth fok life's work. "I shall not want." God is able to meet all our 
needs. "As thy days, so shall thy strength be" (Deut. xxxiii. 25; Phil. iv. 13). 

II. SuppoET DNDBB life's TRIALS. There will be changes. The " green pastures " 
may give place to the dark valley. There may be loss of health, of property, ot friends ; 
there may be unknown trials. " Thou art with me." 

III. Fulfilment of life's great hopes. It is a great thing to be one of Christ's 
flock, ever under the Shepherd's tender care. But more is promised. There will be 
the going in and out, and finding pasture — all through ; but the end is not here, but 
above. The best is to come. The perfection of manhood ; the "rest that remaineth; " 
the " fulness of joy ; " the glorious fellowships that know no break, and that bring no 
pain, are in our Father's house. 

" For ever with the Lord I 

Amen, so let it be; 
Life from the dead is In that word, 

'Tis immortality." 

W.P. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Ood^s providential care. " The Lord is my Shepherd ; I shall not want," 
etc. God's care and providence over man are denoted by the following things. 

I. He gives rest to the weart. " Maketh me to lie down in green pastures." 
Man is a combatant; he has a light to maintain, a work to do; and he shall have 
seasons to rest from his exhaustion. He is a piigrim-traveller. He has rest from 
bodily toil. So also rest from spiritual work. But the rest is spiritual in its kind. 
Not mental inactivity. But a clearer perception of those grand truths which afford 
the truest relief from the distraction of the conflict. Composure amidst distractions. 
The hlfssed end we aim at, and the certain issue of it. 

II. He renews the exhausted srHENGTH OF MAN. (Vers. 2, 3.) Religious 
strength consists in the power to do and the power to suffer— or courage and fortitude. 



172 



THE BOOK OF ISALMS, 



[ps. XXIV. 1 — 10. 



This power to do — to conquer sin in ourselves and in the world — is strengthened by 
unshaken faith in QocCs truth, and hy the power of sdf-denial. These are G-od's 
gifts, not by any direct act of his, but as the consequence of striving to do his will. 

III. God will afford pboteotion in the darkest amd most difficult times. 
(Ver. 4.) Death is not always dark or difficult to good men. But the general tendency 
is to view death as dark and evil, ami to Tear it on those accounts. Darkness creates 
a feeling of uncertainty and a desire for guidance. God has removed the uncertainty 
and affords us guidance. The evil of death is the sense of guilt. Christ gives us the 
victory over that evil by proclaiming the forgiveness of the Father, and the removal 
of our sin. All who submit to God's guidance may claim him for their Shepherd. 
Jesus Christ fulfils the character of man's true Shepherd. — S. 

Vers. 5, 6. — Fvlness of joy. The psalmist has hitherto spoken of the care of the 
good Shepherd in removing the miseries, pains, and sufferings which this life brings — 
of the rest, refreshing, and protection he had received. Now he rises higher into the 
rich fulness of joy he receives, and the good things of God's house. Four principal 
ideas here. 

I. That there is an abundant provision fob every want. (Ver. 5.) For all 
outward and inward want. A feast or banquet is spread for us by a royal Host. 
There is a feast provided for the senses and appetites in outward nature — if we do not 
turn it into a riot and a debauch. The enjoyment of it arises from and depends ou 
labouring for it and the moderate use of it. There is also the greater feast provided 
for the mind and heart, in finding the truth and responding to the love which God 
has set forth, as the means of building up the true life. Christ is the Bread and Wine 
of life. David's honour as God's guest was the greater, that it was witnessed by those 
who had been his enemies. 

II. His heart was full of solemn thankfulness and jot. (Ver. 5, " Thoa 
hast anointed my head with oil ; my cup overflows.") He had a most vivid perception 
that the feast, the anointing, the fulness, all came from the Divine hand. This sense 
of God in our lives makes a whole world of difference to our experience. No gratitude 
possible without it. No sense of the glory of life without it. 

III. Our assurance of the constancy op the Divine love and goodness. 
(Ver. 6.) What God had been to him in the past, he would continue to be in the 
future. He had suffered, had been weary, been persecuted, had had battles to fight, 
had been bewildered in his path; but God had been his Guide* and Deliverer, and 
would continue to be all through the remainder of his life. 

IV. He would be blessed with the fellowship and friendship of God fob 
EVER. (Ver. 6.) This is the meaning of "And I will dwell in the house of the Lord 
for ever," so as to be near him and have constant intercourse with him. It includes 
all kinds of intercourse with God — worship, communion, sonship, obedience, guidance, 
so as to fill the whole life of thought and feeling and action. "For ever" looking 
onwards, perhaps, dimly, to the life beyond, wMch was not so clear to him as it 
is to us. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXIV. 



At first sight this psalm seems to be com- 
posed of two quite separate fragments (vera. 
1 — 6 and vers. 7 — 10); whence Ewald 
has laid it down that, in their origin, the 
two parts were wholly separate, and that 
the union took place subsequently. But a 
careful consideration reveals points of unity 
which favour the view that the connection 
was intended from the first, and is essential 
congenital. " The glory of the approach- 



ing Lord is, in both parts of the psalm, the 
fundamental idea " (Hengstenberg). Both 
parts speak of an ascent into the holy hUl 
of Zion, the first manifestly (ver. 3), the 
second by implication (vers. 7, 9). If we 
regard part ii., with most critics, as intended 
to be sung by the choir of Levites, which 
bore and accompanied the ark of the cove- 
nant as it was brought to the gates of the 
tabernacle or of the citadel of Zlon, then 
it is clear that in part i. we have a very 
suitable introduction. Part i. puts forward 



PS. XXIV. 1 — 10.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



17S 



two ideas — the infinite glory of God (vers. 
1, 2), and the need of holiness in all that 
draw near to him (vers. 3 — 6). To impress 
on the minds of those present the intinite 
glory of God is the main object of part ii. ; 
while, if we regard the lifting up of the 
gates as emblematic of the lifting up of 
men's hearts, we may say tliat the direct 
teaching of the part is the need of a pure 
spirit of devotion in worshippers. 

David's authorship is allowed by most 
critics ; and the most probable period of the 
composition is the time when David deter- 
mined to bring up the ark of God from the 
house of Obed-Edom to the tabernacle 
which he had prepared for it on Mount 
Zion (2 Sam. vi. 12). 

The psalm is made up of three strophes : 
vers. 1, 2; vers. 3 — 6; and vers. 7 — 10. 
The first and second are closely connected ; 
the third is a little detached. 

Yer. 1. — The earth is the Lord's, and the 
fulness thereof. God's glory was set forth 
in Ps, xix. from a consideration of the 
heavens (vers. 1 — 6); here it is manifested 
from the other half of creation — the earth. 
The whole earth, and all its fulness, is his. 
He made it, and he remains its sole Owner 
and Master. There is no inferior Stiiu- 
ovpyds, as some believed, who framed it and 
governs it. All its marvels, all its beauty, 
all its richness, proceed from God alune. 
The world, and they that dwell therein. 
" The world " (^3fi) seems to be here syno- 
nymous with " the earth " (f^^n). Not only 

do its material products belong to God, but 
its inhabitants also. 

Ver. 2. — For he hath founded it upon the 
seas, and established it upon the floods 
(comp. Gen. i. 9). God has established the 
earth above the sea» and floods, causing it 
to "appear," and thus making it a fitting 
habitation for man. Hence bis right of 
property in the earth and in all tlie dwellers 
on it. They exist througli his providential 
care (comp. Ps. civ. 6 — 9). 

Yer. 3. — ^Who shall ascend into the hill 
of the Lord? The second strophe opens 
with one of David's sudden transitions. 
Who is worthy to be brought into contact 
with a God of such miglit and glory ? Who 
shall ascend into his hill? God's "hill" 
is, in reality, the highest heaven, wherein 
he has hid dwelling-place. Its representative 
on earth was, at this time, the Mount Zion, 
where it was already determined in the 
Divine counsels that the temple should be 
built, and whither David was now about to 
transfer the ark of the covenant (see the 
introductory paragraph). David aaks the 



question as a warning to the Levites, whom 
he was about tu employ in the transport of 
the ark, that they might purify themselves 
in heart and soul before venturing to take 
part in the solemn ceremony. Or who shall 
stand in his holy place? Who, i.e., shall 
stand and minister inside the tabernacle, 
when the ark has been placed therein, and 
it has thus become, in a special sense, God's 
holy place? 

Ver. 4. — He that hath clean hands. He 
whosu hands are free from acts of sin (comp, 
Ps. XT. 2 — 5), and not only so, but he who 
hath also a pure heart, since the heart is 
the source of all evil (Matt. xv. 19, 20), and 
wrongl'ul words and wicked acts are the 
necessary results of the heart being impure. 
" God's demands upon his people," as Heug- 
stenberg observes, " go beyond the doiuaiu 
of aotioa. Tliose only see him — those only 
are fit to ascend into his hill — who have a 
pure heart." Who hath not lifted up his 
soul unto vanity; i.e. who has not lusted 
after vain and worthless things, whose 
desires are subdued, brought into captivity 
to the Law of Goil, and kept under strict 
control. This is really implied in purity 
of heart. Xor sworn deceitfully. False 
swearing is the worst — or, at any rate, one 
of the worst — sins of the tongue. The 
psalmist means to say that a man is not fit 
to draw near to God unless he is righteous 
in act, in thought, and in word. 

Yer. 5. — ^He shall receive the blessing 
from the Lord ; rather, bleaeing, without the 
article. On the pure in thought, word, and 
act, God's blessing is sure to rest (see Matt. 
V. 8). And righteousness from the God of 
his salvation. To the man who comes to 
God with an honest and true heart, God 
will give additional graces, such as justifi- 
cation, assurance, perseverance, unwavering 
hope, perfect charity. 

Yer. 6. — This is the generation of them 
that seek him. Men with this character 
impressed upon them are the *' generation," 
the stamp of men, whom God will recog- 
nize and accept as his worshippers, true 
seekers after him. That seek thy face, 
Jacob. The LXX. have, ZnToivTuv rb 
TrpoawTTov Tov ®€ov 'laKc6;3, whence some sup- 
pose 'n"?!* to have fallen out of the Hebrew 
text. This, no doubt, is possible, and re- 
moves all difficulty. But it is better to 
loose a Gordian knot than to cut it. We 
may keep the present text, and obtain a 
satisfactory sense, by regarding "Jacob" 
as srammatioally in apposition with " gene« 
ration," and translating, "This is the 
generation of them that seek him — that 
seek thy face — even Jacob." All they are 
not Israel who are of Israel (Bom. ix. 6). 
The true Jacob consisted of those Israelites 
who answered to the character described in 



174 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. XXIV. 1 — 10. 



ver. 4. Selah. A break, or pause, here 
ocourred, while the procession of Levites 
advanced to the very gates of the sanctuary. 
Then the strain was resumed — the choir 
being divided into two parts, which sang 
aitiphonally. 

Ver. 7. — Lift up your heads, ye gates. 
So sang one half of the choir, calling upon 
the gates to tlirow themselves wide open 
to their full lieight, that free entrance might 
be given to the approaching sacred fabric. 
And be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors. 
Pleonastic, but giving the emphasis of 
repetition, and adding the epithet " ever- 
lasting," because the tabernacle was viewed 
as about to be continued in the temple, and 
the temple was designed to be God's house 
"for ever" (1 Kings viii. 13). And the 
King of glory shall come in. God was 
regarded as dwelling between the cherubim 
on the mercy-seat, where the Shechinah 
from time to time made its appearance. 
The entrance of the ark into the tabernacle 
was thus the "coming in of tlie King of 
glory." 

Ver. 8.~Who is this King of glory T The 
other half of the choir, acting as keepers of 
the doors, inquires, as if -ignorant of the 
motive and character of the procession, 
" Who is tliis King of glory ? " — who is it 
to whom ye give this high-sounding appella- 
tion, and to whom ye require us to open ? 



And the reply follows from the previous 
speakers. The Lord strong and mighty, 
the Lord mighty in battle. It is Jehovah, 
the Strong and Mighty One — strong in him- 
self, mighty in his acts, mighty especially 
in battle ; whom ye may therefore oe glad 
to receive among you as your Defence. It 
is tins King for whom we demand admission 

Ver. 9.— Lift up your heads, ye gates ; 
even lift them up, ye everlasting coorsj and 
the King of glory shall come in. A repetition 
of ver. 7, the first part of the choir reiter- 
ating its challenge. 

Ver. 10. — Who is this King of glory t 
The second part of the choir reiterates its 
question, as though not yet quite under- 
standing. " Who is he, this King of glory ? " 
and the first, slightly varying its unswer, 
replies. The Lord ef hosts, he is the King 
of glory. The epithet, "Lord of hosts" 
well known at the time (1 Sam. i. 11 ; !! 
Sam. V. 10 ; vi. 2; vii. 18, 26. 87, etc.), made 
all clear, and, the gates being thrown open, 
the ark was brou^lit in, and set in its place 
in the midst of the tabernacle (2 Sam. vi. 
17). It has been generally recognized that 
the reception of the ark intotlie tabernacle 
on Mount Zion typified the entrance of our 
Lord into heaven after his ascension, 
whence our Church appoints this psalm as 
one of thoae to be recited on AiBoension 
Day. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 1.— T^e world for God. "The earth is the Lord's," etc. The world-wide 
breadth and grandeur of the Old Testament Scriptures, contrasted with the local 
narrowness and national bigotry of the Jewish people, is among the most impressive 
notes of its Divine inspiration. Every Israelite was trained in two convictions, which 
lay close to the heart of the national religion : (1) that Israel, in a sense that put a 
wide difference between them and all other nations, was God's chosen people; and 
(2) that the land which God had given as an inalienable inheritance was peculiarly 
Jehovah's land. What the Israelite was apt to lose sight of was that these gifts and 
distinctions were not for Israel's own glory, but for the good of mankind. 'The Holy 
Land was to be the seed-plot of the world. Probably no ancient nation could have 
grasped this grand idea. But the spirit of prophecy fills the pages of Old Testament 
Scripture with God's all-embracing purpose ; brightens them with the promise of a 
universal kingdom and religion ; claims the whole world for Jehovah. 

T. The earth is the Lord's, as the whole univebsb is his, bt eight op 
CREATION. This is the first lesson of religion (Gen. i. 1). David beautifully expresses 
this (1 Ohron. xxix. 11, 12, 14). Men may call themselves lords of the soil, and make 
what laws they choose about land ; but in literal truth, every inch of earth, from 
centre, to surface, belongs to " the blessed and only Potentate." The wealthiest 
owner, the most absolute despot, is but a tenant-at-will, who may at any moment 
receive notice to quit (Luke xii. 20). Bear in mind that creation implies design. 
Every creature, every atom, force, law, existed in the Infinite Eternal Mind, before 
" he spake, and it was done " (Ps. xxx. 6 — 9). 

II. As THE OBJECT OP HIS INCESSANT, UNIVERSAL DARE, KNOWLEDGE, BOUNTT. 

Men talk and think as though Gud were an absentee owner ; at most a constitutional 
Sovereign, ruling by laws that restrict his action and bind his will. This is in truth an 
absurd fancy, yet one which often passes for scientific. Even really godly people have 



C8. XXIV. 1—10.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 175 

<*ften a way of talking as though God's providence were partial, intermittent, an 
occasional interference with the regular course of nature, ihe glorious truth, alike 
rational and scriptural, is that " he maketh his sun to rise . . . and sendeth r»in,"i 
feeds the birds, clothes the lilies, makes all events to " work together for good " 
<Matt. V. 45 ; vii. 26, etc. ; Eom. viii. 28 ; Ps. cxix. 89 — 91). There is no rational 
standing ground between the fancy (void of shadow of proof) that atoms and forces, 
with their intricate laws of action and reaction, have an independent existence — a self- 
acting machine, grinding out irre^stible fate; and the faith that God lives in every i 
fitom of his universe ; nor can their slightest movement evade his knowledge and 
«are, or gainsay his will. 

in. As THE SCENE AND FIELD OF HUMAN LIFE, in which he Is everywhere to be 
acknowledged and glorified. The first claim on life, with all its possessions, faculties, 
opportunities, is that God be loved and lionoured (Rev. iv. 11). The hard boundary- 
line men draw between things sacred and secular is never recognized in God's Word. 
All is sacred ; for all is his (1 Tim. iv. 4). On this text St. Paul rests the doctrine 
both of Christian liberty and of Christian self-denial ; the right freely to enjoy what 
■God freely gives ; and the duty to abstain from any use of these gifts through which 
he might be dishonoured (1 Cor. x. 25 — 31). To all the motives drawn from the fore- 
aoing considerations, the gospel adds those drawn from God's " unspeakable Gift," and 
from our redemption through the blood of Christ and new creation by the Spirit of 
•God (1 Cor. vi. 19, 20; Eom. xii. 1). 

Ver. 4. — A high standard of practical morality, '* Clean handi, and a pure heart.'' 
It would be impossible to condense into so few words a more beautiful and compre- 
hensive description of true holiness. The gospel reveals motives and offers gra,ce beyond 
not only the experience, hut the conception, of Old Testament saints. But it cannot 
«et a higher standard of practical morality than this : blameless conduct, and right 
motives; dean hands, wnd a pure heart. To come up perfectly to this mark would be 
to resemble him who was " holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners," and who 
<x)uld safely challenge his bitterest enemies, " Which of you convicteth me of sin ? " 
(John viii. 46). 

I. " Clean hands" is a phrase containing a fulness of varied meaning. 1. The hand 
is in Scripture the symbol of work (Pss. xcv. 5 ; cxi. 7 $ Eccles. ix. 10) ; the gospel version 
of which is Col. iii. 23. " Clean hands " in this sense are hands whose work is faithful 
and thorough. Among the evil omens of our time is a decay of honest pride in good 
work — a tendency to substitute cheap show for solid value. Every stroke of unfaithful 
work is a nail in the cofiin of national honour and prosperity. Here religion steps in 
to our rescue. The Bible puts great honour on work. Every Christian should look 
on his daily work as a ministry to man for God's sake. If he would have " clean 
hands," he must engage in no business which cannot be so regarded. 2. The hand is 
ihe symbol ofea/rning and paying, getting and giving. (Prov. x. 4.) " Clean hands " are 
hands never defiled by unjust gain, never disgraced by withholding what is due (see 
Isa. xxxiii. 15). 3. The hand is the symbol of mutual faith and honour. To " lift up 
the hand " is to pledge one's truth (Gen. xiv. 22 ; Deut. xxxiii. 40). " Clean hands " 
therefore mean unblemished honour, inviolable faithfulness (Ps. xv. 4). 4. The 
hand is the symbol of power and of conduct. Hence the prophet's indignant denunci- 
ation (Isa. i. 15), and St. Paul's injunction (1 Tim. ii. 8). 5. Clean hands are hands 
■n»i only kept clean, but washed. The fiurest hands have on them stains that nothing 
but the blood of Christ can cleanse. And this can cleanse even the foulest. Our greatest 
poet has pointed out the anguish of a guilt-burdened conscience — 

" What 1 will these hands ne'er be clean ? . . . 
All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little band." 

But " the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin." 

II. " A PUEB HEABT." luward holiness : right motives, feelings, aims. The hands 
without the heart may pass muster in human eyes. Worldly morality concerns itself 
rather with conduct than motives (1 Sam. xvi. 7). But the grave characteristic of 
Bible morality is that everywhere the worth of actions is made wholly to depend on 
their motives. The unaccomplished purpose, if sincere, is accepted (1 Kings viii. 18). 



178 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. iiiv. 1— la 

The holiest service, with impure motive, is hateful to God (Prov. xxi. 27). Thus that 
modern philosophy, which seeks to derive conscience from the experience of the useful- 
ness to society of certain actions, utterly breaks down. The judgments of enlightened 
conscience, and all just praise or blame, take account, not of outward actions as such, 
or their consequences, but of motives. St. James puts these together (Jas. It. 8). 
He that would keep " clean hands " must put up David's prayer (Ps. li. 10, 11). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — t. — Celebrating the Real Presence. {For opening or reopening a church.y 
There seems to be no very great difficulty in finding the occasion on which this magni- 
ficent psalm was originally composed. In all probability it was written by David, and 
sung on the occasion of bringing up the ark of God to Mount Zion (2 Sam. vi. 2, 18; 
vii. 25, 26). Some regard it as prophetic, and call it "the Song of Advent," others 
" the Song of the Ascension." Others again apply it individually, and look upon it as 
appropriate for one who would open his heart to God, and let the King of glory enter 
therein. There are, however, so many Scriptures bearing more manifestly on these 
three latter applications, and there is such a fulness of instruction in dealing with the 
truths which are immediately suggested by the song as prepared for the historic occasion 
above referred to, that we shall simply invite the reader to follow the course of thought 
suggested thereby. All the historic information needed may be gathered from the 
writers referred to below ; especially from the brilliant and inspiring description of 
Dean Stanley.' The psalm discloses to us the grand revelation of God which the 
Hebrews possessed, and the joy which they felt at his making his dwelling-place among 
them. From the Hebrew standpoint we are bound to move forward to that of the 
Christian. Remembering this, let us note — 

I. The name and domain of Jehovah are immeasurably vast ; while the great- 
ness of his attributes, as disclo^-ed to his people of the olden time, is correspondingly 
august. The various names given to him in this psalm show us how far removed were 
the Hebrews' thoughts of God from those to which other nations of the earth had 
attained. The various expressions for the Name of God which are found here remove 
us very far from anything like anthropomorphism. 1. Jehovah, ; pure being — he who is, 
was, and will ever be. 2. The Ood of salvation. 3. The God of Jacob (LXX.), who can 
note the individual while watching over all. 4. The King of glory in whom the 
highest glory centres, and from whom all created glory proceeds, of every kind. 
5. The Lord of the whole earth. The wide difference in this respect between the 
thonghts of the heathen and those of Israel is seen in 1 Kings xx. i'3 ; Dan. ii. 11. 
The idea of local and tutelary deities is common enough among pagan nations. But 
that of one God supreme and alone is taught by revelation (Deut. vi. 4). 6. The 
Lord of hosts ; Lord of all the hosts of heaven, whether the hosts of stars that roll at 
his command, or the hosts of seraphim and cherubim who wait upon his word. All 
these names of God are now a joy to the believer. He sees more in each of them 
than the saints of old could possibly do ; and seeing God as revealed in Christ, he 
can add yet other names, and say : 7. " God is Spirit ; " " God is light ; " " God is love," 
ariding to the latter the touching words, " He loved me, and gave himself for me." 
Thus while the universe is no tax on his power, the humblest child may nestle in his 
lore. 

" His greatness makes us brave as children are 
When those they love are near." 

II. Xevertheless, there are some spots where his pkesencb ts specially seen. 
" The hill of the Lord " (ver. 3) ; " His holy place " (ver. 3). A careful student of the 
Scriptures may find matter of absorbing interest in two disclosed facts : (1) that the 

' For historic information, see Perowne's introduction to this psalm ; Dean Stanley's 
' Lei-tures on the Jewish Church,' 2nd series, lect. xxiii. ; Bdersbeim's ' Bible History,' It. 
177 ; Goikie's ' Half-hours with the Bible,' vol. iii. ch. ix. ; Kitto's ' Daily Bible Readings ' 
(Porter's edit.), vol. iii. pp. 341—351. The remarks of Dr. Moll (in Sohaffs Lange), 
Delitzsch, Hengstenberg, and the introductions to this psalm in 'The Cambridge Bible' 
and in the R.T.S. new edition of t\e ' Book of Psalms,' are worth notice. 



fa. XXIV. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 177 



great aim of God's revelation is to bring about tbe dwelling of man with God, and of 
God with man (cf. Bxod. xxv. 8); (2) that this is one of the thoughts of God 
unfolded in its dili'erent stages in the Scriptures. 1. There was the patriarchal period, 
when each holy man might commune with God, or erect his altar or his Bethel any- 
where. 2. There was the Mosaic and prophetic period, during which there was one 
place that the Lord chose to put his Name tnere. 3. There is the present Christian 
period, of which it is said (1) in prophecy (Mai. i. 11) ; (2) in promise (Matt, xviii. 
20), that wherever God's people meet in his name, he will be with them. 4. There 
will be the heavenly state (Rev. xxi. 3, 22, 23). We have not yet come to the 
rest and inheritance which the Lord hath promised to give us. The fourth stage 
is yet ahead. The second is past. The third is ours. To the believer, any room 
where but two or three meet in their Saviour's name may be as really a house of 
worship as the proudest cathedral. Such worship-rooms were common in the early 
Christian age.* The worship itself consecrates the place. And the presence of God is 
in it, because it is with those who worship there. No Church has any monopoly q/ 
this Real Presence, To all believers the Living One has said, " Go ! teach, baptize, and 
lol I am with you all the days, to the end of the age ! " 

III. The Litiho Pbbsbnob of God, whbrbveb ebalized, sheds a badianot of 
QLOBT. The ark was to the Hebrews the symbol, sign, and token of the Divine presence, 
and when it was conveyed to the Hill of Zion, that hiU at once attained a proud pre- 
eminence, before which hills of far greater height became quite insignificant. Hence 
Ps. Ixviii. 16." And whether iu eailier or later days, in tabernacle or temple, God's 
" way " was " in the sanctuary." Note : The tokens of God's presence, and these 
«lone, will light up any place of worship with glory. That presence is realized : 1. In 
the blest fellowship the saints have in their worship, with all the redeemed on earth 
and in heaven, as well as with the Lord. 2. In the concert of prayer, as they plead 
for each other and for all men. 3. In the messages of love that come to them from 
their Father's Word. 4. In partaking of the tokens of love which are given in the 
sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 5. And in the reception of new blessing and power 
for life's service through the energy of the Holy Ghost, who in his blest fellowship 
quickens and inspires. Surely, any place where all these boons are enjoyed is indeed 
radiant with light and blessing I 

IV. Although this pbesencb mat fill the house of woeship, not all 
THBBEIN will BE EQUALLY CONSCIOUS OF IT. Surely this must be the deep meaning 
of vers. 3—6. The question in ver. 3 is unintelligible. As a matter of fact, any one 
could ascend the hill of the Lord, and even take up his abode in the sacred precincts. 
But physical proximity to the ark of God, and spiritual nearness to the God of the 
*rk, are two very different things. It is easy to be where God is blessing his people ; 
it is another thing to be one of those who get the blessing. Moral and spiritual 
receptivity is needful if we would enjoy the fulness of that blessing. Mechanism is 
■not inspiration.* Posture is not devotion. The Real Presence cannot be had through 
tlie bread and wine of the sacrament. It will not come to any through a line of 
officiating priests. While no one may limit the extent of the blessing so as to shut out 
any true worshipper, on the other hand, not even the holiest place will ensure the blessing 
to any except the worshipper is true. " He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; 
he shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his 
salvation." 

V. BT such as worship in spirit and TRUTH, THE SACBED GATES MAT BS 
OPENED WITH JOYOUS ACCLAIM, TO RBOEIVB THE KlNG OF GLORT. (Vers. 7 10.) Yea, 

" the King of glory shall come in." He will. There is no doubt of it. The gates will 
not be opened in vain. The joyous host of devout souls wending their way thither 
will not be doomed to disappointment (Pss. xxvi. 8 ; xxvii. 4 — 6 ; xlii. 4 ; xliii. 3, 4 ; 
xlviii. 9; Ixvi. 13—19; Ixiii. 16, 17; Ixxvii. 13; Ixxxiv. ; Ixxxvii. ; oxvi. 14 — 19; 
■cxvii. 19 — 27 ; cxxxii. li — 16). They may take up the grand choral song of this psalm, 
«nd make it their own. That they and God thus may meet is the only reason why 
these houses of worship are erected. That they do thus meet, the experience of the 
■saints declares. That they vrill thus meet, the promises of God's Word ensure. Ntfie ; 

' Cf. Dr. Jacob on ' The Ecclesiastical Polity of the New Testament' 
' See renderins: of this in notes of ' Variorum Bible.' 
PSALMS. ■ 



178 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. , »s. xxiv. 1— lOi. 

The dignity of God's worshippers. Not only do they go to speak to the King, but th» 
King of heaven comes to meet them ! — C. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — 2%« King of glory. Christ as the King of glory iB represented here 
in three aspects. 

I. As THE LoBD OF THE BABTH. (Vers. 1, 21.) The kingiloms of this world are 
limited. Some are lar°;er than others, but the largest has its bounds (Esth. i, 1 ; 
Dan. iv. 1). Christ's kingdom is unlimited. Go where you will, pass from one 
country to another, visit different peoples, with different customs and laws, you can 
never get beyond its bounds. Like the sky, it covers all — " the earth, and the fulness 
thereof; the world, and they that dwell therein." The grounds of this universal Lord- 
ship are absolutely just and suflScient (ver. 2). He is the Proprietor, because he is the 
Maker ; he is the Euler, because by him all things subsist. While this belief should 
call forth our admiration and trust, it should also quicken our humility, and excite 
us to watchfulness and care as to the use we make of all things committed to us. We 
are occupants, not owners ; we are stewards, not proprietors ; we are servants, not lords. 

II. The Supreme Jodqe of mankind. The question asked here is one of trans- 
cendent importance. " Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord ? " It comes home 
to each of us. It demands consideration. It presses for a reply. Who is fit for thi» 
high honour? Who is worthy of this holy fellowship? Who is capable of entering 
upon this transcendent service? The question relates to character ; and the answer is 
given by him who alone can rightly judge as to character. In the deepest sense the 
description can be applied only to Christ Jesus. But the words hold good also of all 
who are Christ's (ver. 6), the true community of Israel, who have been redeemed and 
sanctified for the service of the Holy One. As Dean Stanley had said, " The answer 
is remarkable, as expressing, in language so clear that a child may understand it, the 
great doctrine that the only service, the only character, which can be thought worthy 
of such a habitation, is that which conforms itself to the laws of truth, honesty, 
humility, justice, love. Three thousand years have passed ; Jerusalem has fallen ; the 
Jewish monarchy, and priesthood, and ritual, and religion have perished ; but the words 
of David still remain, with hardly an exception, the rule by which all wise and good men 
would measure the worth and value of men, the greatness and the strength of nations." 

ni. The Soveeeion of the uitiverse. (Vers. 7 — 10.) Under the grand imagery ol 
this passage we may find some important truths. 1. 2%o< Christ is the King o/glorp. 
He has vindicated his right to this title on earth and in heaven. He is the highest 
Manifestation of the Divine Majesty. 2. That as the King of glory he claims admis- 
sion to the heart of man. In his Word and by the providence of his Spirit he comes 
to all. He offers himself in the plenitude of his grace and power as a Saviour. If 
we are overawed by his greatness, we are conquered by his love. He will not force an 
entrance, nor will he come in secretly or by stealth. If we are to receive him, it must 
be willingly, and with all honour and welcome as our Lord and King. 3. That at 
the King of glory he is destined to reign everlastingly over his people. " Of his kingdout 
there shall be no end." — W. F. 

Ver. 3. — This psalm breathes the spirit of aspiration. It speaks of the earlh as the 
Lord's; but we are not to rest with the earth. The call is, " Who will ascend?" A» 
one of our own poets has said — 

" Not to the earth confined, ascend to heaven." 
Aspiration is an instinct of the heart. The yoimg man is full of hope. Nothing 
•eems to him impossible. His spirit leaps within him, longing to take part with other* 
in the struggle of life. 

" Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new. 
That which they have done but earnest of the things that they shall do." 

Often such aspirations come to little. Work is hard. Progress is difficult. Thin?» 
turn out so different from what was expected. Some fail. Others falter and lose 
heart. Others sink down to the dull routine of business, and the bright vision that 
charmed their youthful fancy fades away. But there are some who succeed. They 
have had ambitions, and they have stuck to them. They nave nad purposes, and have 



PS. XXIV. 1—10.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 179 

courageously carried them out. But if their aspirations have been limited to thii 
world, success brings no real satisfaction. Byron found himself famous, and for a 
while was a great power; but how miserable were his last days I Even Gibbon, when 
he had brought his great work, that cost three and thirty years of labour, to an end, 
felt anything but quite satisfied. " I will not dissemble," he writes at Lausanne, " the 
first emotions of joy on the recovery of my freedom, and, perhaps, the establishment 
of my fame. But my pride was soon humbled, and a sober melancholy was spread 
over my mind, by the idea that I had takea an everlasting leave of an old and agree- 
able companion, and that whatsoever might be the future fate of my History, the life 
of the historian must be short and precarious" (vol. i. p. xxiii.). Our aspirations need 
guidance and support. The true ascent is to " the hill of the Lord," and " his holy 
place." The Hebrews had much to stimulate them in the very conditions of things. 
They had to " go up " to Jerusalem, and when they went to the house of the Lord, the 
way was " still upward " — from the entrance to the holy place (Ezek. xli. 7). And all 
this was made helpful to them as regards higher things. But we have greater aids and 
encouragements. We have " the hope of glory ; " the lives of the good who have siona 
before us ; the voices of the prophets ; the example of our blessed Lord ; and the (promise 
of the Holy Spirit. Every true life has its Jerusalem, and we must " go from strength 
to strength," still upward, if we are at last to reach the joy and peace of God. Thera 
are difficulties, as there will be in the way of all high endeavours ; but we are com- 
forted with the promise of help and the assurance of success. Thought is good, 
"meditated action" is better, but right action carried out, and that to the end, is best 
of all. If we are of the generation that seek God (ver. 6), then our motto will be, 
" Death to evil, and life to good." If we open our hearts to the King of glory, then 
under his leading our path shall ever be onward and upward, till at last we stand in tha 
holy place, and receive the blessing from the Lord. 

"Breathe me upward, thou in me 
Aspiring, who art the Way, the Truth, the Life I 
That no truth henceforth seem indifferent, 
No way to truth laborious, and no life — 
Not even this life I live — intolerable." 

('Aurora Leigh.") 

W. F. 

Veri. 1 — 6. — Who can dwell viith Ood f The twenty-third psalm concludes witli 
the hope of dwelling in the house of the Lord for ever, and this psalm asks, " Who is 
qualified to dwell with God in his holy place ?" Composed on the bringing of the ark 
to Mount Zion. Vers. 1 — 6 are introductory. 

I. God's exalted natubb. (Vers. 1, 2.) Relation of land to water in Gen. i. 9. 
God's creative universal power was coimected in the mind of the psalmist with : 1. 
Eis omniscience. He saw with unerring truth the character of those who professed to 
worship and serve him. 2. His holiness. None but the pure in heart could have 
fellowship with him. The hypocrite, therefore, could not hope for acceptance. " God is 
a Spirit, and those who worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth." And 
he was a Holy Spirit, who could have no fellowship with the untruthful and unclean. 

II. QuALlFiOATiONS OF W0RSHIPPBE8. (Vcr. 4.) 1. Pure conduct. " Clean hands " — 
significant of conduct — the outward life of action, which must be unstained and 
righteous. No man's inward life can be right if his outward life be unclean or unjust. 
2. Pwe thoughts and affections. " A pure heart." The heart is the seat of the pur- 
poses and desires, and if these be not in the main and on the whole pure — " the single 
eye " — the whole character and life are defiled. " Not that which goeth into a man 
deflleth him, but that which cometh out of him." " He hath not lifted up his soul 
unto vanity or falsehood." He is not pursuing vain or untrue things — things which 
are only a show, but have no substance. 3. Pure speech. " Nor sworn deceitfully." 
His word corresponds to his thought, and is not uttered to deceive. This requires not 
only truthfulness, but courage, to brave all consequences of being truthful. A man who 
combines these attributes can live in God's highest presence, and have fellowihip and 
friendship with him. 

III. The reward of sncH worshippers. (Vers. 5, 0.) 1. IncreoM of righteousness. 



180 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. XXT. 1- 22. 



By seeing God and having real communion with him. The "blessing" he receives ui 
this increase of righteousness. No priestly benediction avails, unless there be the 
moral condition indicated. 2, He shcUl seek the face of God with increased earnestness. 
" To seek the face of the Lord " is to be greatly concerned about his favour and the 
doing liis will. And this can come only as the result of pievious effort and practice. — S. 

Vers. 7 — 10. — Appeal for God's entrance into the heart of man. Sung on the entry 
of the ark into the ancient gates of the fortress of Jerusalem. The singers, two choirs 
of priests — the one bearing the ark, the other already stationed there as warders. First 
choir demanding admission; second reply from within, " Who is this King of glory ?" 
The transaction may suggest and represent the appeal made for God's entrance into 
the heart of man. Then — 

L The lanouaob would eepbbsent the misd of man as God's temple. What 
views of our nature are suggested by such a representation ? 1. The religious destina- 
tion of man. A temple is built for religious uses and objects. So this is the grand 
destiny for which man is created — religion. Physical, intellectual, moral destiny. 2. 
Represents the mind as a sanctuary fur the Divine habitation. The glory of God dwelt 
between the cherubim ; but man is God's grandest Shechinah. This is fully recognized 
and asserted in the New Testament. " He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you ; " 
"Ye are God's temple." 

IL God as a glorious King is ever seeking admission into our minus. 1. 
The King of glory assumes the attitude of a majestic suppliant. " Let the King come 
in." "Behold, I staml at the door, and knock." Illustrates the voluntary nature of 
our relations with God. Wonderful 1 Infinity pleading with the finite ; majesty sup- 
plicating meanness ; holiness stooping before the unholy I 2. The purpose for whick he 
seeks to occupy our minds. To draw us into friendship and harmony with himself, and 
to establish a glorious rule over us. We are incapahle of self-rule, and cannot exist 
alone. And this is our proper and normal relation to him. 

III. The exercise of mind by which God is admitted into our nature. A 
lifting up of its powers — an elevation and expansion of them — ^in the following ways. 
1. It is the reaching forth of our powers towards the Infinite Being. An effort to embrace 
our infinite and eternal concerns — a going forth out of the transient and visible into 
the everlasting and spiritual. 2. The active reception of Ood enlarges our best powers 
and affections. It enlarges and exalts love, will, and conscience. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXV. 



Tms is the second of the "alphabetic 
psalms." It is not so irregular as Ps. ix., 
but still is defective in some respects, the 
letters heth and vau being omitted in their 
proper place, resh being substituted for koph, 
and a second he being added at the end. 
Some of these variations may be accidental, 
but others would seem to liave been inten- 
tional, being found also in Pa. xxxiv. The 
psalm consists of a number of prayers, re- 
flectiuUd, and pious ejaculations, not drawn 
np in any systematic order, and not very 
clbarly connected by any single line of 
thought. The separate portions have, how- 
ever, in many cases much beauty; and it 
is observed that " some of the most precious 
spiritual treasures of the Church liave 
been drawn from this psalm " (Kay). The 



thoughls are quite worthy of the writer to 
whom it is attributed in the title, viz. 
David ; and the alphabetic arrangement, 
which has been urged against David's 
authorship, is scarcely conclusive on the 
point. Many of the best critics regard 
Pss. ix. and xxxiv., which, like this, are 
imperfectly alphabetic, as David's. 

'J'he metrical arrangement is not voiy 
marked. Some divide the psalm into five 
unequal strophes — vers. 1 — 7, vers. 8 — 10, 
Vers. 11—15, vera. 16 — 21, and ver. 22; 
others see no divisions beyond those of the 
Hebrew verses, which are followed in our 
Authorized Bible. 

Ver. 1.— Unto thee, lord, do I lift np 
my soul (comp. Pss. Ixxxvi. 4; cxliii. 8). 
The Hebrew phrase does not mean a tem- 
porary raising of the heart to God, but • 
permanent setting of the affections on him 



PS. XXV. 1—^2.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



161 



(see Dent. xxiv. 15 ; and eomp. Ps. xxiv. 

Ver. 2. — my Goi, I trust in thee (oomp. 
Pss. vii. 1 ; xi. 1 ; xxxi. 1, 6, etc.). Let me 
not be ashamed ; ie. do not disappoint my 
trust, and thereby briiig me to shame (oomp. 
Job vi. 20). Let not mine enemies triumph 
over me. It does not appear whether tlie 
" enemies " intended are domestic or foreign 
foes. Either would triumph were David 
disappointed of a confident expectation. 

Ver. 3. — Yea, let none that wait on thee 
be ashamed. The prayer passes from the 
particular to the universal. What David 
desires for himself lie desires also for all 
the true servants of God — all who wait on 
him, look to him, seek for indications of 
liis will (comp. Ps. cxxiii. 2). Let them be 
ashamed which transgress without cause. 
Let shame be the portion, not of thy ser- 
vants, but of thy adversaries — nf those who 
tiansgri'ss (or rebel) without reasonable 
cause. Such persons deserve to be brought 
to shame. 

Ver. 4. — Show me thy ways, Lord; 
teach me thy paths. An echo of the prayer 
of Moses when his people were rebellious 
at Sinai (Exod. xxxiii. 13), reiterated by 
David in Ps. xxvii. 11, and perhaps again 
in Ps. Ixxxvi. 11 (see also Ps. oxix. 33). 
Man is so wanting in spiritual understand- 
ing, so morally blind and ignorant, that, 
unless enliglitened from on high, lie cannot 
discern aright the " way of godliness; " he 
does not know at any given moment what 
God would have him to do. Hence it is 
the constant prayer of every religious man 
that God will "lighten his darkness;" 
" make his way plain before his face ; " 
"show him the path that he should walk 
in ; " enable him to see, if no more, at any 
rate the next step which it is his duty to 
take. The idea lias been beautifully ex- 
pressed by a modern poet — 

"Lead, kindly Light, amid the encircling 
gloom 
Leail thou me on. 
The night is dark, and I am far from 
home; 
Lead thou me on. 
Keep thou my feet ; I do not ask to see 
The distant scene ; one step enough for 
me." 

Ver. 5. — Lead me in thy truth, and teaoh 
me. "Thy truth" would seem to mean 
here " the true, right path " — the " way of 
godliness." The prayer is that God will 
both teach this to the psalmist and " lead 
him in it " — cause him, i.e., to walk in it, 
and never stray from it, so long as he lives. 
For thou art the God of my salvation. Thou 
art the God from whom alone I obtain sal- 
vation, and to whom alone, therefore, I am 



bound to pray for everything on which 
salvation defiends — as, for instance, light 
and guidance. On thee do I wait all the 
day. In prayer for these blessings, I wait 
on thee all the day long. 

Ver. 6. — Eemember, Lord, thy tender 
mercies, and thy loving-kindnesses. Past 
mercies form a ground for the expectation 
of future lilessings. God's character cannot 
change; his action as one time will always 
be consistent and harmonious with his action 
at another. If he has been kind and merci- 
ful to David in the past, David may count 
on his continuing the same in the future. 
For they have been ever of old. Not lately 
only, or to David only, have his mercies 
been shown, but thorough all past time, to 
all his servants, from of old. 

A er. 7. — Remember not the sins of my 
youth, nor my transgressions. Job thought 
that God counted against him the " iniqui- 
ties of hid youth " (Job xiii. 26) ; David, 
with greater faith and a deeper insight into 
the true character of God, can ask with 
confidence that his may not be reckoned 
against liim. An earthly father does not 
remember them against his son. How much 
less will our heavenly Father I According 
to thy meroy remember thou me, for thy 
goodness' sake, Lord ! Still, put me not 
from thy mind. "Eemember thou me" 
always — but in the light of thy tender 
meroy, with the rays of thy love streaming 
over me and hiding the deformities of my 
transgressions. Do this " for thy goodness' 
sake," i.e. because thou art essential Good- 
ness, perfect Tenderness, perfect Love. 

Ver. 8. — Good and upright is the Lord. 
A transition. From prayer the psalmist 
turns to reflection, and meditates awhile 
(vers. 8 — 10) on the character and ways of 
God. God is. Indeed, "gnod," as he has 
implied in the preceding verse — i.e. kind, 
tender, gentle, merciful; but he is also 
"upright" (n»^')— just, straight, strict, un- 
deviating from the path of right. As Bishop 
Butler observes, " Divine goodness, with 
which, if I mistake not, we make very free 
in our speculations, may not be a bare single 
disposition to produce happiness, but a dis- 
position to make the good, the faithful, the 
honest man happy " (' Anal ,' i. 2, p. 41) — a 
disposition, i.e., to be just as well as merci- 
ful—to distribute happiness by the canon 
of right. Therefore will he teach sinners 
in the way. He will nut abandon sinners — 
this is his " goodness ; " but will reclaim 
them, chasten them, make them to walk in 
his way — this is his uprightness. 

Ver. 9. — The meek will he guide in 
judgment. It is only such sinners as are 
" meek " — i.e. humble, submissive, contrite, 
teachable — that God will take in hand and 
teach. The proud and perverse be will 



i82 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. ixv. 1—22. 



leave to their own devices, but the meek 
he will guide in the paths of righteousness, 
and the meek will he teach his way. 

Ver. 10. — All the paths of the Lord are 
mercy and truth nnto such as keep his 
covenant and his testimonies. Mercy and 
truth will meet together (Ps. Ixxxv. 10) in 
the case of tho.se who, however thpy may 
have sinned, meekly submit themselves to 
God's guidance, and thenceforth keep his 
covenant and his testimonies. 

Ver. 11. — For thy Name's sake, lord, 
pardon mine iniquity. The psalmist here 
resumes the attitude of prayer, which he 
had laid aside in ver. 8. The " sins of liis 
youth," and his other "transgressions," 
which he had asked God to forget (ver. 7), 
rankle in his own memory, and force him 
to cry out again and again for pardon (see 
ver. 18; Pss. xxxii. 5; xxxviii. 18; xxxix. 
8 ; xli 4, etc.). Here he beseeclies God to 
pardon him " for his Name's sake," i.e. for 
the honour of his Name, that his mercy 
may be known far and wide, and his good- 
ness cause all the world to praise him. He 
enforces his plea by the confession, For it 
(t.e. his iniquity) is great ; so great, that his 
need of forj^iveness is excessive ; so great, 
that to forgive it will be truly Godlike ; so 
great, that, unless forgiven, he must be lost. 
(For his "great sin," see 2 Sam. xi. 4 — 17.) 

Ver. 12. — ^What man is he that feareth 
the Lord ? Once more we have a series of 
leflections (vers. 12 — 15) — first, with respect 
to the God-fearing man. Every fuoh man 
shall have favour shown him by God — ^him 
shall he (i.e. God) teach in the way that he 
BhaU choose. This is, of course, the right 
wav — the way of God's commandments (Ps, 
cxix. 30, 173). God shall make his way 
plain to the God-fearing man. 

Ver. 13. — His soul shall dwell at ease; 
rather, Ms soul shall dioell in bliss; i.e. he 
shall enjoy, while on earth, blessings of 
every kind. And bis seed shall inherit the 
earth. His posterity after him shall be 
continued upon tlie earth, and shall prosper 
(oomp. Ps. xxxvii. 11, 22, 29). There is a 
tendency in righteousness to " inherit the 
earth," only held in check by accidental and 
(it may be) temporary circumstances (see 
Butler's 'Analogy,' pt. i. oli. 3, pp. 78, 79). 

Ver. 14. — The secret of the Lord is with 
them that fear him. God favours those 
who fear him with secret and confidential 
communion (comp. Pro v. iii. 32) He " comes 
unto them, and makes his abode with them " 
(John xiv. 23), and " teaches them " (John 
xiv. 26), and enlightens them, and leads 
them in his way, and learns them (ver. 5), 
and "seals their instruction" (Job xxxiii. 
16). And he will show them his covenant ; 
i.e. make them see the full force of it, since 
his "commandment is eiijeeding broad" 
(Pb. cxix. 96). 



Ver. 15 — Mine eyes are ever toward 
the Lord. David is always looking to God 
(Ps. oxli. 8), waiting for Mm (Pss. xl. 1 ; 
Ixii 1, 5 ; Ixix. 3, etc.), expecting his pro- 
vidences, anticipating his deliverances (Pss. 
iii. 7; v. 11; vii. 1; ix. ^, etc.). He is 
now, apparently, in some danger or diffi- 
culty, and in need of the Divine succour 
(comp. ver. 2). For he shall pluck my feet 
out of the net (comp. Pss. ix. 15 ; x. 10 ; 
xxxi. 5 ; XXXV. 7, etc.). 

Ver. 16. — Turn thee unto me, and have 
mercy upon me. The approach of peril is 
regarded as a sign that God has "turned 
away his face." He is besought, therefore, 
to turn towards one who needs his aid. 
For I am desolate and affllctjd (comp. vers. 
17, 18). The affliction evidently comes from 
enemies, either foreign or domestic (vers. 2, 
19) ; but its nature is not further indicated. 

Vers. 17, 18. — The troables of my heart 
are enlarged : O bring thou me out of my 
distresses, Look upon mine af9iction and my 
pain ; and forgive all my sins. The afflic- 
tion, of whatever kind it may have been, 
was regarded by David as a punishment 
sent on him for his sins. Of his sins lie 
was at this time deeply conscious (vers. 7, 
11) and deeply repentant. Probably they 
included his great sin (see the comment on 
ver. 11). 

Ver. 19. — Consider mine enemies ; for they 
are many (comp. Pss. iii. 7 ; v. 8 ; vi. 7, 10 ; 
vii. 1, 6; xvii. 9; xviii. 2, 17); and they 
hate me with cruel hatred. This would 
appear to point to domestic rather than 
foreign foes (see 2 Sam. xvi. 6—8). 

Ver. 20. — keep my soul, and deliver me 
(comp. Pss. vi. 4; xvii. 3; xxii. 20, etc.): 
let ma not be ashamed ; for 1 put my trust 
in thee (see comment on ver. 2). 

Ver. 21. — Let integrity and nprightnesi 
preserve me. Scarcely his own inherent 
integrity and uprightness, the want of 
which he has deplored when confessing 
that his iniquity is great (ver. 11). Kather 
an integrity and uprightness whereto ha 
hopes to attain, by the grace of God, in 
days to come — an integrity and uprightness 
for which he " waits : " For I wait on thee. 

Ver. 22. — Redeem Israel, Goi, out of all 
his troubles. It is supposed by some that 
this verse was added during the "trouble" 
of the Captivity; and certainly its stand- 
ing outside the alphabetical arrangement 
favours this view ; but the similar irregu- 
larity at the close of Ps. xxxiv. rather makes 
against it. David evidently was not a slave 
to a mechanical arrangement ; and any pious 
Israelite, at any age (therefore certainly 
David) might naturally append a prayer 
for his people to an outpouring of prayer 
for himself. Moreover, redemption is an 
idea familiar to David (Pss. xix. 14; xxvi 
11 ; xxxi. 5; xxxiv. 22) 



PS. XXV. 1— 2H.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 183 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 4, 5. — " Show me thy ways," etc. Prayer ought to be the most natural, as 
it is the noblest, form of speech. It would be if human nature were not off its balance, 
out of tune, morally crippled and disjointed. In extremity of peril or grief, the 
instinct of prayer often wakes up even in godless hearts — 

" And lips say, ' God be merciful I ' 

That ne'er said, ' God be praised I ' " 

But no godless lips would be surprised by danger or stung by pain into uttering such 
a prayer as this (Rom. viii. 26). The Book of Psalms nhounds in prayers like this, 
or like vers. 6, 7, 11, which bear the stamp of the Holy Spirit's teaching. 

I. These wokds teach otm urgent need op God's teaching. 1. Concerning 
himself. Nature is a revelation of God; a lesson-book stored with Divine meaning 
(Ps. xix. 1; Rom. i. 19, 20). His existence; his infinite wisdom and goodness in 
design, power in execution, ruling, upholding; unchanging faithfulness; — these are 
lessons we may read, if we have eyes, in this glorious universe. But nature has no 
message to the individual ; no answer to this petition, " Show me, teach me, lead me." 
Like a machine, it is guided by fixed laws ; all is universal, calculable, relentless. The 
knowledge of God the heart needs is personal. Does he care for me, love me, invite my 
love? Have I sinned against him? and, if so, will he pardon? Will he listen if I 
apeak, answer if I pray? Is that Arctic creed true, that he 

" Sees with equal eye, as God of all, 
A hero perish or a sparrow fall " ? 

Or that blessed faith, that, while not a sparrow dies without the will of my heavenly 
Father, I count for more in his reckoning "than many sparrows"? 2. Concerning 
ourselves. Our life, duty, salvation. This is the teaching the psalmist asks for : " thy 
ways;" "thy paths;" "Lead me in thy truth." The revelation of Scripture in a 
sense resembles that of natnre. It is universal — for mankind (" all nations," Matt, 
xxviii. 19 ; Luke xxiv. 47). The individual soul needs more than revelation — 
inspiration, the light and leading of the Holy Spirit. 

II. This Divine teaching is to be sought and obtained bt peateb. 1. Not as 
a substitute for Scripture. The inward light is not to supersede the written Word. 
God has given us there, so far as words can convey it, all the knowledge we need of 
himself, and of our duty, salvation, and destiny. 2. Nor yet to make us independent 
of human teaching. God does not bestow equal light on all Christians ; but larger, 
deeper, clearer knowledge and wisdom to some, that they may impart to others. A 
mind too proud to learn from man is not in a fit state to be taught of God (1 Cor. xii. 
8 ; Eph. iv. 11, 12). 3. But the capacity to apprehend Divine truth is from Gk)d. 
So is a right disposition of heart — faith, humility, sympathy, desire for holiness, love 
to God. The Bible is a sealed book to the understanding as long as the heart is closed 
against the gospel (Matt. xiii. 13 — 15 ; 1 John ii. 20, 27). The Spirit of God can 
teach us more in a single verse or sentence of a sermon, book, or letter, than we can 
gain without his teaching from whole volumes (Acts xvi. 14 ; 1 Thess. i. 5). 

Remark : This truth is vital to Protestantism. Private judgment apart from Divine 
teaching would mean only the right to err. Daily experience shows the adequacy of 
the Scriptures, studied with earnest prayer for the Holy Spirit apart from human 
teaching, to convert the heart and bless and guide the life (John vi. 45). Without 
such prayer and Divine teaching the most learned biblical scholar may utterly fail to 
reach the hidden heart of Scripture. 

Ver. 10. — Glorious prospect of OocTs dealings. " All the paths," etc. The spirit 
of this psalm is lowly but tranquil faith. Lowly, because of deep sense of sin (vers. 7, 
11, 18) and experience of sorrow (vors. 2, 15 — 17) ; tranquil, because resting in God 
(vers. 1, 6, 8, 12). Like a flower rooted in a roclt-cleft, that shivers with every breeze, 
but which you may tear to pieces but not uproot. This tenth verse contains an 
answer to the prayer of ver. 4. Starting from his own experience, the psalmist is 



184 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xiv. 1— 22. 

elevated to this glorious universal prospect of God's dealings. Consider (1) the/eaturei 
here selected as characteristic of God's dealings : " mercy and truth ; " (2) the assurance 
that these are never wanting in any inntance ; "all the paths," etc. 

I. The features chabaoteristic of God's dealings. 1. " Mercy ; " or, " loving- 
kindness," as the same Hebrew word is often rendered. (In Prov. xxxi. 26 and some 
iither places, " kindness.") Although it is a useful general rule to employ one English 
word constantly to represent one Hebrew or Greek word, yet we could not afford to 
spare either of these words from our English Bible. Rules must not be pressed with 
l.edantic strictness when they hurt in place of helping. Mercy, or loving-kindness, 
ii.eans goodness, and something more — a personal reference, inviting personal trust 
and thankfulness. You show goodness, large-hearted bounty, if you set up a public 
fountain where one is needed. But if you are journeying through the desert, and 
share your own scanty supply with a traveller ready to die of thirst, that is mercy, 
loving-kindness. When Israel dwelt in Goshen, God's goodness was shown in every 
ripening fruit and bending ear of corn. But perhaps the poor slaves forgot to praise 
the bountiful hand which fed their oppressors as richly. But when a table was spread 
for them morning by morning in the desert, and water gushed out of the rock, Israel 
learned the lesson they were brought there to learn, and praised the Lord, "for he 
is good ; his mercy endureth for ever." So with God's greatest Gift : " God so loved 
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son " (John iii. 16 ; 1 John iii. 9, 10). But 
it is in the personal reception of this universal gift that " whosoever belie,veth " really 
learns its value. The sense of personal sin and unworthiness is indispensable to any 
adequate sense of God's mercy (comp. Gen. xxxii. 10). 2. Truth is the other great 
feature of God's character here set forth. These two are inseparable (Ps. Ixxxv. 10). 
Neither apart from the other would furnish a gospel. God's mercy is the matter and 
motive of our faith ; his truth its warrant ami assurance (1 John v. 9 — 11). Among 
men one would rather trust a hard-hearted but incorruptibly truthful man, than one 
full of kind feeling but faithless. In God the two are as inseparable as the form and 
the colour which make to our view one image. 

II. These glorious attributes of God abb constant, because he is unchangeable. 
They characterize all his dealings without exception, for God is always himself. "All 
the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth." The psalmist adds, "unto such," etc. 
This twofold descrifition of God's written Word corresponds with the two features we 
have been contemplating of the Divine character. " His covenant," including all his 
promises (2 Cor. i. 20), is the expression of his mercy ; " his testimonies," the utterance 
of his truth. Inseparable, like the glories of his nature. They also correspond with 
the twofold nature ot faith — personal trust in God, and intelligent belief of Divine 
truth. Why this limitation — " unto such," etc. ? Are not God's mercy and truth 
his free gift to all men — the charter from which none may bar them? Surely, if they 
ivill receive them. Truth is not truth to one who refuses to believe it — treats it as a 
fancy or a lie. A promise is no promise to one who rejects it (1 John v. 10). Such 
limitation lies in the nature of things, not in any arbitrary appointment. All are 
included who are willing to be included. None are shut out but those who shut 
themselves out (1 Tim. ii. 4 — 6). Does any child of God, sorely tried in mind, body, 
or estate, Snd it hard to hold fast this faith? Are you tempted to think some of God's 
ways unmerciful — that some of his promises fail ? Hest assured this is your ignorance 
and weakness, not God's harshness or forgetfulness. This was Asaph's temptation, so 
pathetically recorded in Ps. Ixxvii., so triumphantly overcome. When " the end of 
the Lord " comes to be known, every one who has " kept his covenant and his testi- 
monies" shall find thut "hope maketh not ashamed;" and shall confess, "He hath 
done all thmgs well." 

Ver. 11. — " For thy Name's sake." The distinction between " natural religion " and 
" revealed religion," which makes a great figure in theological writings, finds no place 
in Scripture. Religion, as set forth in the Bible, is alike natural and revealed. All 
nature, human nature above the rest, bears witness to God. Ignorant of God, and 
separated from him either by ignorance or by want of natural affection, man is in an 
unnatural condition — out of harmony with his native surroundings. But just as i* 
is not enough for vision that we have eyes, or for hearing that we have ears — we n«r 



,xxv. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 185 

light and sound — so if reli2;ion is to have any reality and worth, it is not enough that 
our nature cries out for God ; we must have the light of Divine trath, the voice of 
Divine teaching. This, in a word, is just what is meant by t is phrase, so constantly 
employed in Scripture, "The Name of God." It stands for all that God has made 
us capable of knowing of him, and all that he has actually made known of himself. 
This plea, " for thy Name's sake," is accordingly an appeal — first, to God's manifes- 
tation (or revelation) of himself to men ; and then, farther, to his unchangeableness ; 
and to his pledged word of promise. 

I. To God's manifestation of himself. In other words, to his recorded dealings 
with mankind. Our knowledge here, as elsewhere, rests on experience. When we 
speak of the Bible as " a revelation," we express but half the truth. It is the history 
(^revelation — the record of God's progressive manifestation of himself to mankind. 
Speech is a powerful revealer of character. But words must be accompanied or backed 
lip by deeds, if we are to trust them fully. Conduct reveals character as words cannot. 
And these, conduct and speech combined, cannot give full, intimate knowledge of 
any one without converse — personal communion and sympathy. Accordingly, this 
threefold cord is woven right through the Bible : (1) the revelation of God in his 
Word — law, instruction, promise, warning; (2) the revelation of God in his public 
dealings with nations and with individuals ; and (3) the revelation of God by his Spirit 
in personal communion with the soul that seeks and loves him. It is little to say that, 
outside the Bible, in the religions and religious books of the heathen world, there 
is no such record, nor any semblance of it. There is nothing from which the very 
imagination of it could be drawn. To illustrate this threefold manifestation of God 
would be to go through the whole Bible. The light which dawns in Genesis shines 
brighter and brighter, lill iu the gcspel we have the perfect day (1 John ii. 8). The 
words of Jesus tell all that words can express of God. His atoning death is every- 
where in the New Testament declared to be the highest, deepest, most convincing 
revelation of both God's love and righteousness — the two main features of his character. 
And personal communion with God cannot possibly go beyond our Saviour's promise 
to his disciples (John xiv. 7, 10, 21), combined with the promise of the indwelling 
presence of God's Spirit (vers. 16, 17). . 

II. An appeal to God's unchangeableness. In other words, to what in men we 
call consistency and stability of character. This is all-important ; yet in the case of 
men we must rest content with something short of complete certainty. The best of 
men may change or break down. We may say — 

"He was a gentleman on whom I built 
Ad absolute trust." 

But temptation may find some weakness in him. Disappointment may sour his spirit. 
Some secret sin may undermine his virtue and piety. Circumstances, if they cannot 
conquer his will, may destroy his power to make good his word. But God cannot 
change (2 Tim. ii. 13 ; Mai. iii. 6). The revelation of God in Scripture is progressive 
but consistent. His Name is, as it were, spelled out letter by letter ; but no letter 
once written is ever erased. In this sense, therefore, our knowledge of God has greater 
certainty than of our fellow-men. What is true of them to-day may not hold good 
this day year. But 1 John iv. 16 is true for all time, for all eternity. (These passages 
may be referred to : Exod. iii. 14, 15 ; xxxiii. 19 ; xxxiv. 5 ; Prov. xviii. 10 and 
Ps. ix. 10; John v. 43; Matt, xviii. 20.) 

HI. An appeal to God's word of promise. When an honest man puts his name 
to a promise or engagement, he is bound by a tie stronger than iron. God lias 
coridesceialeil to give us this security. Purblind critics may call this "anthropo- 
morphism ; " it is what the Bible calls " the grace of God " — the settled plan and eifort 
of the Father of spirits, by coming near to us to draw us home to him. Glimpses of 
this sublime idea, irrevocable Divine promise, may bo found in heathen literature 
(' Homer,' e.gi) — a religion based on God's promise will be found nowhere but in the 
Bible. Fear not, then, to use this plea, which God himself puts in thy mouth, " For 
thy Name's sake ! " 



186 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xxy. 1—22. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — Prayer: its warrant, petitions, and arguments. It is thought by 
Bome that this prayer telongs to the Exile period; but by whomsoever it may have 
been penned, or at whatsoever age, matters little. There is nothing in it which 
depends on known historic incident i for its elucidation. And whoever desires to dive 
into the depths of its meaning will find the habit of waiting on God the best key to 
its words and phrases. No merely natural man can possibly unravel spiritual things, 
and he who is a stranger to prayer will get no help whatever in the understp.nding of 
this psalm from all the scholastic critics in the world. There are a few doubtful 
phrases, on which Perowne's notes will throw some light ; but, speaking generally, this 
is one of the psalms on which Calvin and Matthew Henry will furnish adequately 
suggestive remarks. Reserving all dealing with specific texts in it for other writers 
in this Commentary, we propose to survey the psalm as a whole, though it may be that 
each heading thereon might furnish a theme for separate discourse. This prayer of an 
Old Testament saint suggests — 

I. That wk know enough of God to furnish us with a sound basis fob feateb. 
Interspersed among the several petitions there are here several statements of exquisite 
beauty (of. vers. 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 3, 13). These may be thus set forth : 1. God is good 
and upright ; therefore will he teach and guide those who seek him. Good, so that he 
delights to do it ; upright, so that he will be true to his promise. 2. This guidance 
he vouchsafes to the meek (ver. 9). Taken in a physical sense, the word translated 
" meek " is equivalent to " afflicted ; " in a moral sense its meaning is as given here 
(cf. Jas. i. 21 ; iv. 6 ; Matt. xi. 25). 3. To loyal souls all his ways are mercy and 
truth (ver. 10) ; hence he cannot shut his ear to their prayer (see also ver. 12). " Him 
shall he teach in the way that he shall choose; " Luther, "Er wird ihn tmterweisen 
den besten Weg." 4. He will give such souls a rest and refuge in himself (ver. 13). 
"His soul shall lodge in goodness" (Hebrew; cf. Ps. xci. 1, Hebrew). 5. To such 
God will open up the heavenly secrets of his covenant love. A glorious anticipation, 
by spiritual intuition, in Old Testament times, of John xv. 15. 6 He will never put 
to shame those that wait on him (ver. 3, Revised Version ; see Perowne's note thereon). 
As followers of our Lord Jesus, we may add to all this the amazing statement, " The 
Father seeketh such to worship him." God is not only willing to receive their 
worship, but he eagerly desires it (John iv. 23). 

II. That praybe is the highest effort of man. It is described in the first verse 
as " lifting up the soul to God " (cf. Pss. cxxi. 1 ; cxliii. 8). This the psalmist did (1) in 
the niorning (Ps. v. 3); (2) at noun and at evening (Ps. Iv. 17); (3) seven times 
a day (Ps. cxix. 164); (4) all the (iay (Ps. xxv. 5); (5) perpetuidly (Ps. xxv. 15). 
The psalmist prayed not only when trouble came, but always. His heart sponta- 
neously went up ever to God, as to the Friend without whose smile he could not live, 
and without whose protection he dared not move. Note: For elevation of life our 
spirits must be ever looking above and beyond themselves. An upward look will 
uplift character; the downwaid look will degrade. 

III. That inward conflicts and outward oiboumstances often givb special 
intensity to prayer. Glancing over the- varied forms of expression which indicate 
the p^almist's mental state and his surroundings, we shall see this: 1. The remem- 
brance of past sins troubles him. Oh that the young would beware of sin ! Long, 
long after it is forgiven by God, it will poison and wdrry the memory (ver. 7). So 
much so, that only as the sinning one flings himself on mercy, can he have any rest 
at all. 2. The psalmist is desolate, afBicted (ver. 16), troubled in heart (ver. 17), in a 
net (ver. 15), surrounded with bitter enemies (ver. 19). What a burden of care and 
grief be has to roll over upon God ! Note : It is an infinite mercy to be permitted to 
tell God exactly what we feel, and all that we feel, knowing that we shall never be 

' The carefully prepared work of the Rev. A. R. Fausset, M.A., entitled, 'Horm 
PBalmicse,' is worthy of a careful study. He regards this psalm as " David's prayer for 
deliverance from enemies like Absalom and Shinipi, on the ground of God's covenant of 
grace to the meek penitent " (see remarks of great interest on this psalm in lectures ii., iv., 
vi.. and xiv.l 



PS. XXV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 187 

misunderstood, but that we shall be laying open all our griefs only before infinit* 
goodness and mercy. 

IV. The specipio petitions in pbatee mat be varied ab dub need. The 
petitions specified in this psalm are mainly for himself, but not exclusively. Those 
for himself are such as any child of God may present at any time. The special 
colouring given to each must need be the reflection of hues of his own, " fresh 
borrowed from the heart." The psalmist's petitions for himself may be grouped under 
ei^ht heads. 1. That God would not put him to shame before his enemies (ver. 2). 
2. He prays for light (ver. 4). 3. For teaching in the way in which he should go 
(vers. 4, 5). 4. That he may have experience in God's faithfulness (ver. 5 ; see notes, 
' Variorum Bible '). 5. For loving-kindness and mercy (ver. 6). 6. For forgiveness (ver, 
11). 7. For Divine guardianship (ver. 20). 8. For a gracious, compassionate look 
(ver. 18). 9. That amidst all temptations to wander from the way, he may be kept 
ill integrity and uprightness (vers. 21, 22). But the pleading one cannot close without 
one prayer for the Church of God (ver. 22 ; cf. Ps. li. 18, 19). A noble, pious, public 
spirit existed in the Old Testament saints. Such a one as the writer of this psalm 
cannot forget his people at a throne of grace. Well would it be if such earnest public 
spirit were possessed by Christian people everywhere, so that, as priests unto God, they 
would never enter the holy of holies save with the names of the twelve tribes of 

' Israel graven on their breast. 

V. The prating one mat use manitold abgumbnts in pleading with his God. 
There is a blending of simplicity, boldness, and grandeur in the pleas of this prayer. 
1. "I trust in thee" (ver. 2). When there is trust on one side, we may be sure it is- 
reciprocated by love and pity on God's side. 2. " Thou art the God of my salvation " 
(ver. 5). Thou hast undertaken to deliver me, and thou wilt be true to thine own 
pr. imises. God loves to be reminded of his promises. He has never said in vain to 
the seed of Jacob, " Seek ye me." 3. " Remember thy tender mercies," etc. (ver. 6). 
David's past experience of God's mercy was a pledge that God would not forget him. 
4. " For thy Name's sake " (ver. 11). Gracious answers to his people's prayer magnify 
God's Name ; they reveal his grace and love. And the psalmist, in holy daring, pleads 
with God to magnify his own Name in hearing him. Tea, more ; a more startling 
argument still is used. 5. "For it [mine iniquity] is great "(ver. 11)1 Who but 
those who know how God delights to forgive, and even to multiply pardons, could ever 
venture to plead for forgiveness because their sin was so great? Yet surely the 
meaning is, " Lord, though my sin is great, the greater will thy mercy be, and the 
more lustrously thy pardoning love will shine forth on the background of my guilt I " 
Such prayers and such pleadings as these are not learnt in a day nor in a year. They 
can come only from one whose eyes are ever towards the Lord. 

VI. Such teubting and pbatino ones will not be pot to shame. (Ver. 3, 
Revised Version.) They never have been. They never will be.^ They cannot be. 
The revealed character and attributes of God assure us of tliis. The opening up of the 
new and living way to God, which our great High Priest has consecrated for ever for 
our use, ensures it. The blood of Christ seals the same; it is the "blood of the 
everlasting covenant." The love of God shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Ghost 
is another pledge of the efficacy of prayer. Yea, the immutability of God himself 
confirms this ; not only that prayer will avRil, but also that without prayer we have 
no right to expect the blessings we need. Our Lord has said, " Ask, and ye shall 
receive." Thus he teaches the Divine rule for us. If, then, it is God's will to give us 
blessing when we ask, it is useless for us to think to change the mind of God, and to 
expect the blessing without asking for it. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Onward and upward. There are different stages in the life of 
godliness. Hence experiences vary. Some are but babes, others are strong men. Some 
have only started in the race, others are nearing the goal. Some have only put on 
their armour, while others have borne themselves bravely in many a fight and are 
waiting the crown. Some have only entered by the wicket-gate, while others have 
gone through most of their pilgrimage; they have climbed the Hill Difficulty, have 

" For Innumerable instances of direct answers to prayer in times of extreme diffloulty 
and peril, see 'Autobiography of J. G. Paton, Missionary to the New Hebrides,' let part. 



188 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxt. 1— 22, 

passed safely through the Valley of Humiliation and Vanity Fair ; have stood on the 
Delectable Mountains, and are now resting in the pleas int Land of Beulah, till called 
home to the heavenly city. The psalmist here speaks lilie a man of matured wisdom 
and piety. His voice is not that of one beginning the spiritual life, but rather of 
one who, like "Paul the agrd," has seen many days, and has gatheied large stores of 
experience. We find here — 

I. Holt aspiration. The psalmist was a man of prayer. His yearnings were ever 
towards God. There was much to weigh him down; but against all obstacles he 
pressed upward and onward. " Nearer my God, nearer to thee," was his cry. 

IL Appbopkiatino faith. There is not only faith in God as God, but the 
higher and nobler faith of appropriation. " My God." This implied knowledge and 
personal trust. But while the confession is boldly made, it is accompanied by true 
lowliness of heart. The sense of weakness ; the danger of yielding to false shame ; the 
possibility of being overborne, as others had been, by the might and craftiness of the 
foe,— constrain the soul to cling the more closely to God. 

III. Loving SELF-suEttBNDER. Here is the spirit of the learner (ver. 4), humble and 
trustful, willing to be led and to be taught of God. It is what we find in Paul, who 
cried, " Lord, \vhat wilt thou have me to do?" and then, in obedience to the heavenly 
vision, was content to sit at the feet of the Immble Ananias of Damascus. We must 
feel ourselves simply and unreservedly in the hands of God, if we are to learn aright. 
If we trust to our own wisdom, we shall go astray, if we take counsel of men, we are in 
dauger of being led into by-paths and devious ways ; but if we commit ourselves to 
God, he will guide us into all the truth, and lead us in the way everlasting. 

IV. Loyal sebviob. " Waiting " does not imply inaction. It is not resting in 
ease, or folding the hands in idleness, or holding back from effort, as if we could do 
nothing. Bather it implies faith and work (Ps. cxxiii. 2). We see also that there is 
no limit or stop to the service. It is not for an hour, but " aU the day." So it was 
with our blessed Lord (John xi. 9) ; so it should be with us. 

V. Quickening memoeibs. The mercies of the past are pledges of mercies in the 
future (ver. 6). "Of old" reaches far back. Imagination looks to the beginnings 
when God first showed mercy to sinful man ; while memory recalls the special tokens 
and proofs of Divine kindness to ourselves. God's mercies always flow in the channel 
of his righteousness. 

VI. Inspiring hopes. Memory has its pains as well as its pleasures. As the 
psalmist looks back, the " sins of his youth " come up before him. But God is merci- 
ful. Other sins also rise in dread array; not only errors, but "transgressions," 
wherein he had wilfully offended. Again the only refuge is in God. The worse our 
case, the greater our need of mercy. God's Name inspires hope, and assures us not 
only of forgiveness, but of grace to sanctify and sustain our souls till the conflict 
closes in victory, and our prayers end in praise. — W. F. 

Ver. 7. — Sins of youth. " Remember not the sins of my youth." This prayer 
implies — 

I. Painful memories. Brought up under the eye of God, our life should have 
been pure. It is our shame that it has been othei'wise. Looking back, we are dis- 
tressed at the remembrance of our follies and offences. Oh that we had hearkened 
unto God ! then it might have been with us as with the holy Child Jesus — 

" A son that never did amiss, 
That never sham'd his mother's kiss. 
Nor oross'd her fondest prayer." 

II. Deepening sense or ebsponsibilitt. Life is one whole. Amidst all changeo 
personal identity remains. The present; is linked to the past. We are answerable, not 
only for what we do to-day, but for what we have done in our earliest days. The sins 
of our youth are " ours." They form part of our burden, and press upon UB the more 
heavily because of the added sins of riper years. 

III. Growing consoiousnebs of the evil of bin. Once, perhaps, we thought 
lightly of the sins of youth. They were but errors and faults common to all — the 
inevitable result of, ignorance and inexperience at the worst. We were only lowing 



PS. XXV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 18& 

our wild oats. But now we look at things differently. We have seen not only the 
Jeed, but the fruit (Rom. vi. 21). We have, besides, gained insight, and our con- 
sciences have become more tender from living near to God. We judge, therefore, not 
only with better evidence, but by a higher standard. 

IV. Miserable sense of helplessness. We see and deplore the evil, but cannot 
remedy it. We are like one standing by a house on fire. There was a time when we 
could have stopped the flame, but it is now too late. Perhaps some brother or sister 
has erred through our fault. If counsel could avail, we would give it. If tears and 
repentance on our part could atone, tney would not be wanting. But no ; it is too 
late ; our only help is in God. 

Y. Terbible fobebodinos. Think how distressiag it must be to see the bad results 
of our sins in others. Some have died who had been hurt by us ; others are living now 
in sin, whom we had helped to lead astray. Our own sins are reflected in the sins of 
others. Of Jeroboam it is said, " Who sinned, and made Israel to sin." Alas 1 he has 
had many followers. The sins of youth may become the groans of age (Job xiii. 26). 

VI. Faith ik the mbrot and power of God. In our distress we turn to God. 
We cannot hope that he will forget ; but he can forgive. We must not think that he 
will alter his law — ^tbat " whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap ; " but he 
is able to change our minds and hearts, so that we shall accept his law as holy and just 
and good ; and then what we have regarded as stern rebuke will be turned into loving 
discipline, and our severest chastisements will end in our highest good. What a 
blessed change it makes, when into the confasions and the miseries and the sorrows of 
this world we bring the light and the love of God 1 We make our confession to him, 
and find peace. We cast our burden upon him, and are sustained. — ^W. F. 

Vers. 8 — 14. — Here we may learn something as to ffod" » revelation to man. I. 
That God's revelation must be in habmony with his ohabaoteb. With God there 
oan be no contradiction. What he does shows what he is. His words and his works 
agree. If we were created in the image of God, then we reasonably infer that, when 
God makes a special revelation to us, it will be in accord with our moral nature. This 
is what gives the gospel its preciousness and its power. " God was in Christ." 

II. That God's revelation is hade to the bpirituaixy susoeftible. (Vers. 8, 9.) 
In this there is nothing arbitrary or strange. It must be so, from the very nature of 
things. As Coleridge sings — 

" O lady, we receive but what we give. 
And in our lives alone does nature live." 

And a greater authority has said, " The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" 
(1 Cor. ii. 14). " To many among us neither heaven nor earth has any revelation till 
some personality toaches ours with a peculiar influence, subduing them into recep- 
tiveness." 

III. That God's revelation can only be beoeived in its fulness by the obedient. 
(Vers. 10 — 14.) The question is asked, " Who is the man that feareth the Lord ? " 
and this is as good as saying, " Find me such a man, and I will tell you how it will 
fare with him. God wiU reveal himself to him otherwise than he does to the world. 
Between them there is sympathy and sweet accord." God opens his mind to those 
who love him. He lets them into his secrets. They are in the way of light, and 
evermore, as they advance, the light shines on them more fully. The word of the 
psalmist is confirmea and completed in the teaching of our Lord (John xv. 7 — 15). 
This has been the experience of God's people in all ages. Abraham in his tent (Gen. 
xviii. 17), David with his flocks, Daniel in the king's palace, the apostle in the 
dungeon <at Fhilippi, — all have felt alike that God reveals himself to those who truly 
serve him. — W. F. 

Vers. 15 — 22. — There are three stages depicted here in the godly man's life. I. The 
'OODly man in fkab. Trouble comes. Perhaps there has been over-confidence, or 
uu watchfulness, or entanglement with the things of the world. Our feet are caught 
In the net. Enemies scoff. We are harassed and perplexed. Our efforts to relieve 



190 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxt. 1—22, 

onreelveB may make things worse. It is hard to be alone when one falleth ; but it is 
harder when troubles increase till they are heavier than caa be borne, and there seems 
no eye to pity nor arm to bring deliverance. 

II. The godlt man obtino fob besoub. (Vers. 16 — 22.) Prayer is a sure 
resource in trouble. To whom but God can we lay bare our hearts? and who is ihere 
but Qod that can bring help when the help of man faileth ? He loves us ; therefore 
we can cry to him with hope. We can weary him with our sias, but never with our 
prayers. The very greatness of our need is our best plea for God's doing great things 
for us. Our cause is his care ; our relief is his pleasure ; our salvatiou is bis glory. 

III. The godly man bejoioino fob dblivbeanci. (Vers. 20 — 22.) The prayer 
implies the performance. The hope which Qod begets he will never betray. The 
consciousness of integrity, of simple faith and willingness to submit to God's guidance, 
without byways or secret ways, gives the assurance that God will save. " They shall 
not be ashamed that wait for me," is the promise. Having this confideuce, we can 
rejoice, not only in deliverance for ourselves, but in like deliverances for others, whose 
needs are like ours. As it was in the past, so shall it be to the end. From many a 
land, and in many a tongue, the cry will go up, " The troubles of my heart are 
enlarged." But let us be of good cheer. Christ lives. He has not only overcome the 
worl^ but he promises the victory to his people also. He has not ouly ascended to 
heaven, but he has engaged to bring his people there also, " where there shall be uo 
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying " (John xiv. 3 ; Bev. xxi. 4). — W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Trust in Ood, "Belongs probably to the time of the Exile. Its 
prevailing thought is that God is the Teacher of the afflicted and the Guide of the 
erring; and this is constantly repeated, either in the way of statement or of prayer." 
The first seven verses contain three things. 

I, AsPiRiNO TBUBT IN GoD. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Seeking, drawn towards, lifting himself 
up towards God, waiting upon him, — all signify the earnest, confident trust in God, 
which is the highest act of the soul towards the great Invisible Being. This is 
associated with obedience ; for transgressors will be confounded ; they have no ground 
for expecting salvation, and will be made ashamed. 

II. Earnest peatee FOE (HJiDANCB. (Vers. 4, 5.) " Show me thj ■ways;"" Teach tne 
thy paths;" "Lead me in thy truth." (1) Help me to understand thy providence orgovern- 
ment, for I am often perplexed by it. (2) Teach me the paths in which thou wouldst 
have me walk. (3) Let me live in the experience of thy faithfulness. (1) Enlighten 
my thoughts, and give me the power to interpret thy ways of acting. (2) Control my 
conduct, move me to duty, and give me an obedient heart. (3) Help me to trust in 
the truth of thy Word and thy ways. For thou art saving me, and I am waiting on 
thee to this end. 

IIL A CBY FOE God's unohanoeable meect. (Vers. 6, 7.) God's mercy is called 
" tender mercy " and " loving-kindness," to indicate its qualities and its source. And 
it is everlasting and unchangeable, because God cannot be unlike himself; he cannot 
change his nature nor his conduct. The cry here is for mercy upon the sins of his 
youth. 1. I^e sins of youth are the sins of impulse, of inconsideration. Not deliberate 
sins, but better remembered than sins of later life. 2. The sins of inexperience aTid 
ignorance. We know not what we do — like Christ's murderers — when we transgress. 
The plea is, " According to thy loving-kindness," etc. For the sake of thy goodness, 
because thou art love, because thou art good, do these favours for me. This is the 
everlasting plea with God that sinners must use; not that God can be made propitious 
towards us, but that he is propitious, has been, and will always remain so, " not willing 
that any should perish." — S. 

Vers. 8 — 14. — The supreme importance of Divine interposition. The main subject 
of these verses is the Divine teacljing, help, and guidance. Men are ignorant and 
erring, and the supreme importance of Divine interposition is here recognized and 
unfolded. 

I. The pbbsons whom God enlightens and helps. 1. Ee instructs sinners. 
Shows them the right way, and helps them to walk in it. He helps his people, though 
they are sinners, and in spite of it (ver. 8). The ground of this conduct is given — 



PS. XXV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PaALMS. 191 

because he is good and righteous, or upright It becomes his nature to act thus. 2, 
He leads the lowly vr meek; or those who are lowly because of oppression. He leads 
them in righteousness ; i.e. he gives to them, who do not oppose might with might, 
justice against their oppressors. The right is sure to triumph in the end. 3. He 
reveals himself to his faithful, ohedient people. (Ver. 10.) Shows to them that all his 
ways are gracious and faithful. Haman faithfulness discovers Divine faithfulness, and 
is the organ through which it is revealed. 4. He teaches them, that fear him. (Vers. 
12 — 14.) Only those who fear God are anxious to liaow the right path; and even 
God can teach only those who are anxious to find the way of life. 

II. The benefit and the blessing of Divine guidance. 1. He who fedt guided 
hy Ood is emboldened to cry for pardon for his sins. His argument for pardon is two- 
fold. " For thy Name's sake," etc. ; " For mine iniquity is great," etc. I shall sink 
under it unless it be pardoned. 2. He shall know how to choose laisely his own way. 
(Ver. 12.) Acquires an inherent, constant wisdom, as the fruit of Divine teaching, 
and is raised above the power of changing human opinion. 3. He shall enjoy enduring 
prosperity (ver. 13), and his seed hy way of natural consequence. The path of right- 
eousness is the only " way everlasting." 4. Only those who live and walk with Ood 
know his will. (Ver. 14.) " The secret of the Lord " is hidden from the eyes and hearts 
of the disobedient. God himself is hidden ; but the secret of his love is further off still 
from their perceptions. God's "covenant" with man through Christ surpasses in 
glory all his former covenants with man. — 8. 

Vers. 15 — 22. — The troubles of the righteous. The two previous sections of the 
psalm express trust in the Divine help and prayer for guidance. From the fifteenth 
verse we see the reasons ot the urgency of his prayer. The friends and the enemies 
of God are in conflict in this world, and the psalmist is suffering at the hands of the 
wicked, and needs the interposition of God. The troubles of the righteous. 

I. Evil counsels abe set in iiotion against him. (Ver. 15.) " A net is laid 
for his feet." This may mean physical or moral danger, putting in peril his life or 
his character, aiming either at his death or drawing him into evil courses. Evil men 
rejoice if they can prevail upon a good man to abandon his principles or sacrifice his 
character. His danger is not trom open temptation, but from artful sophistries, making 
the worse appear the better reason ; plots against his honour. 

II. He is in special need of Divine sympathy. (Ver. 16.) On account of 
his loneliness in his trouble — desolate. He is isolated from sympathy and com- 
panions, and cast upon God's companionship. We are often thus tried if we are faith- 
ful to God and our work — as Christ was, and our consolation was his, " I am not alone ; 
for the Father is with me." 

III. He had many inwaed as well as outward tboublbs. (Vers. 17, 18.) 
He suffered pain and affliction, and an intense consciousness of sinfulness. Either of 
these experiences, separately, is hard enough to bear; but when both have to be 
endured at the same time, there is no greater misery. We can but cry and pray as the 
psalmist did. 

IV. He dreaded that the active hatred op his many enemies would bbino 
HIM to open shame. (Vers. 19, 20.) He was afraid that the Divine cause, as repre- 
sented in his person, might appear, in some way, to be worsted ; and if so, he would 
feel the deepest humiliation. " Let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in thee." 
If God disappointed bis hope, his enemies would pour derision on his trust in God, 
and that would be a deep calamity, if men proclaimed that faith in God was a vain 
thing. But God is not unfaithful ; it is we who are faithless, and expose ourselves to 
•hame. 

V. Hk concludes with a pbayeb fob integrity and uprightness as his 
defence. (Ver. 21.) He desires to have these as his guardians, because his way is 
perilous from inward and outward foes. The effect of deep trouble is sometimes to 
make us reckless, and to forfeit steadfast perseverance ; to unstring and relax our moral 
nature. And sometimes it braces us up to the highest aim and the strongest effort, as 
here, to realize our trust in God and to seek for the whole armour of righteousness, 
that " we may withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to htand." The twenty- 
second verse was added when this psalm came to be used in public worship, — S. 



193 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XXVI. 1 — 12, 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXVI. 



Davis, abont to sacrifice at God'a altar, 
protestB his integrity, but still prays for 
God's protection (Ter. 9) and for his redeem- 
ing mercy (ver. 11). The psalm has all the 
notes of David's style, is full of his thoughts 
and imagery, and is allowed to be his by 
iilmost all critics. It must belong to the 
time following the removal of the ark to 
Mount Zion, and preceding the committal 
of the great offence. 

Ver. 1. — Judge me, Lord; for I have 
walked in mine integrity. It seems to 
Cliristians a bold act to call on God for 
judgment, but the saints of the earlier dis- 
pensation, having, perhaps, a less keen sense 
of human imperfection, were wont to do so. 
It is Job's cry from his first utterance until 
his " words are ended ; " and here we find 
David taking it up and re-echoing it. Man 
longs to hear the sentence of acquittal from 
the great Judge. Like Job, David asserts 
liis " integrity," and in the same qualified 
sense. He is sincere in his endeavours to 
do right. Tet still he needs mercy and 
redemption (see ver. 11). I have trusted 
also in the Lord ; therefore I shall not slide, 
(oomp. Pss. xviii. 36 ; zxxvii. 31). David is 
confident of his past; for the future he 
trusts in God to uphold his steps, and save 
him from slips and falls. 

Ver. 2. — Examine me, Lord, and prove 
ae. He desires to be examined and proved 
— tested, as a metal is tested (comp. Pa. 
xvii. 3)— that his sincerity may fully appear. 
Try my reins and my heart; i.e. my 
emotional and my intellectual natures. 

Ver. 3. — For thy loving-kindness is before 
mine eyes The psalmist now enters upon 
ail enumeration of the points of conduct on 
which his confidence in his integrity rests. 
They are six — three positive and three 
negative. First of all, he keeps God's 
loving-kindness, or mercy (ipn), ever before 
his eyes — reflects on it, meditates ou it, 
presents it to his thought — continually. 
And I have walked in thy truth. Secondly, 
he walks — he has always walked — in God's 
truth. God's Law is the truth (Ps. cxix. 
12) ; and walking in God's truth is walking 
in the Law which he has given to men ; as 
Hitzig, Maurer, and others have seen. 
Hengstenberg's exposition, "I have con- 
stantly thought upon thy faithfulness," 
cannot b^dmitted. 

Ver. 4. — I have not sat with vain persons. 
Thirdly, he has not sat with vain persons ; 



literally, with men of vanity; i.e. he has 
not consorted (Ps. i. 1) with light and 
frivolous persona— those whose hearts are 
set upon vain and worthless things (see Ps. 
xxiv. 4, and the comment). Xeither will I 
go in with dissemblers. Nor will he go in 
with (nor has he, we may conclude, gone in 
with) dissemblers, i.e. hypocrites. He has 
neither thrown in his lot with the light, 
vain persons who make no pretence to 
religion, nor with the pretenders, who " have 
the form of godliness, but deny the power 
tliereof"(2Tim. iii. 5). 

Ver. 5. — ^I have hated the congregation 
of evil-doers. Fifthly, he has hated, and 
hates, witli a holy and strong abhorrence 
(comp. Pd. cxxxix. 22), the congregation of 
evil-doers — the gatherings and assemblies 
of those who meet only for wicked purposes 
— to sin themselves, and to draw others into 
like evil courses. This is a positive trait 
of a very marked character, and goes far 
beyond the explanation which has been 
given of it : "I take no part in assemblies 
for the ruin of others" (Hengstenberg). 
Sixthly and lastly, he will not sit with the 
wicked. This only goes beyond the declara- 
tions in ver. 4 by extending to all wicked 
persons of every kind the avoidance there 
limifed to "vain persons," and "dissem- 
blers." The spirit is that indicated by 
Jacob in Gen. xlix. 6; by St. Paul, in 1 dor. 
V. 9—11 and Eph. v. 7, 11 ; and by St. John, 
on the celebrated occasion when he avoided 
contact with Ceriuthus (Iren., iii. 3, § 4). 

Ver. 6. — I will wash mine hands in 
innooenoy; so will X compass thine altar, 
Lord. This seems to be the key-note of 
the psalm. If not a necessary, it is at any 
rate a probable, exegesis, that David com- 
posed this psalm on an occasion whom he 
was about to olfer a sacrifice of praise and 
thanksgiving to God for some mercy recently 
vouchsafed him (ver. 7). Before offering, 
he feels the necessity of doing spiritually 
that which the priest who officiated would 
have to clo ceremonially (Exod. xxx. 17 — 21) 
— to " wash his hands in innncency, and ss 
to go to God's altar." His self-justification 
from ver. 1 to ver. 5 has had for its object 
to clear him from guilt. 

Ver. 7.— That I may publish with the 
voice of thanksgiving ; rather, to sound 
forth the voice of thanlogiving (Kay); or, 
to make the voice of thanksgiving to he heard 
(Revised Version). And tell of all thy 
wondrous works; or, recount them, enume- 
rate them. 

Ver. 8.— Lord, I have loved the habitation 
of thy house ; i.e. " the home that thy house 
affords me." It has been my delight to 



PS. XXVI. 1 — 12.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



193 



remain there, to pass long hours there, as 
it were to dwell there (oomp. Pss. xxiii. 
6 ; xxvii. 4 ; Ixiii. 2). And the plaoe where 
thine hononr dwelleth; literally, the place 
of the tahernacling of thy glory— the place 
where thy filnry — tha Shechinah — is en- 
shrined and abides. 

Ver. 9. — Gather not my soul with sinners. 
Unite me not in one doom with open sinners 
— those with whom I have always refused 
to consort (vers, 4, 5) — whose congregation 
I have "hated." " That the righteous 
should be as the wicked, that be far from 
thee : shall not the Judge of all the tsarth 
do right?" (Gen. xviii. 25). Nor ray life 
with bloody men. Bloody men — literally, 
men of bloods — are the worst of wicked 
men, cut-tliroats, assassins, murderers. At 
any rate, put me not on a par with them. 
Little, probably, did the psalmist think at 
this time how soon he was to become, 
practically, a murderer, and to " slay Uriah 
the Hittite with the aword of the children 
of Amnion " (2 Sam. xii. 9) 

Ver. 10. — In whose hands is mischief ; i.e. 
who are always occupied with some mischief 
or other — always engaged in carrying out 
wicked devices (see Prov. xii. 2 ; xiv. 17). 
And their right hand is f nil of bribes. Which 
they have taken to condemn the innocent 



(comp. Ps. XV. 5 ; Isa. i. 23 ; Jer. xxii. 17 ; 
Ezek. xxii. 12; Hos. iv. 10; Micah iii. 

11, l:tC.). 

Ver. 11. — But as for me, I will walk in 
mine integrity ; i.e. I will continue to walk 
as I have walked hitherto (see ver. 1) — I 
will be "integer vitse scelerisque purus" 
— a brave and good resolve. Had he but 
kept to it I Bedeem me, and be merciful 
nnto me (compare the comment on ver. 1). 
Though hitherto he has walked innocently, 
and is resolved still to continue to walk 
innocently ; he nevertheless feels that he 
has need of redeeming mercy. Though he 
" knows notl i ing by himself, yet he is not 
thereby justified" (1 Cor. iv. 4). Many, 
doubtless, are his " secret sins," which God 
has " set in the light of his countenance " 
(Ps. xc. 8). 

Ver. 12. — My foot standeth in an even 
place; or, on level ground — where there is 
nothing to cause me to stumlile (oomp. 
Ps. xxvii. 11). In the congregations will I 
bless the Lord ; i.«. in the asseAiblies of the 
people for public worship. David constantly 
acknowledges this duty (Pss. xxii. 22, 25 ; 
xxvii. 6 ; XXXV. 18 ; xl. 9, 10 ; Ixviii. 26, etc.). 
Indeed, it is the general idea that underlies 
all his psalms of praise, since they were 
oompcaed to be recited in the congregation. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 2. — Faith's bold request. "Examine me," etc. A veiy bold prayer. The 
image is taken from the testing and purifying of gold in the furnace, to which the 
word rendered " try " properly applies. It is as If the gold begged to be cast into 
the furnace (Job xxiii. 10). Who can say, if this prayer is to be answered, how hot 
the furnace may need to be? But "we have boldness '' (Eph. iii. 12). There are 
cases in which this bold prayer may be justifiable, wise, needful. It includes — 

I. A KECOGNITION OP God's ALL-SEABOHING KNOWLEDGE. (Ps. CXXXlx. 1 ; Jer. 

xvii. 10 ; Rev. ii. 23.) God's free, forgiving mercy is represented under the image of 
his/orgetting our sins (Heb. viii. 12, etc.). This must not make us lose sight of the 
fact of his actual knowledge (Heb. iv. 13). If men see faults where God does not, it is 
their blindness, not their keenness. 

II. The appeal or conscious intboeitt, from men's slander or misjudgment to 
the righteous judgment of God. Such an appeal is perfectly consistenr with true 
humility and a deep sense of sinfulness before ( jod (cf. Acts xxiii. 1 ; xxiv. 16 ; 1 Cor. 
iv. 3 — 5 with 1 Tim. i. 12 — 15). At the same time, we can hardly suppose David 
could have composed this psalm after his great and shameful fall. Kegarded apart 
from that dark passage of his life, we see a man, with the faults, it is true, of an ardent, 
passionate temperament, but conscious of honest purpose, high sense of duty, fervent 
love to God, and true desire to rule God's people well; yet we must bear in mind 
(what Bishop Perowne has well expressed) that " the full depth and iniquity of sin was 
not disclosed to the saints of the Old Testament. Sin could only appear to be sin in 
all its blackness and malignity when it was brought into the full light of the cross of 
Christ. And it is only as any man grasps that cross that he can bear to look into th« 
pollution which cleaves to his nature" (Perowne, ad loc.). 

III. Prayeb against bblf-deoeption. An appeal not only from the unfair judg- 
ments of men, but from our own ignorance of ourselves (Pss. xix. 12 ; cxxxix. 23, 24). 
Peter's boastful, self-ignorant self-confidence was the immediate forerunner of his fall 
(Matt. xxvi. 33, 35). 

PSAT.JIS. 9 



i94 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxvi. 1—12, 



IV. Submission to God's methods of tkial. These may be severe, the faithful 
severity of love. It needs the courage of faith — undoubting confidence in God's love — 
to enable us to offer this prayer with full thought of all it may mean in our cage. 
Christ sits as a Refiner (Mai. iii. 2, 3). God searches by his Word (Heb. iv. 12), by 
his Spirit (John xv. 8), by the dealings of his providence and outward trials (1 Pet. i. 
6, 7), even by the permitted temptations of the evil one (Lulie xxii. 31, 32), 

Thus a prayer which would be the height of rash presumption, offered in the spirit 
of self-righteous self-confidence, becomes a wise, safe, and fitting prayer, offered in the 
spirit of humble, childlilse faith. 

Ver. 10. — The sin of bribery. " Their right hand is full of bribes.'' Christians have 
undeniably a far higher standard of morality supplied by the gospel than was possible 
in earlier times under any other dispensation. How, then, is this paradox to be solved — 
that we find Old Testament saints trying themselves by severer tests, and aiming at a 
higher level both of morality and of devotion than multitudes of professed Christians 
attempt to reach or even deem attainable? The practice of bribery has often attained, 
in nominally Christian commonwealths, such proportions as to endanger public welfare 
and honour, and this with the connivance of many religious people; yet it is here 
condemned as worthy to be classed with the worst crimes, utterly inconsistent with 
" innocency " and " integrity " (vers. 6, 11; cf. Isa. xxxv. 15). Subject — The tin of 
bribery, and^the duty of Christians to oppose it to the utmost of their power. 

I. Bbibebt means a baegain to beteay a solemn public trust. The consti- 
tution bestows the vote, not for the voter's private benefit, but that fit men may be 
chosen to office ; it is a trust for the community. Suppose a prime minister were to 
sell the offices at his disposal, or a jury to sell their verdict, or a judge his sentence, 
would not the world cry shame ? The scale is different, but the principle is the same. 

II. Bribeby powerfully corbupts public morality and national ohabaotxb. 
For patriotism and public spirit it substitutes selfishness ; for honest, independent 
conviction, base disregard of principle. It destroys the sense of public honour ; it 
degrades office by making the qualification, not fitness, but pelf; it puts the making of 
laws and ordering of justice in the hands of men who have begun by breaking the 
law and insulting justice ; it degrades alike the giver and the receiver. 

III. Bbibeby tends to produce corrupt government and dishonest legisla- 
tion. It is true a man's conscience may allow him to give a bribe, yet forbid him to 
take one ; but how long would this inconsistency last if the innocency of giving bribes 
were generally allowed ? If an elector may sell his vote, why not a member of 
parliament or of council? What right would an elector have to complain if his 
representative were to say, " I have bought my seat, and paid for it, and have a right 
to make a profit out of it " ? 

A Christian's reputation should be dear to him, not for his own sake alone, but for 
his Lord's, for the gospel's and the Church's sake. He should be able to say, with 
St. Paul, Acts xxiv. 16 (cf. 1 Tim. v. 22 ; Phil. iv. 8). Some excellent Christians, it 
is true, would limit " whatsoever things," etc., to the concerns of private life. But by 
what right ? A Christian, they say, is a citizen of the heavenly city, and has no 
concern with earthly politics. But he cannot help having concern. He is also a 
citizen of his earthly country, whether he will or no, and has all the privileges of a 
citizen and the benefits of the commonwealth. Privilege and benefit mean duty and 
responsibility. Love to our neighbour and care for the poor do not surely cease to be 
Christian duties when the welfare of a whole nation, and of other nations, or the care 
of the poor at home and the enslaved and oppressed in other lands, call for the strong 
arm of law and national government. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Assailed integrity's final appeal.^ It seems evident that this psalm 
was written by some Old Testament saint who was surrounded by ungodly men, by 

' This psalm may be compared with the seventh and seventeenth (see homilies thereon). 
Canon Cheyne »ays (Expositor, January, 1890), in reference to this and the tvfenty-eighth 



Pb. «ivi. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 195 



whom he was assailed, reproached, and slandered. From them he appeals to Glod. By 
the Leading of the psalm we are pointed to David as the author. And there is no 
reason, for questioning that. Mr. Fausset, in his most suggestive book, 'Horee 
Psalmi«i«,' working along the line of " undesigned coincidences," remarks, " Another 
feature \J Mndesigned coincidence is the unmistakable identity of David's character, 
as he re\'eals it in the Psalms, and as the independent historian describes it in the 
Books of Samuel and Chronicles. Thus the same ardent love to the house of God 
appears in bath. How instinctively one feels the harmony between the character self- 
portrayed in ItB. xxvi. 8 ; Fs. xxvii. i ; and Ps. Ixiz. 9 1 Compare the historian's record 
of his words to Zadok (2 Sam, zv. 25), and still more in 1 Chron. xxix. 2, 3."^ 
Undoubtedly, thus read and compared, the Psalms and the history mutually throw light 
upon and con arm each other. But iu following out our plan in this section — of dealing 
with eiioh psj-lm as a unity — we tind this, as well as all the rest, fumisbing material 
for pulpit e>,position, which we could ill afford to lose. Our topic is — Assailed 
integrity's final appeal. 

I. We have here the obabaoteb of an upbight han, sketched bt himself. 
It may not be a very wholesome exercise for a man to be engaged in — to sketch a 
moral portraiture of himself. Painters have often painted their own portraits ; that 
requires but an outward gaze on one's outer self ; but to delineate one's own likeness 
morally requires much introspection. Few can carry on much of that without becoming 
morbid through the process ; and fewer still, perhaps, have fidelity enough to do it 
adequately and correctly. Yet there may be circumstances under which such abnormal 
work becomes even necessary (as we shall point out presently). And when such is 
the case, it is well if we can honestly point to such features of character and life as are 
presented to us here. 1. The psalmist has a goodly foundation on which his life was 
buUt up. (1) Trust in Jehovah (ver. 1). (2) God's loving-kindness (ver. 3). (3) God's 
truth (ver. 8) ; i.e. God's faithfulness. Note : That all the supports of the psalmist's 
integrity were outside himself. Happy is the man that, under all the circumstances of 
life, can stay his mind and heart on Divine faithfulness and love. If such underlying 
props cease to sustain, moral and spiritual worth will soon pine from lack of motive 
and hope. It is one of the evils of the day that some of our most popular novelists 
delineate religion without God.' 2. 2%e life built up on this foundation was one 
which may with advantage be imitated. It was a life of : (1) Integrity (ver. 11). 
(2) Straightforward progress (ver. 1). No sliding, (3) Avoidance of evil associa- 
tions (vers. 4, 5). (4) Cultivation of holy worship, song, and thanksgiving in the 
sanctuary * (vers. 6 — 8, 12). Note : (o) Those to whom God is the support of their 
life, will show a life worthy of such support. (6) Those who most value communion 
with God and a life hidden with him, will most fully appreciate and most diligently 
cultivate that stimulus and comfort which come from mingling with God's people in 
the worship of the sanctuary. 

II. The host cfbioht of mek hat be misundebstood, unappbeciated, his- 
BEPBESENTED, AND ASSAILED. Speaking roughly and generally, it is no doubt true 
that, on the whole, a man's reputation will be the reflection of what he is, and that 
most .men go for what they are worth. And yet, so long as there are envious hearts, 
jealous dispositions, unbridled tongues, few can be regarded as absolutely safe from 
detraction and slander. Our Lord Jesus implies and even states as much as this 
(of. Matt. v. 44 ; x. 25 ; xviii. 6, 7 ; John xv. 18). See Peter's words (1 Pet. ii. 12 ; 
iv. 14) ; see Paul's words (Bom. xii. 18, 19). Paul had to bear much in the way of 

psalm, "The psalmist lived during one of the darker parts of the period between Ezra and 
the Macoabbees." tut not an atom of proof is given of that statement. All we know is 
ipse dixit. We abide by the heading of the psalm, until tome reasm: for the contrary it 
shown ; but see note 3. 

' ' HorsB PsiilmiosB,' pp. 49, 75. 

' For a masterly exposure of this evil, fee Rev. Wm Arthur's work, ' Religion without 
God.' 

' The word rendered " compass thine altar," etc., is thought by Bwald and Lengerke to 
refer tu David's religious dances round the altar (see Geikie, ' Hours with the Bible,' 
vol. iii. p. 235). If so, Cheyne'i* assertiun as to date is still more manifestly unjustifiable 
and rash. 



196 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxvi. 1—12. 



depreciation from some who even denied his apostleship. Job was surrounded with 
"miserable comforters," who thought, by defaming him, to defend God! Such trials 
are hard to bear. They may arise (1) from the occasional foibles of a good man being 
magnified by the slandeier into sins; (2) from the utter injpossibility of bad men 
leading aright the character of the just and pure. Having no virtue themselves, they 
cannot credit others with any. "Doth Job fear God for nought?" "He hath a 
devil," etc. Many can say the words in Ps. Ivi. 5. 

III. It is an infinite belief, under such oircdmstanoes, that the belibvbr 
CAN APPEAL TO HIS GoD. The whole psalm is snoh an appeal. True, the Infinite Eye 
can discern flaws and faults where we suspect none ; but then the same perfect gaze 
discerns the desire after being right and pure and true, however far the believer may 
be from realizing his own ideal. The suppliant has to do, moreover, with One who 
never misunderstands, and whose glory is in his loving-kindness and truth. And from 
a Christian point of view we must remember that we have a High Priest who was m 
all points tried like as we are, yet without sin, and who can therefore pity what is 
trail, and pardon what is \yrong. What a mercy to have such a throne of grace to 
which to flee ! 

IV. The appeal will be marked by sfeoifio entreaty. Here there are four 
lines of supplication. 1. That God would vindicate hiin, and not let him be mixed up 
in confusion with the men whose sin he hates (vers. 1, 9, 10). He looks to God, as 
Job did, as his Vindicator (Job xix. 25). 2. That God would search and prove him 
(ver. 2 ; cf. Ps, cxxxix. 23, 24). 3. That God would purify him (ver. 3). So the 
word here rendered " try " indicates.* He is upright before men, but he does not pretend 
tu be perfect before God. 4. That God would entirely deliver him from the surround- 
ings of ungenial and unholy men (vers. 9, 10). Whether the psalmist intended any 
reference to a future state or no, the believer now cannot help so applying the words. 
Who could endure the thought of evil and good always being mixed up together ? The 
Divine mandate is, " Let both grow together until the harvest " (Matt. xiii. 13). Then 
will come the final severance. 

V. The rbsdlt of such appeal will not be fruitless ob vain. (Ver. 12.) 
" His prayer has been heard ; he is sale ; he stands on the open, level table-land, where 
he has room to move, and where his enemies cannot hem him in ; and therefore he 
lulfils the resolve made before (ver. 7), and publicly pours out his thanksgivings to 
God " (Perowne). Whoever thus Jays his complaints before God will find deiiveranoe 
in God's own appointed time ; we must leave, however, the " when " with the great 
Defender. Either (1) on earth in our day, (2) on earth after our day, or (3) in heaven, 
God will bring us and our reputation out to the light. " He shall bring forth thy 
righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday " (Ps. xxxvii, 5, 6). — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Integrity. All through the Scriptures "integrity"' is commended. 
It is a characteristic of the saints. Whatever else they are, they must be men of 
intearity. This does not mean that they are morally perfect, or that they have any 
ground for trusting in their own righteousness ; but it means that they have an " honest 
and iiood heart." Whatever may have been their past life, or however much of 
imperfection may still cleave to them, they are conscious of a pure intent, a firm and 
steadfast resolve to trust only what is true, to do.only what is right, and to order their 
whole conduct according to the holy will of God. They can say, as Joseph's brethren 
did, "We be true men; " or with Paul, "We serve God with a pure conscience." 

I. Intbgmty is essential to a bight belation to God. God desireth "truth 
in the inward parts." All guile and falsehood are offensive to him. If we are to come 
to him, we must come just as we are ; and if we are to abide with him, we must walk 
in the truth. Integrity lies at the very basis of faith, and " without faith it is impossible 
to please God." 

II. Integrity is essential to the possession of a true oharaoteb. "There 
is no redeeming efBoacy in right intent ; taken by Itself, it would never vanquish the 
in ward state of evil at all. And yet it is just that by which all evil will be vanquished, 
under Christ and by grace, because it puts the soul in such a state as makes the t^race- 
power of Christ co-working with it effectual." "The sinning man, who comes into 

• See Perowne thereon. 



PS. ixvi. 1— 12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 19; 



integrity of aim, is put thereby at the very gate of faith, where all Q-od's helps are 
waiting for him" (Bushuell). There is a vital oontieotioQ between "integrity" and 
" truth " (ver.s. 1, 3j. " Truth " is of God. " Integrity " belongs to us. We can only 
have truth, as we receive it from God. We can only have " integrity " as we allow 
God's truth to rule our hearts and our lives. First the heart is made right by being 
directed into the love of God, and then the life is made holy and beautiful by being 
swayed by the will of God. This leads to unity and completeness of character. 

III. InTE&BITT is essential to the BIQHT discharge 01' OUR SOCIAL DUTIES. 

In society we meet with "vain persons," "dissemblers," and "evil-doers" (vers. 4 — 6). 
This is a test and an education. A man is known by his friends. There is a power 
lor good in good companionships, and for evil in evil companionships. But if we are 
walking in truth, we cannot bat hate all that is alien and hostile to truth. Our choice 
will be truth, and not vanity. Our delight will be in honesty, not in "dissemblers." 
Our fellowship will be with the righteous, and not with " evil-doers " (Ps. cxix. 63). 
It is only as we ourselves are true that we can commend the truth to others. It is 
only as we ourselves are upright in all our dealings that we can secure respect and 
confidence, and that we can best advance the interests of religion. 

IV. InTEOBITT is essential to full DBL1I5HT IN BBLIGIOUS OKDINAN0E8. (Vers. 

6 — 8.) There are some who are neglectful (tleb. x. 25); there are others who satisfy 
themselves with formal observances (2 Tim. iii. 6). In these ends there can be nu 
real pleasure in what is done. But where there is integrity, the heart is engaged, 
there will be diligence, preparation and prayer, and increasing joy in the worship and 
service of God (Fss. zxxiii. 31 ; cxix. 2). God's presence is the attraction and life 
of all true worship. The more deeply we feel our sinfulness, the more earnestly will 
be ouv cry for mercy. The more truly we realize that the will of God is " our sanctifi- 
cation," the more fervently shall we " press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling )f God in Christ Jesus." 

V. That integrity is essential to the assured hope or a bright fdtubb. 
(Vers. 9 — 12.) The very fact of what we are is a prophecy as to destiny (Rom. v. 10 ; 
Phil. i. 6). Looking to the past, we confess that it is wholly of grace that we have 
been turned unto God. Looking within, we are conscious of a sincere resolve to follow 
after holiness. Looking to the future, we are able to oast ourselves with implicit 
confidence on the care of God our Saviour. God is true, and he will not forsake. God 
is just, and he will never condemn the righteous with the wicked. It is only those 
whose hearts are right with God that can face the future without fear. When we 
commit ourselves to God we are safe. We have not only a sure standing, as accepted 
in Christ Jesus, but we are comforted by the fellowship of kindred hearts, and cheered 
by the hope of being kept from falling, and having in the end an " entrance ministered 
to us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ " 
(2 Pet. i. 6-11).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The oppressed righteous man. It is impossible to say on what occasion 
the psalm was composed, or from what kind of trouble it prays to be delivered. The 
theme is — Only he who can say with truth, " I have walked in integrity, and I have 
trusted in the Lord," may depend upon Divine aid in trouble ; but we may do so with 
full confidence. In the first verse the whole psalm is summed up. 

I. A PRAYER FOR HELP IN THOUBLB. "Judge me," equivalent to " vindicate my 
rights and rescue me from injustice." The only clue tfi the meaning of the prayer is 
in the ninth verse, " Take not my soul away with the wicked, and my life with men 
of blood." He was in some way suffering; but he prays that he may not fall into 
the utter ruin which is the iiortion of the wicked — the penalty of daring sin, nor the 
fatherly chastisement of infirmity. The psalmist's faith was that God could not 
involve the righteous in destruction with the ungodly, but would separate between 
them even in their outward lot. This in great pari true. " Godliness has the promise 
of the life that now is" — outwardly and inwardly. So far as we know, the psalmist 
did not know of any other world where God could interpose to show his approval 
of the righteous and his disapproval of the wicked. 

II. The ground of the psalmist's prayer. " I have walked in mine Integrity, 
■f have trusied in the Lord." But if I have not, do thou show it me (ver. 2). But 1 



198 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XXVII. 1 — H. 



think I have ; for thy love has been before my eyes, and I continually thought ujnm 
thy truth, or faithfulness (ver. 3). The two main grounds on which he prays for help 
are his morality and piety — integrity and trust, expanded further in the life (ver. 8). 
1. Sis morality. " Integrity," equivalent to " with the mind aiming at the right and 
true, and with an undivided purpose. He had avoided all voluntary association with 
the wicked (vers. 4, 5). He would neither go (walk) nor sit with them. All his 
sympathies vvent against them, equivalent to " hated them." The company we keep /row 
choice is a true and strong indication of ourchaiacter. 2. His piety. " I wash my hands," 
etc. The hands the instruments of action. His actions are cleansed from defilement; 
and this is his preparation for worship. " If thy brother hath aught against thee . . . 
first he reconciled unto thy brother," etc. " I hold fast by thine altar." This placed 
in opposition to the assembly of the wicked, which he shuns. The purifying of the 
heart and conduct is natural] j followed by worship, and preceded by it. Ee would 
proclaim God's wondrous works to the people : only he whose heart is full of them can 
worthily and truly pnblish them. He shall come to share in new wonders. Se loved 
the house of God, because there God manif sted his glory to him (ver. 8). Manifested 
himself; and he sees him as Isaiah saw him, "high and lifted up." He fully trusted 
in the deliverance he sought; for he expected to praise the Lord in the congregation 
(ver. 12).— S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM xxvn. 



This psalm is one of those which have been 
called " composite " (' The Psalms,' by Four 
Friends, p. 67) ; and certainly it falls into 
two parts which oSei the strongest possible 
contrast the one to the other. Part i. (vers. 
1 — 6) is altogether joyous and jubilant. It 
records, as has been said, " the triumph of 
a warrior's faith." Part IL (vers. 7 — 14) 
is sad and plaintive. It pleads for mercy 
and forgiveness (vers. 8 — 10). It complains 
of desertion (ver. 10), calumny (ver. 12), and 
imminent danger (vers. 11, 12), It still, 
indeed, maintains hope, but the hope has 
only just been saved from sinking into de- 
spair by an effort of faith (ver. 13), and a 
determination to "wait" and see what the 
end will be (ver. 14). Jt is thought to 
" express the sorrows of a martyr to the 
religious persecutions at the close of the 
monarchy" (Four Friends, p. 68). 

For these reasons the psalm has been sup- 
posed to be "composite;" but the question 
arises — If the two parts, being so entirely 
unlike, were originally distiuct and uncon- 
nected, what shonld have led any arranger 
or editor to unite them ? To this question 
there seems to be no possible answer ; and 
fhus the very diversity of the two parts would 
seem to show an original union. 

Aco(>rding to the statement of the title, 
the psalm was written by David. It has 



many oharacteristies of his style, the snctden 
transition and change in the tone of thought 
being one. It is quite conceivable that 
daring the rebellion under Absalom, having 
obtained some important success, he may 
have considered it an occasion for thanks- 
giving; and that, after his thanks were 
paid, his thoughts may have reverted to the 
still-continuing difficulties of the situation, 
the danger which impended (vers. 11, 12), 
the calumnies to which he was exposed 
(ver. 12), the desertion of those near and 
dear to him (ver. 10), the fact that the chas- 
tisement had been provoked by his own sin 
(ver. 9) ; and so the strain, which began in 
jubilation, may not unnaturally have ended 
in a plea for mercy. 

The psalm consists of a strophe (vers. 1 — 
6), an antistrophe (vers. 7 — 12), and a brief 
epode (vers. 13, 14). 

Ver. 1.— The lord is my Light (comp. John 
i. 7—9; xii. 35, 36, 46; 1 John i. 5). The 
statement does not occur in any other place 
in the Old Testament, though the idea may 
be found in Isa. Ix. 1, 20 ; Mioah vii. 8 ; and 
elsewhere. Light has been well called " this 
profoundly beautiful name of God" (De- 
litz^ol)). And my Salvation fcomp. Pss. xviii. 
2; lxii.2,6). Whom shaU I fear ? "If God 
be for us, who can be against us?" (Bom. 
viii. 31). Who can be to be feared? (see 
Ps. cxviii. 6). Not man certainly ; for" what 
can man do unto us ? " Not other gods ; for 
they are nonentities. Not devils; for they 
can do nothing but by God's permission. 



Pi. xxvn. 1—14.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



199 



The Lord is the Strength of my life ; lite- 
rally, the stronghold (comp. Pss. zxvili. 8 ; 
xxxi. 4 ; Ixxi. 2 ; cxliv 2). Of whom shall 
1 be afraid ? The question is superfluous, 
but is repeated to complete the balance of 
the clauses. 

Ver. 2. — When the wioked, even mine 
enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat 
up my flesh, tney stumbled and fell A 
special occasion seems to be intended, so 
that the LXX. have rightly, i)<Teiviiaav itaX 
iireaav. Some uurecorded event in the war 
with Absalom before the linal struggle, is 
probably alluded to. Tliere is an empiiasis 
on "mine enemies," which implies that the 
adversiiries were not tlie foes of tlie country, 
but David's personal foes. 

Ver. 8. — Though an host should encamp 
against me, my heart shall not tear. In tlie 
first burst of joy at his recent victory, the 
"host" which remains unconquered seems 
of light account — let them advance — let 
them "encamp against him" — his heart 
will not be afraid ; but when the joy has 
htui full vent, there is a reaction; the 
enemies then appear more formidable, and 
God's aid is besought against them (see 
vers. 9 — 12). Though war should rise 
against me, in this will I be confident. " In 
this" may be either "in the fact that the 
Lord is my Liglit and my Salvation " (ver. 
1), or " in case of such an eveut as war and 
attack on the part of the enemy." 

Ver. 4. — One thing have I desired of the 
lord, that will I seek after. A most em- 
phatic introduction of the new topic I Amid 
all my joy and jubilation, there is still one 
thing which I need, which I entreat Jehovah 
to grant — that thing I shall continue to seek 
after until I'obtain it, viz. that I may dwell 
in the house of the Lord all the days of my 
life. The psalmist is evidently debarred 
access to the sanctuary ; he feels his exclu- 
sion from it a terrible privatiou ; he longs 
to be there — ^to "dwell" there (comp. Ps. 
xxvi. 8); to offer there "sacrifices of joy" 
(ver. 6); to sing there psalms of thanks- 
giving. He would fain also behold the 
beauty of the Lord — t^v tg^t. prfrT^ra, LXX. 
— " all that is engaging and gracious in his 
revelation of himself" (Kay); "not the 
outward beauty of the sanctuary, but the 
gracious attributes which its ritual syriibnl- 
ized " (' Speaker's Cnmraentary '). And to 
inquire in his temple. It has already 
appeared, from Ps. v. 7, that the word 
" temple " or " palace " (Iteykal) was applied 
in David's time to the tabernacle. 

Ver. 5. — For in the tima of trouble he 
shall hide me in his pavilion; in the 
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me. 
This is not to be understood literally. 
David means that his spirit will find a re- 
fuge with God in times of trouble, not (as 



some Jewish expositors argue) that he will 
actually hide from his enemies inside the 
tabernacle. From such a sacrilege he would 
hare shrunk. He shall set me np upon a 
rock (comp. Pss. xviii. 2; Ixi. 2). The 
"Rock" is God himself, who is always 
David's final Befuge. 

Ver. 6. — And now shall mine head be 
lifted up above mine enemies round about 
me. A further and final triumph is confi- 
dently anticipated. God will complete his 
work. He will repulse the " host " by which 
David is about to be attacked (ver. 3), give 
him victory over it, bring him back from 
exil e, and grant him once more free access to 
the sanctuary. Therefore, says the psalmist, 
will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of 
joy ; or, " sacrifices of joyful sound," accom- 
panied with singing and instrumental music 
(comp. Ps. Ixxxix. 15). I will sing, yea, I 
I will sing praises unto the Lord (comp. 
Eph, T. 19). 

Vers. 7 — 14, — The strain now entirely 
changes. The rhythm alters from a jubi- 
lant double beat to a slow and mournful 
cadence, A cry is raised for mercy and 
pity — the wrath of God is deprecated — re- 
jection and desertion are contemplated and 
prayed against (vers, 7 — 10), The danger 
from the enemy appears great and formid- 
able (vers, 11, 12). "With an effort of faith, 
the writer just saves himself from despair 
(ver. 14), and then, in brave words, braces 
himself up for further endurance. 

Ver, 7. — Hear, Lord, when I cry with my 
voice : have mercy also upon me, and answer 
me. There is no "when" in the original. 
The clauses are short, and broken, " Hear, 
O Lord ; with my voice I call ; pity me, and 
answer me." 

Ver. 8. — When thou saidst, Seek ye my 
face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, 
Lord, will I seek. The order of the words 
in the original is as follows : " To thee said 
my heart — Seek ye my face — thy face, Lord, 
will I seek." And the full meaning seems 
to be, " To thee said my heart — Hast thou 
said unto men. Seek ye my face ? 1 for one 
will obey thee — Thy face, Lord, will I seek." 
The command, " Seek ye my face," had 
been given by David to the people on the 
day that he set up the ark upon Mount 
Zion (1 Chron. xvi. 11). It was probably 
regarded as implied in Dent. iv. 29. 

Ver. 9. — Hide not thy face far from me. 
It would be useless for David to " seek 
God's face," if God should determine to 
"hide his face" from him. David felt 
from time to time as if God's face was hidden 
from him, as we see in other psalms (Pss. x. 



200 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XXVII. 1 — 14. 



1 ; xiii. 1 ; Ixix. 17, etc.) and so also did 
other saintB (Pas. xliv. 24 ; Ixxxviii. 14). In 
most instances, probably, CJod sends the 
feeling as a chastisement, that the heart 
may turn with morB sincerity to him. Put 
not thy servant away in anger ; i.e. reject 
me not — cast me not off. The verb used is 
very strong and emphatic. Thou hast been 
my Help. Ever in the past I have had 
tliee for Helper (oomp. Pss. iii. 3 — 7 ; iv. 1 ; 
vi. 8 — 10 ; xviii. 2, etc.). God's goodness to 
us in the past mast ever be our chief ground 
of confidence in him for the future. Leave 
me not, neither forsake me, God of my 
salvation (oomp. Pa. xciv. 14). 

Ver. 10. —When my father and my mother 
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up. 
We are not to gather from this that David's 
father and mother had forsaken him. They 
were probably dead at the time of his flight 
from Absalom. What David means is that, 
even if forsaken by his nearest and dearest, 
he would not be forsaken by God. The ex- 
pression is proverbial. 

Ver. 11. — Teaoh me thy way, Lord (oomp. 
Ps. XXV. 3, and the comment ad loc.^ 
And lead me in a plain path ; literally, a 
level path — a path traversing a flat and 
smooth country, not one where the ground 
is rugged and beset with rocks and preci- 
pices. Because of mine enemies. David'q 
enemies are ever at hand, to swallow him 
up (Ps. 1 vi, 2). If his way be not plain and 
smooth, it will be to their advantage and to 
his detriment. 

Ver. 12. — Deliver me not over unto the will 
of mine enemiss ; literally, the noul of mine 
enemies; i.e. their desire (see Pss. xxxv. 25; 
xli. 2), which was no doubt to capture him, 
and bring him a prisoner to Jerusalem. Tor 
false witnesses are risen up against me . 1 he 
party which attached itself to Absalom ac- 
cused David of cruelty to the house of Saul 
(2 Sam. ivi. 8), and probably of other crimes 
and misdemeanours. Absalom himself ac- 
cused him of a failure in his kingly duties 
(2 Sam. zv. 3). And such as breathe out 



cruelty ; or, violence. To " breathe out " 
violence, tlireats, slaughter, malice, etc., is 
a common metaphor in many languages 
(Acts ix. 1 ; Aristoph., 'Bq.,' 1. 437 ; Uor., 
'Od.,'iv. 13,1. 19, etc.). 

Ver. 13. — I had fainted, unless I had 
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in 
the land of the living. In the original, by 
the figure apo8iopesi$, the apodosis is 
omitted, " had I not believed that I should 
see the goodness of Jehovah in the land 
of the living [i.e. in this present world], 
then . - ." He shrinks from stating tha 
consequences. He would have fainted, or 
despaired, or lost all faith in religion (com- 
pare, for similar uses of the figure aposiopetit, 
Gen. iii. 22 ; xxxi. 41 ; 1. 15 ; Bxod. xxxi;., 
32 ; Dan iii. 15 ; Zech. vi. 15 ; Luke xiii. 9). 
By an effort of faith, the psalmist saved 
himself from the despair which threatened 
to seize upon him, and assured himself that 
he would yet experience " the goodness of 
the Lord" in some merciful interposition 
and deliverance, while he still remained on 
earth, before ho " went whence he should 
not return — to the land of darkness and 
the shadow of death, a land of darkness a* 
darkness itself, and of the shadow of death, 
withont any order, and where the light is 
as dai kness " (Job i. 21, 22). 

Ver. 14. — Wait on the Lord. This is an 
exhortation, not to others, but to himself 
(comp. Ps. Ixii. 5 ; and see also Pss. slii. 5, 
11 ; xliii. 5). His stronger self exhorts hit 
weaker self not to despair, but to wait upon 
God — to tarry, i.e., the Lord's leisure — and, 
meanwhile to be of good oonrage; or, b» 
strong (comp. Deut. xxxi, 6; Josh. i. 6; 
1 Chron, xxii, 13), as the phrase is else- 
where generally translated. "Be strong," 
he says to himself, and he (i.e. God) shall 
strengthen thine heart, " Aide-toi, le ciel 
I'aidera." Make an effort to be strong, and 
the strength will be given thee, as then 
makest it. Then in this strengtii, thus 
given, continue thy waiting — ^Waiti I say, 
on the Lord. 



HOMILBTICS. 

Ver. 8. — The believing heart's obedience to God's command. "When thou saidst," 
etc. If we were to translate strictly word for word, we should read this verse, " To 
thee said my heart — Seek ye my face — thy face, Jehovah, I will seek," Our trans- 
lators (and Revisers) have wisely preferred plain English to pedantic rigour, and have 
given as the probable meaning, " When thou saidst," etc. This, says Calvin, is a 
dialogue between the believing heart and God, He likens the Divine invitation, 
"Seek ye my face," to the key wherewith faiih opens the door for prayer. " Without 
this prelude, no one shall lead the chorus of prayer," The reply of the heart he likens 
to the echo sleeping in silence, till the voice calls it forth, 

I, What is meant by sbekinq God's pack ? 1, To seek the/avowr of God ; q.d. 
his pardoning mercy, the smile of his approval, the assurance of his loving-kindness, 
the happy, peaceful sense of his presence and care. There is a notion in many mindi 



P8. xxvn. 1— 14.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 201 



that because God is love, he must love all alike — as he dispenses ram and sunshine to 
all alike — good and bad, lovely and hateful ; and that because he is just, he must treat 
all alike. Such views can be upheld neither from Scripture nor from common sense. 
Justice lies not in treating all alike, but in treating each according to «haracter and 
conduct. Love that can see no fault is as blind as hate that can see no goodness. A 
face that wears the same bland meaningless smile to every one is intolerable. To 
suppose that God has no more approval and love for a Christian mother training her 
child to love him, or a Christian martyr dying for truth, than for a seducer, a thief, an 
assassin, is to deny God's moral chaiacter. It is to substitute an idol of fancy for the 
living God. The whole gospel hinges on this. God's universal love is shown in the 
provision whereby each sinner may seek and receive his favour (John iii. 16 ; Bom. v. 
1, 2, 10, 11). 2. To seeh to know Qod. When we look into one another's faces, we 
read the soul. Smiles and frowns and tears, the flash of pleasure or of anger, the softening 
of tender feeling, speak a languau,e which all read intuitively. In its fulness, any such 
direct knowledge of God is impossible for us (Bxod. xxxiii. 18, 20). But Jesus is to 
us aa the Face of Qod (2 Cor. iv. 6 ; Heb. i. 3 ; John i. 18). God's character is revealed ; 
while the Divine glory is veiled and softened to suit our weakness (John xiv. 9 ; 
1 Cor. xiii. 12; Matt. v. 8). 3. To have fellomship with God; personal communion 
(1 John i. 3). This leads to a second question — 

II. How IB THIS COMMAND TO BB OBEYED; this invitation accepted; this purpose 
carried out; this fellowship experienced ? 1. By prayer. Looking at vers. 4— 6, we 
may suppose a refeience to the temple, with its twofold service of sacrifice and praise. 
But we must not limit the words to this. They are the language of a lieart that waits 
in secret on Gud (Matt, vi, 6). 2. By the study of God's Word. The whole Bible is the 
record of God's continuous revelation of himself; partly in words — laws, declarations, 
predictions, promises ; partly in his dealings — with nations, with individuals, with his 
Church ; completely and most gloriously in Christ Jesus — his Person, teaching, atoning 
death, resurrection, enthronement in glory. If we would gain the knowledge spoken 
of (2 Pet. iii. 18), we must observe the condition (Col. iii. 16). They that seek shall 
find (Isa. xlix. 49 ; Jer. xxix. 13). 

Ver. 8a — (Second sermon.) The reward of diligent search. " My heart said," etc. 
" Seek, and ye shall find," is one of the great laws of life. The miner must dig for 
the precious ore; the fisherman launch out into the deep, and let down his nets for a 
draught ; the husbandman must plough and sow and have long patience, if he is to 
reap. How is it that in these days the secrets of nature have been laid bare as never 
before ? Because men have sought as they never sought before. And why, in the 
midst of these discoveries, have so many keen eyes failed to find God ? Because they 
have not sought (Jer. xxix. 13). 

I. The languaqe of faith, latino hold on God's promise. Faith is trust. We 
do not trust God because we believe his Word, but believe his promise because we trust 
him (Heb. xi. 6). But he has not left us to vague trust (reasonable though that would 
have been). He has filled the Bible with promises "exceeding great and precious" 
(Isa. Iv. 1, 6, 7 ; Jer. xxix. 11 — 14 ; Luke xi. 9). We need not ask what particular 
reference lies in "when thou saidst." God is always saying it. 

II. The lanquaoe of obedience to God's command. The invitation of a king 
is a command. Every promise carries in its bosom a duty ; every duty, a promise. 

III. The language of love. "My heart said." The utterance of holy desire, 
longinp; after communion with God. Prayer is more than simple asking ; it is com- 
munion of spirit with our Father and our Saviour, by the Holy Ghost (Matt. vi. 6 ; 
Jude 20). 

Ver. 11. — A double safeguard. " Lead me in a plain path." This is a wise, humble, 
comprehensive prayer. Like the entire psalm, it is the language of a heart deeply 
taught by experience. It asks for a double safeguard — Divine guidance and a plain 
path. If sure of the one, why ask for the other ? Answer : (1) Because a great part 
of God's leading just consists in making the path plain; (2) because danger and 
temptation beset even the plainest path — " because of mine enemies." At every stej 
we need God's upholding and protecting hand. 



W2 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xxvii. 1—14 

I. A PATH EAST TO SEE ; free from intricacy and obscurity. In the margin, " a 
way of plainness." The Hebrew word (like our English " plain ") signifies " level " (see 
Isa. zlii. 16, "straight"). In a mountainous region the path is winding, often hidden 
a few yards ahead. On the open plain you see it for miles. As a rule, the straight 
path in life is the plain path. The same Hebrew word also means " uprightness,'' 
"righteousness" (Ps. xlv. 6). Duty is commonly much more easy to ditjem than 
expediency; "What is right?" than "What is polite, worldly wise?" One of the 
great trials of life is when duty is not plain ; duties seem to clash. Then comes in 
the comfort and strength of this prayer, " Teach me thy way 1 " (Ps. ixv. 5, 8, 9). 
God's way must be the right way; "and he will make it plain." 

II. A SAFE AND EASY PATH; at all events, in comparison with the wrong path. 
Not climbing the sharp ascent of the Hill Difficulty, nor winding along the slippery 
edge of temptation, nor descending into the Valley of the Shadow of Death. Q-od cannot 
always grant this prayer in this sense. Yet Christ teaches us to offer it (Luke xxii. 40 ; 
Matt. vi. 13). If, nevertheless, the path by which God sees fit to lead us — either for 
spiritual discipline and growth, or for greater usefulness — be rough, dark, dangerous ; 
the spirit of this prayer may nevertheless be answered by a larger measure of guidance 
and strength. "In the mount, the Lord is seen."* In the furnace is "the Son of 
God." In Gethsemane, the angel. When " all hope was taken away," God's angel told 
Paul that all were to be saved for his sake (Acts xxvii. 20, 22 — 24). Be the path 
what it may, those shall be safe who trust God's leading (Isa. xxxv. 8 ; Rom. viii. 28 ; 
Jude 24 ; Prov. xv. 19). 

This prayer is a prayer against three dangers. 1. Choosing our own way (Prov. xiv. 
12). 2. Trusting, even in the plainest way, to our own strength and wisdom (Prov. iii. 
5, 6 ; Jer. x. 23). 3. Being left to our own weakness ; or distrusting, in the darkest 
path, God's leading (Isa. xliii. 1, 2). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — ^16. — JehovaVs self-revelation, and faith's response thereto. There is no 
Known character and career in Scripture that would correspond to this psalm as well as 
those of David. And it seems difficult to resist the conclusion that the words in ver. 10 
were written about the same time that those in 1 Sam. xxii. 3 were spoken. The 
objection of Delitzsch, that David left his father and mother, not they him, is of no 
weight ; for either way his peril and exposure were such that he was left without 
them; and we are left to wonder why they consented to be sundered from him. But 
these chequered experiences in life serve to bring out to him more and more fiilly the 
wealth of care and love that his God makes over to him. If we were asked whethei 
this psalm is one of those which come directly from God, and so contain a revelation 
from him, we should reply, " It is one of those records of the experience of an Old 
Testament saint who could triumph in God as the revealed God of his salvation." What 
God was to the saints of old, he is to his people still. Therefore the psalm discloses 
God's revelation of himself to his people of the olden time, and it is one in whicli 
believers now may rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory. And the expositor 
will have here a rich mine for exploration, as in the light of this psalm he studies GocTs 
self-revelation to his saints, and faith's response thereto. Let us study these in order. 

I. Wb HAVE HERB INDICATED THE FULNESS OF God's SELF-BBVELATION TO HIS 

SAINTS. The revelation of God which is implied in this psalm is one of exceeding 
tenderness, richness, and glory. 1. Ood himself had led the way in inviting souls to 
seek him. (Ver. 8, " When thou saidst, Seek ye my face."') The heart of God desires 
the friendship and fellowship of man. Our hearts are so made they can rest only in 
God ; God's heart is such that he seeks a rest in us. The fact of his giving an invitation 
to us to seek him is proof of this (of. Isa. xlv. 19 ; Iv. 6 ; liv. 6). So also is the 

' So Gen. xxii. 14 may be rendered ; at all events, this is the meaning of the proverb : 
When faith is strained almost to breaking poiut, God speaks, and all is plain : Isaac is 
spared ; the sacrifice provided ; Abraham blessed. 

' Of. 2 Sam. xii, 1 (Hebrew). See Fausset on this expression, in his ' Horse Paalmicffi ' 
p. 47. 



P8. xxvu. 1— 14.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 203 

complaint of God when men do not seek him (Isa. xliii. 23 — 26). And still more the 
declared joy of God when souls are at rest in him (Zeph. iii. 17). See this taken over 
to the New Testament (John iv. 23). But the grandest illustration of all is in the fact 
(Luke xix. 10) of which thp whole of Luke's filteenth chapter is the fullest declaration 
(still further, see Rev. iii. 20). In fact, had it not been for this self-manifestation of 
God's heart, we must all have been agnostics for ever I 2. Wheresoever men open the 
heart to God's invitation, he proves himself worthy of himself. The student may well 
luxuriate in the various names which the psalmist delights to apply to God as his 
God. Note: (1) The terms themselves, (a) Light (ver. 1). "There shines on him 
[the psalmist] a sun that sets not and knows no eclipse. This sublime, infinitely 
profound name for God, nw, is found only in this passage" (Delitzsch, in loc). 
(6) Salvation (ver. 1). Spiritually as well as temporally, (c) The Fortress of his life 
(ver. 1), in which he was perpetually hidden, (d) Guardian (ver. 10), One who would 
manifest a tenderer care and love than even parents feel, and who, when they are 
removed from us, will be our Guardian 1 still, (e) Helper (ver. 9). Coming with timely 
aid in every emergency. Note : (2) The individualizing care of God. The word " my" 
should be emphasized in each case : " my Light ; " " my Salvation," etc. The experience 
of those who fling themselves on God's care and love is that he manages as beautifully 
and precisely for them as if he had no one else for whom to care. Hence the prophet's 
rebuke of the unbelieving suggestion to the contrary (Isa. zl. 27). If God were less 
than infinite, doubts might creep in. As Faber sings — 

" That greatness which is infinite has room 
For all things in its lap to lie ; 
Wa should be crushed by a magnificenoe 
Short of inflnityl" 

n. Ths bebfonbes of believins hearts to God's self-hanifebtatiok abb 
VARIED AS THE EZFEBIENCES OF LIFE. The whole psalm is ouc of responsive faith ; 
though that response may be sometimes a plea, or a sigh, yea, even a groan, and at 
other times a shout of song as with trumpet- power. We have all these stages in this 
very psalm. Listen to the varied phases of the psalmist's words. Here is : 1. Faith 
seeking. (Yer. 8.) It is an infinite mercy to hear the sweet whisper of God to the 
heart, " beek me." It is so wonderful that there should be any such sound firom God 
to the sinful heart — any sound so tender and sweet. And what should the response be 
but this, "Thy face. Lord, will I seek" ? We may well seek the acquaintance of God 
as our God, to be our Leader, Guide, and Sovereign Lord, even unto death. Note : 
Let the coming sinner never forget that, if he is seeking God, Qodhas soitght him first. 
We may never lose sight of the Divine order, " We love him, because he first loved us " 
(1 John iv. 19). 2. Faith rejoicing in Divine companionship. (Ver. 4.) In the Lord's 
house, his presence was specially manifested ; and those who know the Lord know 
well that there is no home like being by their Saviour's side, in his bouse. There they 
see the "beauty" of the Loid; i.e. his grace, his love, his mercy. There their eyes 
see " the King in his beauty." They " inquire " in his temple for directions for daily 
life ; or they muse on the glories of the temple as the seat of Jehovah's presence. Yea, 
God's love and care make them so happy that they must give vent to their joy as with 
trumpet-song. We often long for greater physical power to praise God in shouting ; 
and the use of trumpet and organ gratifies this longing. We praise God, but the organ 
gives the voice-power (see ver. 6, Hebrew). 3. Faith watching. (Ver. 2 ; cf. Ps. xcii. 11, 
Authorized Version, but leave out the words in italics ; Ps. xxxvii. 34—47.) It should 
be no joy to the righteous to see any one in trouble ; yet they cannot but praise God 
when infamous plots are discovered, and the saints of God are delivered. 4. Faith 
sheltering. (Vers. 1, 5 ; Ps. xci.) No one — in earth or hell — can ever forge the dart or 
weapon that can pierce the saints' stronghold. When the Lord is the Fortress of their 
life, they are in a citadel that can never be invaded. 5. Faith dreading. (Ver. 9.) 
The thing most to be dreaded is the hiding of God's face, and being oast off by him. 
And can faith ever dread this ? Yes, indeed ; for there are moments when the sins of 

' 'JSDN', "will take me up" — "as a child disowned by its parents, and taken up by 
the adoptive father from the streets " (Fauaset). 



-'04 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxvii. 1—14. 

the past do rise up so terribly into the memory, that for a while they seem to eclipse 
iill besides ; and then faith heaves a sigh and drops a tear. There may be as clinging 
■a faith when uttering the wail of the first verse of the twenty-second, as when singing 
the peaceful song of the twenty-third psalm ; for even in the darkest hour, faith says, 
"My God!" 6. Faith, hoping. (Ver. 13 ; literally, "Had I not believed to see the 
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living . . .") The sentence is unfinished. The 
translators have well supplied the blank. The thought is, " What would have become 
(if me ?" The trials of life are often so repeated and so keen, that were it not for God, 
Ills love sustaining the spirit under the weight of the present, and inspiring the heart 
with hope for the future, reason would give way, and the man he hopelessly crushed. 
It is God's love which makes life worth living. 7. Faith trivmiphing. (Ver. 1.) 
When we realize the glory of him whom we believe, there is no bound to our delight 
and exultation ; and at such times we can laugh in defiance at our foes ; yea, " smile 
nt Satan's rage, and face a frowning world." We can, if need be, cherish something of 
Luther's daring, and " go to Worms, though there were as many devils as there are 
tiles on the roofs of the houses ; " or, better still, we can say with Paul, " I can do all 
things through Christ, which strengtheneth me." We know that God will not call us 
to confront an enemy that we cannot lay low, nor to bear a cross which we cannot 
•carry, nor to endure a trial we cannot sustain, nor to do a work which we cannot per- 
form. His grace is sufficient for us. His strength is made perfect in weakness. Hence, 
in closing the psalm : 8. Faith soliloquizes. (Ver. 14.) It may be supposed to be 
addressed first to himself, and so, indirectly, to the people of God generally. The 
words, " He shall strengthen thine heart," are, rather, " Let thine heart be strong ; " as 
if the psalmist would chide himself that he should ever have a moment's misgiving, 
when he has such a God in whom to trust, and such a stronghold in which to abide 
(Nah. i. 7). Be it ours to wait upon our God continually 1 This is the secret of a 
steady, upward, peaceful, and strong life. What may be before any of us, no human 
■eye can discern, nor where our lot may be cast. But God is all-sufiicient. 

Note : 1. How sinful and foolish to incur the risks of life ourselves I To each and 
all of us God says, " Seek ye my face." Let our answer be, " Thy face, Lord, will we 
seek." And all that God has been to our fathers, he will be to us— our Light, our Sal- 
vation, our Helper, our Strength, our All 1 2. None need quail before the risks of life, 
whatever they may be, who put their whole trust in God, and follow him everywhere I 
" Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good ? " 3. Never 
think to gain anything by paltering with duty. If a plain duty is before you, however 
difficult, go forward in the strength of the Lord, and fear nothing. He hath said, "I 
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." Wherefore we may boldly say, " The Lord 
is my Helper, I will not fear j what can man do unto me ?" Only trust in the Lord, 
and do right, and one by one you will see your foes stumble and fall, and you will be 
left in possession of the field, more than conqueror, through him that loveth you." 

" Stand but your ground, your ghostly foes will fly. 
Hell trembles at a heaven-directed eye ; 
Choose rather to defend than to assail, 
Sclt-oouKdence will in the coufliot fail. 
When you are challenged, you may dangers meet. 
True courage is a fixed, not sudden heat ; 
Is always humble, lives In self-distruat, 
Ami will itself into no danger thrust. 
Devote yourself to God, and you will find 
God fights the battles of a will resigned. 
Love Jesus I love will no base fear endure ; 
Love Jesus I and of conquest rest secure." 

(Bishop Ken.) 

C. 

Vers. 1^13. — True religion. True religion beains with G^od. It is a call on his 
part ; it is a response on ours (ver. 8). With some religion is a chance, as settled by 
birth. With others it is a custom — something received by tradition from the fathers. 
With others it is a convenience, the result of education, a matter of prudence and self- 
interest, something necessary to respectability and comfort in the world. In all such 



PS. xxvii. 1— 14.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 205 

cases there may he the form, but there cannot be the power, of godliness; there may 
be certain earthly advantages, but there is no real profit, neither the promisK oi tiie life 
that now is, nor of that which is to come. But with all who are taught of God, 
religion is a choice — the free, settled, rejoicing choice of the heart. It is God manifesting 
himself to the soul, and the soul in love and trust uniting and binding itself to God, 
to be his and his only for evermore. True religion is characterized by — 

I. Pbesonai, trust in God, as the Lord our God and our Eedeemer. " When 
I sit in darkness," says Micah, "the Lord shall be a Light unto me" (Mioah vii. 8). 
So says David, here (ver. 1). We need "light," from the beginning to the end of our 
lile. God is our Light. All real illumination to the mind, the conscience, and the 
heart, is from him. Light is revealing. As we draw near to God, tiie mists and clouds 
of passion and self-love are driven away, and all things stand out clear and distinct as 
they really are. There is not only the revelation of ourselves, but the revelation of 
God. We see ourselves as sinners, guilty and vile; we see God as a Saviour, and we 
trust him utterly (John i. 5 ; viii. 12 j 1 John i. 5 ; 2 Cor. iv. 6). 

II. Fearless devotion to the service" op God, as the freest, the eight- 
fullest, and the most blessed of all services. Beligion is more than know- 
leiige, or feeling, or obedience to the moral law. It is a life. It not only implies 
trust, but love and service. There are difficulties and trials. We look back and 
remember times of danger (ver. 2). When we were in straits and fears. But God 
brought us help. As it was with David (1 Sam. xvii. 37 ; xxx. 6), so it was with us. 
In thought of what God has done for us, we strengthen our hearts. Confidence comes 
from experience. Whom we have tried we trust. The friend we have found faithful, 
we cleave to. The physician whose remedies we have proved good, we confide in. 
The commander under whom we have conquered, we follow bravely to other fields. 
So do we trust in God. Looking to the future, we may imagine greater trials and 
distresses than we have yet encountered (ver. 3). The psalmist conjures up a terrible 
scene. As in a picture, we see the mustering of the forces, the proud array of the 
enemy with tents and banners, the shock and terror of the battle, when host met host 
in furious strife. But, like the psalmist, let us not flinch or fear. God is with us. 
" In this will I be confident " (1 Kings xxii. 19 ; 2 Kings vi. 15 ; Acts xx. 24). 

III. Increasing delight in God, as the satisfaction and joy of the heart. 
Beligion establishes right relations between the soul and God. Every barrier is removed, 
and free access and friemlly communion have been secured. This is beautifully brought 
out in the words, " One thing have I desired of the Lord " (ver. 4). One thought has 
the mastery. One desire gives unity and concentration to all effort. One affection 
binls the heart and the life into a holy fellowship. God is All and in all. The single- 
ness of purpose branches into two main streams. One is meditation : " To behold the 
beauty of the Lord;" the other is like unto it, practice : "To inquire in his temple" 
(ver. 4). This shows the bent of the renewed soul. There is an inward relish for 
what is good. There is a delight in all that is true and beautiful. Every living soul 
is an inquirer. Truth is not born with us, nor can it be obtained without our own 
efforts. It must be sought for its own sake. It must be wooed and won from love, 
that it may be a possession and a joy for ever. All right inquiry is practical. " If ye 
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." Thus coming to the light, and 
walking in the light, " we have fellowship with God, and the blood of Jesus Christ his 
Son cleanseth us from all sin." We have safety and peace (vers. 5, 6). 

IV. Absolute surrender to God, for time and for eternity. True religion 
binds us to God, not only for life, but for ever. This is impressed in the prayer, whicli 
implies : 1. Beep humility. 2. ffoly aspirations. 3. Complete submission. A . 
Victorirms faith. Three things are deprecated, rising one above the other in fearlulnes.-. 
Displeasure (ver. 9) ; rejection, " Leave me not ; " abandonment (ver. 10). But instead 
of these, we see, by faith, a glorious victory, and we hail its coming with renewed 
courage and praise (vers. 13, 14). — W. F. 

Vers, 1 — 6. — Fearless courage. I. The secret of a fearless courage. 1. Eii 

experience of what Ood had been to him. " Light " in the darkest periods of his life. 
Light is a revealing power — for guidance. Salvation from his greatest dangers, temporal 
und spiritual. "Strength," the power that had upheld his life when falling into 



206 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxvu. 1—14. 

wcnknesa and despair. Experience confirmed and rewarded the faith which he had 
ill God. When experience coincides with our faith, then we are at our strongest. 
Hut faith must always live above experience. 2. His experience of his enemies. Their 
most furious and savage onsets had been baffled. This also was of God. And the 
explanation was — they were wicked, and he was righteous. This thought was 
fundamental to his faith — that God would not permit the evil to triumph over the 
good. His experience ol this in the past gave him confidence for the future (vers. 
2, 3). Our past victories should inspire us for the future. 

II. How A FEARLESS COURAGE MAT BE FURTHER BTRENOTHENBD. 1. By felloW' 

ship with Qod. Beholding his beauty or goodness, and meditating upon it. The 
heart and mind must be fed an'l strengthened by constant converse with God in 
worship and holv thought. 2. Frequent seclusion is the best way to strengthen 
ourselves for conflict. (Ver. 5.) " la time of trouble, he shall hide me, and set me 
up upon a rock ; " i.e. shut out from man, and shut in with God, is the way to 
conquer trouble and prepare for danger. 3. Thankful worship is another he^. (Ver. 6.) 
"Sacrifices of joy," or "shouting," "singing praises," — all mean grateful exercises of the 
heart towards God, recounting to ourselves what he has done for us in his wonderful 
goodness. Courage, hopefulness, must be fed with jo^, and not with sadness and 
sorrow. — S. 

Vers. 7 — 12. — Strengthened in Qod. " While strengthening himself in God (in the 
former part of the psalm), he is, perhaps, seized by some sudden fear lest he should be 
foraaken, or be overcome by the craft or malice of his enemies. Till now the danger 
which threatens him is as prominent an object as the salvation and defence were before." 
He earnestly prays now for that in which he had just boasted. And these are thb 
grounds on which he bases the prayer. 

I. He HAD Divine wabbant. The tenor of God's whole Word to man is, "Seek 
ye my face ; " equivalent to " Come unto me for rest, for protection, for salvation." 
We are but obeying the Divine voice within and without us when we seek for 
refuge and an escape from all evil in God. Christ emphasized this truth when he 
cned, " Come unto me, all ye that labour," etc. 

II. Because there was an abidino relation between him and God. (Ver. 9.) 
He was God's servant ; God had been his Help. The good Master would not cast the 
servant away in anger. Masters and servants were knit more closely together in 
early times than now; and the psalmist pleads this relation between them. Then 
God had helped him in former troubles, and God was too constant to change suddenly 
and to cast him away. How strong is our claim upon God in Christ 1 He is our 
Father for ever, and we his children. 

III. Because God draws nearer when the dearest earthly friends forsake 
us. (Ver. 10.) Father and mother had forsaken him, and God had taken him up. 
Trouble often cools the love of human relations, but only increases the Divine pity, 
and attracts God the more closely to us. The psalmist knew this as a fact of 
experience, and he could urge it as a plea now in his present distress. Difference 
between human love, however strong, and the Divine love. No grain or taint of 
selfishness in the Divine love, which clings to us steadfastly, through all our sins and 
sorrows. 

IV. Because he was in danger from two classes of enemies. (Vers. 11, 12.) 
1. The cunning and deceitful. More dangerous than open and violent enemies. Just 
as we are in more danger from those sins which try to look like virtues, than from 
sins which we know to be sins. Avarice is thought prudence ; pride is self-respect ; 
cruelty claims to be justice, etc. 2. Those who employ open violence. This is 
dangerons, because urged on by unrestrained passion. Our passions, yielded to and 
indulged, are dangerous enemies. We have need to pray, " Teach me thy way, and 
lead me in an even path." — S. 

Vers. 13, 14. — How to hecome strong. Translation, " Oh, if I had not believed to see 
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living ! " " Wait on the liord ; be strong, 
and let thine heart take courage; yea, wait on the Lord." The psalmist is speaking 
to himself, to encourage himself in firmer confidence in God, the believing half of his 



■M. Xiviu. 1 — 9.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



207 



«o\il addressing the despondent or weaker half. " I had fainted," or " had perished," 
«B necessary to complete the sense of ver. 13. The passage teaches us how to hecome 
strong to meet the dangers, difficulties, ten^ptations, and afflictions of life. 

I. Faith in the goodness of God. (Ver. 13.) The psalmist has a firm assurance 
-that God will make his goodness manifest to us in our personal history. " He is good, 
to all, and his tender mercy is over all his works." That he will he good to us rests 
4>n the assurance that he will be good to all, and not because we have any superior or 
peculiar claim. For goodness is kindness or benevolence to those who have not merited 
-or deserved it by their character or conduct. If we cannot see the manifest proofs that 
<]rod has been as good to all as he has been to us, we must believe that the evidence' 
will come some time ; or, if we cannot see the proofs that he will be good to us — 
-delivering and redeeming us according to our need — we must believe that he is doing 
all that can be done for us, in seen and unseen ways beyond our power of 
interpretation. 

II. Waitino upon God. This may mean one or both of two things. 1. Service 
^ Ood. There is nothing so strengthening to our whole nature — nothing that so 
oerves us to meet danger and difBculties — ^as the doing all that we know to be the will 
of God— doiog all known duty. An eduoatin?, developing power, in obedience to duty, 
which nothing can take the place of. 2. Waiting for Qod; or, hope in him, God has 
liis own time and method of doing things, " If we hope for that we see not, then di i 
■we with patience wait for it ; " " We are saved by hope." 

m. By cultivating courage. Mni-al courage. As a habit of the mind, and not 
4>nly upon occasions; gathering up tliose considerations that foster and nourish a 
-courageous heart. 1. Our past successes should help us to this, and even some of our 
■failures, when we see how they might have been avoided, 2. Qod is on our side, and 
will help with the direct aid of his Spirit all who are aiming at the right. 3. Things 
are possible to courageous minds which are impossible to weak, cowardly hearts. " Let 
thine heart be strong." "'I'o hini that believtith all things are possible" — believeth in 
■Crud and believeth in himself. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM xxvra. 



This sTiert psalm consists of three parts: 
<1) a prayer for succour (vers. 1, 2) ; (2) a 
-denunciation of the wicked (vers. 3 — 5); 
^nd (3) u thanksgiving for aid given, or 
jregarded as certain to be given (vers. 6—9). 
Metrically, it contains three strophes, oor- 
.respoiiding to the three subjects, and re- 
j»pectively of two, three, and four verses, 
4;huB gradually increasing in length. There 
is no reason for doubting the assertion of 
■the title, that it is " a Psalm of David," 
■flat we cannot definitely assign it to any 
^particular period of his life. It would suit 
«lmost any occasion when he was in danger 
■or diSioulty. 

Ver. 1. — ^TTnto thee will I cry, lord my 
ISock ; be not silent to me ; rather, as in the 
fie vised Version, to thee, O Lord, will I 
aaU; my Book, be not thou deaf unto me. 
■" My Bock " belongs to the second clause. 
It is with David, in these early psalms, an 
•tpitheton utitatam (comp. Pss. zviii. 2; 



xxvii. 5; xxxi. 2, 3: xl. 8; l^i. 2; Ixii. 2, 

etc.). The Hebrew term used is sometimes 
tnur, sometimes aela', which call to our minds 
the two great rook-fortresseg of Tyre and 
Petra. Lest, if thou be silent to me, I be- 
come like them that go down into the pit ; 
i.e. without hope, desperate. 

Ver. 2. — ^Eear the voice of my supplica- 
tions, when I cry unto thee. God is said 
to hear prayer when he grants it, to be deaf 
to prayer when he withholds the boon 
requested. The use of the expressions 
" voice " and " cry " marks the earnestness 
of the prayers offered. When I lift up my 
hands. The usual attitude of a Hebrew in 
prayer (see Exi.d. ix. 29; xvii, 11, 12; 1 
Kings viii. 22, 54 ; Pss. Ixiii. 4 ; cxli. 2 ; 
Lam. ii. 19 ; iii. 41). Originally, the idea 
probably was that the hands should be 
ready to receive the blessings which God 
would bestow. But, later on, the lifting up 
of the hands seems to have been regarded as 
symbolizing the lifting up of the heart 
(Lam. iii. 41). Towards thy holy waole (see 
the comment on Ps. v. 7). 

Ver. 3. — Draw me not away with the 
■wicked, and with the workers of iniquity 
(comp. Ps. xxvL 9). The metaphor implied 



208 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 



[ps. XXVIII. 1 — 9- 



in " draw me not away " is that of a, hunter, 
drawing prey of all kinds to him enclosed 
within a net. The psalmist prays that he 
may not share the fate of the workers of 
iniquity, over whom he seems to see some 
terrible judgment im pending. Which speak 
peaoe to their neighbours, hut mischief is in 
their hearts. (For extreme instances of this 
kind of wickedness, see 2 Sam. iii. 27 ; xx. 
9, 10 ; aod for the wide prevalence of sunh 
treacherous dealing, comp. Ps. Iv. 20, 21 ; 
Jer. ix. 8.) 

Ver. 4. — Give them according to their 
deeds, and according to the wickedness of 
their endeavours. The feeling of righteous 
iiidignatioii, naturally implanted in us, 
causes us to desire the punishment of the 
wicked, quite apart from any wrong that 
they may have done to ourselves (Aristotle, 
'Eliet.,' ii. 1, § 3). Give them after the 
work of their hands ; render to them their 
desert. Nothing satisfies our moral feelings 
•• but exact retribution — E!; Ke irafloi ra/c' ^pe|e, 
S'lkt} k' IBs'lo, yivoiTo. D.ivid shows in both 
respects a moral nature unoorrupted by 
contact with the world of his day. 

Ver. 5. — Because they regard not the 
works of the Lord, nor the operation of his 
hands. They do not note God's providential 
•workings. If they did, they would see that 
judgment falls upon the wicked, and, seeing 
this, they would fear and abstain from evil. 
But they take no notice — God is not in all 
their thoughts. For this neglect and con- 
tempt of him, he shall destroy them, and not 
build them up. 

Vers. 6 — 9. — As, midway in Pa. xxvii., 
the tone changed from j ubilation to humble 
entreaty, so, midway in the present psalm, 
there is a change from plaintive and Immble 
entreaty to rejoicing and thanksgiving. 
The cause of the change would seem to have 
been a confident assurance, arising out of 
the very act of prayer, that the prayer is 
heard and granted, so that the happy 
results prayed for are certain to follow. 
Such an absuranoe is certainly not attained 
by all those whose supplications are earnest 
and devout; but David . apiiears to have 



enjoyed it not infrequently (see above, Ps,, 
vl. 8—10 ; vii. 17, etc.). 

Ver. 6. — Blessed be the lord, because ha 
hath heard the voice of my supBlicatio is 
(comp. ver. 2, with which this is, of s 1 
purpose, made exactly to correspond). 

Ver. 7. — The lord is my Strength and m / 
Shield (see Pss. xviii. 1, 2; cxix. 114). My 
heart trusted in him, and I am helped. As^ 
far as feeling goes, David is already 
"helped." He /eeis himself delivered out 
of his peril. Therefore, he says, my heart- 
greatly rejoioeth ; and with my song — lite- 
rally, out of my snng, which is explained to 
mean "cut of my store of song"— will I 
praise him. He is ready to offer thanks- 
giving for a n:<jrcy not yet received. 

Ver. 8. — The Lord is their Strength | i.e. 
the Strength, not of himself alone, but of 
the whole people. The deliverance will be 
as much for their sake as for his. And he 
is the saving Strength of his anointed; 
literally, and a Stronghold of salvation to }ii» 
anointed is He. The welfare of David and 
that of the people are bound up together. 
God strengthens him for their sakes, that 
he may guide them aright and fight their 
battles, and give them dominion over their 
enemies. It was with this object that he 
chose him out of all Ismel, and took him- 
from the sheepfolds, and had him anointed 
king — that he might " feed Jacob his people, 
and Israel his inheritance" (Ps. Ixxviii. 
71). 

Ver. 9. — Save thy people, and bless thine 
inheritance. " In conclusion, the psalmist 
prays that the Lord would do eternally that 
which he had done now " (Hengstenberg) — 
" save " and " bless " his people — keep tlient 
from evil, and give them all tltat is goo i. 
Feed them also. As a sliepherd does his flock 
(comp. Ps. xxiii. 1, 2; Isa. xl. 11). And lift 
them up for ever. Some explain the " lifting 
up" as carrying in his arms over rough 
places — a prolongation of the shepherd 
metaphor (Kay ; ' Speaker's Commentary ') ; 
but, perhaps, the more ordinary meaning of 
the Hebrew word — "exalt," "lift up on- 
high," " raise above others" — which is pre- 
ferred by Bishop Horsley, Rosenmiiller, and 
Hengstenberg, is intended. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Providence and prayer. The contents of this psalm are in gome 
respects similar to the contents of others already nu'-ioed. But there is one peculiarity 
about it to which we here propose te dev-.-is special attention. It is seen in the 
psalmist's prayer against his enemies. On accuunt of such petitions, much reproach 
has been cast on the Bible itself — as if all the sixty-six books of which the Scriptures 
are composed were to be held responsible for the prayers and petitions of every Old 
lestament sniut ! Xo such absurdity could have root-hold if the actual state of the 



/"fl. xxTiii. 1— «.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 209 

<ase were clearly understood. And we deem it to be of no small importance that 
•li liere readers of the Bible find special difficulty, expounders thereof should put forth 
"l^ecial strength, and by no means pass lightly over such passages, or leave them 
unaccounted for. This psalm is a reilection of varied scenes which may be witnessed 
ill the world — of the known laws of God's providence, of earnest desires which go up 
•fi-iim the hearts of God's people in praver, and of grateful songs which go forth from 
their lips in praise. There is no rtason for attributing the psalm to any one else thau 
to David. Nor do we know of any times in the ancient history which the psalm more 
ilearly reflects than those of the shepherd-king. Nor is there any Old Testamerkt 
-character who would be so likely to speak and write and pray in the style of the psalm 
'before us. In dealing with it as a unity (which method alone Calls in with the plan 
of this section of the Commentary), we have four lines of thought to unfold. 

I. Hebe is a twofold outlook. The writer of this psalm was the anointed nf 
the Lord (ver. 8). He was Israel's king; and was withal encompassed by foes. Not 
-only were there those who were the people of God, his inheritance (ver. 9), but there 
were also those who, regarded not God, and who cared not tor man (vers. 3, 5). And 
the time has not come when such a double outlook has ceased. The righteous, the 
■wicked — tares and wheat — both are still on " the field of the world," gruwing together 
until the harvest. 

IL Hebe is a twofold tearnino of the psalmist. 1. For the righteous. (Ver. 9.) 
■" Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance." Put the emphasis on " thy," " thine ; " 
iierein lies the force of the prayius ont's tender pleading with God " Feed them ; " i.e. 
-tend them, rule them; let them find thee all that thou art as their Shepherd. "Lift 
■them up," equivalent to " bear them up," carry them in thine arms (Isa. Ixiii. 9 j xl. 11 ; 
Deut. i. 31 ; xixii. 11 ; see Perowne hereon). 2. Against the wicked. (Ver. 4.*) It 
is here that so many hare found a difficalty. We acknowledge that there would be 
■% difficulty if these were the words of God to man ; but as they are the words of man 
"to God, why should there be any difficulty at all ? Is any one bound to defend every 
word that any saint ever ofi^ered in prayer? Surely not. It is, however, only fair to 
the writer to bear in mind : (1) That he does not pray agaiust the wicked with per- 
sonal vindictiveness, but regards them as the enemies of God (ver. 5), and of society 
iikewise (ver. 3). (2) No saint's prayers ever could go beyond the limits of the 
inspiration and revelation which were granted to him. No one even now can pray 
beyond the limits of his own knowledge. In the Old Testament times the all-conquering 
love of God had not been revealed as it has been to us, and so could not yield fuel for 
prayer. (3) That such a prayer as this is an historical representation of the petitions 
of saints in the psalmist's time, and is no absolute model for our time, with our larger 
and warmer light-beams from on high. At the same time, we are bound also to 
remember that we ought not to cherish the like feelings towards the wicked that we 
do towards the righteous. Yea, if we are righteous, we cannot. And while we plead 
with God to build up those who are pure and true, we ought to plead with him to 
■frustrate the designs of unreasonable' and wicked men, and to arise and vindicate the 
great cause of righteousness and truth. And this we may do, while leaving it abso- 
lutely with God to deal with wicked people as he sees fit. The Judf!;e of all the earth 
will do right, and we surely can leave the matter there. " Vengeance is mine : I will 
repay, saith the Lord." Job's words are better than any prayers for vengeance : " I 
•know that my Vindicator liveth." There let us rest. For we have to recognize — 

III. A TWOFOLD ACTION OF God's pbovidbnoe. He builds up the righteous, but 
disconcerts the schemes of the wicked. Si tiie experience of life shows us, and so this 
psalm indicates. 1. To the righteous. God is (1) their Strength;" (2) their Shield; 
(3) the Stronghold of salvation for them and for their anointed king. This may be 
applied in the highest sense (cf. Rom. viii. 28 ; Heb. ii. 10). 2. To the wicked, 
<Ver. 5.) " He shall break them down, and not build them up " (cf. Pss. xviii. 25, 26 ; 

' On ver. 4 Calvin is worth careful perusal. 

^ Ver. 8, " Their strength." " Pro ia!j, eit, seu ei, legendum esse IBB^, popuh eju», vix 
-dubitari possit; partim propter consensum omnium Interpretum antiquorum, excepto 
OhaldsBo, in hao leotione, partim propter contextum. Nam non adest substantivum, ad 
41uod illud ia"? referri possit " (Kogers on the Psalms, App. ii., no. 92). 

PSALMS. p 



210 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [m. xxviii. 1— 9}. 

xxxvii. 35 ; Ixxiii. 18 — 20). God will seem to men according to what they are. I* 
they follow his commandments, peace will attend their steps. If they violate them, 
all nature will be full of detectives, whips, and stings. 

IV. A TWOFOLD ACT TOWARDS GoD. 1. PraysT. " Hear . . . when I lift up my 
hands toward thy holy oracle ; " * i.e. towards the " mercy-seat " (ver. 2). Although 
he was not selfish enough to cramp his desires within the limits of his own personal 
need, yet he was not unnatural enough to leave himself out. In fact, God was so 
much to him that his very life seemed hound up in God and his loving-kindness ;. 
tlie lack of a message from God to his spirit would almost drive him to despair (vers, 
1, 2). But, as is so often the case, the very psalms which begin with the deepest sighing 
end with the most joyous shouting. Hence, following on prayer, there is : 2. Praise^ 
(Ver. 6.) The lower God takes ua down in the valley of humiliation, the higher will' 
be take us up on the mount of exultation (Isa. zli. 16). And those who spend most 
time with God in weeping and supplication will have the loudest aod sweetest strains 
to raise over the wonders of delivering grace. " They that sow in trore shall reap io. 
joy." This is as true of prayer as it is of work. 

Note : Making all allowance for the difference of tone in the two dispensations, the- 
Hebrew and the Christian, yet throughout both the same laws hold good. 1. That prayei 
is one of the forces by means of which God sways the world. 2. That his people have- 
for thousands of years been praying to him to bring in righteousness and to put down' 
wrong of every kind. 3. That it is more certain these prayers will be answered than, 
that the sun will rise to-morrow, 4. And, consequently, it is for men to decide whethe> 
to their life there shall attach the privilege of being borne upon the hearts of all God'» 
saints in prayer, or the peril of being surrounded with petitions that they may 
ultimately be put to shame. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — Man's cry and God's response. In this psalm we find— 

I. Man's ort to God. (Vers. 1 — 5.) Prayer is an instinct of the heart. Man oriet- 
to man. There is a bond of brotherhood between all men. The simple fact that » 
brother is in need gives him a claim to help. Friend cries to friend. The nearer our 
relationships, the deeper our obligations. The child cries to its father. Whatever 
may be the conduct of others, we are sure that parents will do what they can for their 
children. With how much more reason and confidence may we cry to God ! He is- 
ever near. He is always pitiful. He will surely help all those who cry to him. It 
is true we may be tried, sorely tried. Distresses may multiply. Our fears may 
magnify our danger. We may tremble as on the verge of the gulf. But let us not 
despair. Bartim^us was not answered at the first, but he cried again. The Syro- 
Phoenician woman seemed at first to be met with repulse and refusal, but she pleaded^ 
the more earnestly. The sisters of Bethany were left for three whole days in their 
woe ; but the Saviour came in his good time, bringing light and joy. So let us learn- 
to pray and wait. Daniel took comfort by looking toward Jerusalem; let us look 
above, to Jesus, " the Author and Finisher of our faith." 

II. God's besponse to man's cry. (Vers. 6 — 9.) In the deepest sense, QodV 
response to man's cry is Christ. In him God has come to us in human form, bringing 
salvation. Through him God is ever with us, to hear the prayer of the sinner and t© 
satisfy the desires of his saints. When we pray it may be that the answer is delayed. 
As Joseph spoke roughly to his brethren, though love and kindness were in his heart 
all the time, so God may seem for a while to close his ear, and suifer us to struggle 
and cry in vain ; but we are sure that his love does not change. He is not like Baal 
(1 Kings xviii. 27) or the god of Ekron (2 Kings i. 2). If he delays it is because this 
is needful. It is part of his discipline ; it is necessary for the full accomplishment of 
his purposes. It may be also that God will answer our prayers in a way different 
from what we expected. We are weak and ignorant. Our minds are clouded, our 
hearts are confused. We are harassed and distressed by the things which press most 
closely upon us. We are not fit judges as to what is best. Let us confide in God. 
He knows what we are and what we need. His way is always the best way. Paul, 

' " Thy holy oracle," Ta^ (see Hengstenberg hereon ; Dr. Moll, in Sohaffa Lange ; an& 
the translation in ' The Psiilms in Chrunological Order,' by Three Friends). 



PB. XXVIII. 1—9.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 811 

hard pressed by the thorn in the flesh, besought the Lord thrice that it might depart 
from him. But he erred. It had been sent as a preventative, " lest he should be 
eialted above measure through the abundance of the revelations; " and it had not yet 
served its full purpose. God did not cause it to depart, but he did what was far better. 
He said, " My grace is sufficient for thee." And Paul, now better taught, ciies, " Most 
gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest 
upon me " (2 Cor. xii. 7 — 9). Baxter's rule is good, " As thou wilt, when thou wilt, 
and where thou wilt." But many times Q-od is pleased to answer the prayers of his 
people by granting their requests. We ask light, and he gives light. We seek pardon, 
and he says, " Thy sins are forgiven thee." We crave help in trouble, and he sends 
forth his angels for our comfort and deliverance. God's response to our cry calls for 
thanksgiving. Thus prayer ends in praise (vers. 6, 7). There is gratitude for deliver- 
ance. Faith is strengthened, hope is revived, and love breaks forth into Joyful songs 
of victory. 

" I'll praise my Maker with my breath, 
And when my voice is lost in death 

Praise shall employ my nobler powera. 
My days of praise shall ne'er be past 
While life and thought and being last, 
And immortality endnres." 

W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — The oppressed righteous king. It is the king who speaks, whose cause 
is identical with that of the people. Difference between this and the twenty-sixth 
psalm. The ground-thought of both is that God will not involve in the same outward 
fate those who are inwardly different ; and that the lot of the wicked cannot be i he 
same as that of the righteous. But there it is the oppressed individual righteous man 
that speaks ; here it is the oppressed righteous king speaking for himself and his people. 

I. The pbateb fob deliveeancb. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Arguments of the psalmist why 
God should answer him. 1. The certain, firm faithfulness of Ood. " God was his 
Bock." God and he were friends, and he could not but listen to the cry of t^ friend 
for help. Besides, Qt)d has promised to deliver the righteous out of his troubles. We 
have this assurance in the gospel. "He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins." 
2. If Ood did not answer him, he would soon he past deliverance. " Like them that 
go down to the dead." No human help could avail him ; no operation of mere natural 
law. God's arm must interpose for him. All real answers to prayer are supernatural — 
iomething above nature— ;/'roni the realm of spirit. 3. He lilted his hands to the place 
■johere Ood speaks with his people. (See Exod. xxv. 22.) That is, he puts himself into 
the divinely appointed way of being heard — praying towards the mercy-seat between the 
cherubim. Did all he knew and covdd do for bt- ing answered. Have we done that ? 
4. Ood was too just to involve him in a common fate with wicked and deceitful men. 
(Ver. 31) " Draw me not tLW&y," etc. That would not be just. " Shall not the Judge 
of all the earth do right ? " 

II. A PRAYER THAT THE WICKED MAT NOT QO DNPUNISHBD. (Vers. 4, 5.) Particn- 

larlv his enemies. The prayer might not have been prompted by malignity. For: 

1. Their frustration might have been necessary to his deliverance. If so, he was only 
crying for justice, such as we often invoke upon those guilty of injustice. " Give them 
according to their deeds," and let them not continue in their unrighteous courses. 

2. The prayer is followed by a prophecy of their assured doom. Because they do ncit 
study God's righteous judgments, they tall into increasing wickedness, and make sua 
of being destroyed. 

III. Peaveb answered is followed by confidence and thanksgiving. 1. Th( 
struggles of his soul have brought victory, praise, and joy. (Vers. 6 — 8.) 2. The 
psalmist prays that the Lord would do eternally that which he had now done. (Ver. 
9.) Would continue to do for ever the same as he had now done for him and hi» 
people. — S. 



212 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[pS. XXIX. 1 — 11, 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXIX. 



Tuts is a psalm of praise to God, and at the 
saiiie time one intended to comfort and olieer 
Ilia jioople. It cousista of three parts : (1) An 
iiiuoiluction (vers. 1,2), in which "the sons 
of tlio mighty" are called upon to praise 
ami worship God; (2) a main body, in which 
thH miglit of God is set forth by the desorip- 
tioi] of a thunderstorm (vers. 3—9); and 
(3) ail appliciition (vers. 10, 11), in which 
the people are called upon to see in the 
power and majesty of God, as placed before 
them, a ground for confidence in his ability 
to save and protect them. The authorship 
of David is not quettioned. The psalm forma 
a portion of the synagogue service on the 
first day of the Feast of Pentecost. 

Ver. 1.— Give nnto the Lord, ye mighty; 
literally, ye sons of the mighty. It is dis- 
puted who are meant Most commentators 
suggest the holy angels (RosenmuUer, Heng- 
Btenberg, 'Speaker's (Commentary,' 'Four 
Friends,' Professor Alexander, Gheyne, etc.) ; 
but some think the heathen (Miohaelis, 
Kay) ; and others, the mighty ones of the 
earth generally (Koater), to be meant. Give 
unto the lord glory and strength; i.e. 
praise his Name, ascribe to liim glory and 
strength and every other excellency. 

Ver. 2. — Give unto the Lord the glory 
due unto his Name(comp. Ps. xovi. 8) ; lite- 
rally, the glory of his Name ; i.e. the glory 
properly belonging to it. Worship the Lord 
in the beauty of holiness (oomp. Ps. xcvi. 9). 
This is generally explained as an exhorta- 
tion to worship God in beautiful vestments, 
or with all the accessories of a beautiful 
ceremonial; but Dr. Alexander rightly 
questions whether the beauty inherent in 
holiness itself is not meant. The apostle 
speaks of "the ornament of a meek and 
quiet spirit " (1 Pet. iii. 4) And in goodness 
and holiness of every kind there is a sweet- 
ness and grace which may well be called 
"beauty," seeing that it has a close analogy 
with the beautiful in external nature and 
In art. The Greeks expressed physical 
biauty and moral perfection by one and the 
same term — rh Ka\6v. 

Ver. 3.— The voice of the Lord is upon the 
waters. The description of God's might in 
the thunderstorm now begins with one of 
the sudden transitions which David loves. 
" The voice of ^>^e Lord " — already identified 
with the thuntlor in Pa. xviiL 13— is sud- 



denly heard muttering in the height of 
heaven, " upon the waters ; " i.e. the waters 
stored in the clouds that float on high in 
the air. The God of glory — the God set 
forth in vers. 1, 2 — thundereth. It is he 
himself, according to the psalmist, no minor 
agent. The Lord (Jehovah) is upon the 
many (or, great) waters (comp. Job xxxvii. 
2—5 and Ps. xviii. 7—14). 

Ver. i. — ^The voice of the Lord is powerful; 
literally, in power, or with power (LXX., in 
ia-x^i)' "^^^ voice of the Lord is full of 
majesty ; literally, in majesty, or with 
majesty. Two somewhat distant crasliea, 
eiich louder than the preceding one, are 
thought to be represented — the storm sweep- 
ing on, and gradually drawing nearer and 
more near. 

Ver. 5. — The voice of the Lord breaketh 
the cedars. At length down swoops the 
hurricane — wind and rain and forked 
flashes of lightning all blended together, 
and violently tearing througli the forest. 
The tall cedars — the pride and glory of 
Syria and Palestine — • are snapped like 
reeds, and fall in a tangled mass. The Lord, 
who erstwhile " planted them " (Ps. civ. 16), 
now breaketh the cedars of Lebanon — 
breaketh and destroyeth them in his fury. 
Such storms, though rare in Palestine and 
Syria, are sometimes vritnessed; and de- 
scriptions have been given by travellers 
whicli bear out this one of Duvid (comp. 
Wilson, 'Travels,' p. 146; Cunningham 
Geikie, vol. ii. pp. 57, 335 ; Tristrum, ' Land 
of Israel,' pp. 40, 191, 227, etc.). 

Ver. 6. — He maketh them also to skip 
like a calf (comp. Pa. xviii. 7). As the 
thunder crashes and rolls and reverberates 
among the mountains, it seems as though 
the mountains themselves shook, and were 
moved from their places. This is expressed 
with extreme vividness, though no doubt 
with truly Oriental hyperbole, in the present 
passage. Lebanon and Sirion like a young 
unicorn ; rather, like a young wild ox. 
Lebanon and Sirion, or Hermon (Deut. 
iii. 9). are the two principal mountains of 
Palestine, Hermon being visible th roughout 
almost the whole extent of the Holy Land, 
and Lebanon enjoying a commanding 
position beyond Galilee to the north. The 
storm which shook these lofty mountain- 
tracts would indeed be a manifestation of 
power. 

Ver. 7. — ^The voice of the Lord divideth 
the flames of fire; rather, the voice of the 
Lord heweth out flames of fire. The poet 
describes the appearances of things, not the 
actual reality. To him it seems as if the 
thunder, rolling along the sky, hewed out 



PS. XXIX. 1 — 11,] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



21 S 



a chasm in the olonda, from which the 
forkt'i lightning issued. 

Yer. 8. — The voice of the Lord shaketh 
the wilderness ; yea, the lord shaketh the 
wilderness of Kadesh. Kadesh seems to be 
meutiuned as lying at the opposite ex- 
tremity of Palestine from LeiDauon and 
Ilermon, so that the storm is made, by a 
magnificent hyperbole, to extend over the 
entire Holy Land, from the far north to the 
extreme south, and to embrace at once 
the lofty mountain-chains which are rather 
Syrian than Palestinian, the hills and 
valleys of Palestine proper, and the arid 
region of the south where Judiea merges 
into Arabia. 

Yer. 9. — The voice of the Lord maketh 
the hinds to calve. Plutarch says, " Shep- 
herds accustom their flocks in a thunder- 
etorm to keep together, and put their heads 
in the same direction ; for such as are left 
alone and separated from the rest through 
terror cast their youns " (' Sympos.,' Quaast. 
ii.). And Pliny, " Solitary sheep cast their 
lambs in tliunderstorms ; the remedy is to 
keep the flock together, since it helps them 
to have company." A traveller in South 
Africa observes, " In Bechuanaland, when 
there are heavy thunderstorms, tlie ante- 
lopes flee in constermition ; and the poor 
Bechuanas start off on the morning follow- 
ing such a stnrm in quest of the young 
which have been cast through horror " (see 
Moffat's ' South Africa,' quoted by Dr. Kay, 
in his ' Commentary on the Paalms,' p. 93). 
And disoovereth the forests; or, strippeth 
the foretts. Denudes them of tlieir leaves 
and branches. And in his temple doth 
every one speak of his glory; i.e. hU j;iand 



temple, or palace (heyJcal), of heaven and 
earth. In tbia temple "every one," or 
rather everything, all that is in it, is con- 
tinually speaking of his glory (literally, 
"says, "Glory!"). 

Yer. 10. — The Lord sittsth upon the flood. 
Most modems tianslate, " The Lord sat (as 
King) at the Mood," and understand by 
" the Flood " the great Noachian Deluge 
(Eoseuniiiller, Hengstenberg, Kay, Revised 
Version). Some, however, regard this as a 
forced and uunatural interpretation (Bishop 
Horsley, 'Four Friends,' 'Speaker's Com- 
mentary '), and think the flood accom- 
panying the storm just described (vers. 3 
— 9), or floods and inundations generally, 
to be meant. It is difBcult to decide between 
the two interpretations. Tea, the Lord 
sitteth King for ever. As God has sat as 
.King in the past, whether at the great 
Deluge or at any other flood or floods, eo 
will he ever " sit as King " in the future. 

Yer. 11. — The Lord will give strength 
unto his people. The Lord, who shows his 
strength in the thunderstorm, will be able, 
and assuredly will be willing, to "give 
strength to his people " — to impart te them 
some of that power and might which he 
80 abundantly possesses. Then they, par- 
taking in his strength, need not fear the 
attacks of any adversaries. Struggle and 
contention will, by his' good providence, be 
one day brought to an end ; and ultimately 
the Lord will bless his people with peace — 
will give them the " rest which reiuaineth 
to the people of God " (Hub. iii. 9), tlie 
perfect peace which "pasaeth all under- 
standing" (Phil. iv. 7). 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 2. — " The heauty of holiness." To every devout Israelite Jerusalem was " the 
perfection of beauty," " die joy of the whole earth " (Pss. xlviii. 2 ; 1. 2) ; because the 
temple of the Lord was there. Its gorgeous ritual, white-robed priests and Levites, 
choral psalms, clangour of trumpets, harps, cymbals, all seemed the highest ideal of 
worship, the very visible "beauty of holiness." To all this we may well see an 




splendour" or "majestic 
words are spoken, but to angels (ver. 1; Ps. Ixxxix. 6); and in Ps. xcvi. 9 to the 
" kindreds of the people " (Revised Version), q.d. all the families of mankind. Therefore 
we recognize a higher, more spiritual meaning, of which all the glory of temple- 
worship was a faint shadow. To perceive " the beauty of holiness," we must first 
know what holiness really means. 

I. What is holiness? The Bible gives a triple answer — three steps, from the 
lowest to the loitiest views, from ritual to spiritual, from spiritual to Divine. Holiness 
is (1) consecration to God ; (2) likeness to God ; (3) God's own nature. 1. Conse- 
cration — dedication, or devotion to God. In this sense, things, places, times, ceremonies, 
as well as persons, are continually spoken of in the Old Testament as "holy to the 
Lord." The ground round the burning bush was holy (Exod. iii. 5), as long as God'? 



2U THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [p8. xxix. 1—11. 

presence was manifested there. So was the place where, for the time, the tabernacle 
was pitched. When the bush ceased to burn ; when' the cloud rose from the tabernacle, 
and Israel marched to a new resting-place, — the wild creatures roamed over those spots 
as common ground. The notion of indelible sanctity communicated by ceremonies is 
foreign to the Bible ; things, places, etc., were holy because actually employed in God's 
service. No paina were spared to impress the idea that nothing is too pure or good to 
give to God. The victims must be without blemish ; vessels, of precious material and 
perfect workmanship ; bread, unleavened ; altar, built of whole stones ; priests, free from 
all bodily defect ; the very clothes of worshippers washed clean. Yet upon thn 
tabernacle, the vessels, the priests, the people, must be sprinkled the blood of atone 
ment. The lesson was that even our holiness is stained with sin in God's all-searching 
eyes (Heb. ix. 14, 23 ; x. 19 ; 1 John i. 7 — 9). 2. Likeness to God is the higher, deeper 
view of holiness, to which all these forms of outward holiness were designed to lead. 
Before a single rite was enacted, or Aaron consecrated, the people were told to be " a 
kingdom of priests, a holy nation" (Bxod. xix. 6). Again and again, like a trumpet- 
peal or a minster bell, sounds out the great command, " Be ye holy ; for I am holy." 
The teaching of the New Testament cannot go beyond this (1 Pet. 1. 16). There are 
those who tell us that the Old Testament ideas of holiness were not moral or 
spiritual, but ritual and external. This text confutes them. Could any Israelite be 
so dull as not to see that all this outward ceremonial was meant to inspire deep 
reverence, profound worship, in thinking and speaking of God, and drawing men to 
him ; but that God's holiness which he was bidden to imitate, must be personal purity, 
righteousness, goodness ; and that to be truly holy, we must be like God (comp. Isa. 
vi. 1 — 6) ? 3. Therefore our highest idea of holiness is this — it is God's own character. 
Thought cannot soar above this. Uninspired human thought has never risen bo high. 
The Bible idea of Divine holiness — perfect moral and spiritual excellence — as much 
excels all heathen religious teaching as noontide, twilight. It is summed up in 1 John 
i. 5 ; iii. 8. 

n. The beauty of holiness must, uke tbub holiness itself, be spiritual, 
INWAKD. Yet also manifest ; for beauty is something we can behold, if not with the 
eyes, with the mind. Not a beauty we confer, by clothing, adorning, materializing the 
spiritual ; but a beauty it confers on us, by purifying and exalting. If the heart be 
consecrated, the life that flows from it will be beautiful. All the outward beauty of 
God's works is a parable of loveliness of character and soul. Sunbeams are not so 
bright as loving smiles ; the rose and the lily are less fair than modesty and innocence • 
the gorgeous sunset less grandly beautiful than the calm evening of a holy life. 

Ebmabks. 1. The perfect " beauty of holiness " is seen in the Lord Jesus ; at once 
the Revelation and the Reflection of God's character in human nature — " Immanuel." 
2. This beauty can be truly seen only by those whose eyes are opened (John i. 14 
contrasted with Isa. liii. 27). 3. The life of every Christian ought to be beautiful 
(Matt. V. 16.) 

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The glorious sceptre of universal power. There are many productions 
of poets and poetesses, celebrating the grandeur of nature, and the glory of God as 
manifested in the works of his hands ; but there are none which, even in a poetical 
point of view, surpass those in Job xxvi., xxviii., xxxviii. ; Isa. xl. ; Pss. civ., xix., cxlvii., 
and that in the psalm before us now, which rises to the very noblest heights of Hebrew 
poetry, in its symmetry and grandeur. Bishop Perowne (who acknowledges his obliga- 
tions to Ewald therein) has a most interesting introduction to this psalm, in which he 
points out the beauty of its structure, as in its grand description of a tempest it shows 
the storm at its height of majesty, and then in its su bsidence to comparative calm. And, 
verily, even on this lower ground of poetic beauty, he would be by no rieana to be 
enyied who could read it without a strange commingling of rapture, wonder, and awe. 
We seem to hear the roll of the ocean, to listen to the pealing thunder, to watch the 
flash of the lightning, the crashing of the trees of the forest, the heaving of the 
mountains, as if they were loosed from their foundations by an earthquake, Lebanon 



PS. XXIX. 1— ll.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 213 

and Sirion * leaping as wild creatures free from all restraint. But while it is to tha 
descriptions of all this grandeur and majesty that some expositors chiefly call our 
attention, neither nature's grandeur nor majesty is the main topic of the psalm. By 
no means ; but rather the glory of him whose dominion extendeth over all I In the 
eye of the psalmist, all the forces of nature are under one sceptre ; that sceptre is wielded 
by one hand ; that hand is moved by one heart, even that of our redeeming God. Such 
is the theme before us.' 

I. Hbbb poweb in vabied manifestations is tbaoed to one souboe. There are 
five thoughts which are presented cumulatively. 1. Power in, nature's works and 
wonders specially as shown in storm and tempest, lightning and thunder, earthquake 
and mountain wave. Note : The larger our knowledge of natural science, the more 
capable shall we be of discoursing with interest, delight, and profit to others on these 
" wonderful works of God." * 2. Power in providential administration. (Ver, 10.) 
" The Lord sat enthroned at the flood." This word rendered " flood " is the one applied 
to the Deluge of Koah, and only so applied. Hence it seems to include the specific 
thought that over and above all merely natural disclosures of power, there is a moral 
enthronement, whereby natural phenomena are made subservient to moral ends. Not 
only is every atom kept in harness, but the collocation of atoms is subsidiary to the 
discipline of souls. 3, Thtre is gracious Uming-kindness towards his own people. (Yer. 
11.) " His people." There are those in the world marked off from the rest by tokens 
known to God alone. They are his, having " made a covenant with him by sacrifice " 
(Ps. I. 5). And with reference to them, there is a grace marvellous in its tenderness. 
The same Being who can thunder most loudly can also whisper most sweetly, and can 
also give out blessings to his own. (1) Strength (cf. Isa. xl. 31 ; 2 Cor. xii. 9 ; Ps. 
xxvii. 14). (2) Peace. While the fiercest storm is raging without, God can and does 
give us peace within ; a peace which becomes richer and fuller, till it is exceedingly 
abundant " above all we can ask or think." It is " the peace of God, passing all under- 
standing " (John xiv. 27 ; Phil. iv. 6, 7 ; Bom. y. 1 ; Eph. ii. 14). 4. Ee who thus 
rules in nature, providence, grace, is the everlasting King. (Ver. 10.) " King for 
ever i " The sceptre of universal power will never drop from his hands, nor will he 
ever transfer it to another (Ps. xcvii. 1). The hand that upholds all will never become 
weary. The eye that watches all will never droop with fatigue. The arms that clasp 
believers in their embrace will never relax their hold. The voice that whispers, 
" Peace ! " will never be stilled in death. The love that enriches with blessing will 
never be chilled. " King for ever ! " 5. Me who is this everlasting King is our 
redeeming God. The usual term for God as the God of nature is "Elohim" (Gen. 
i. 1). But here we are reminded that the God who thunders in the heavens and 
controls the swelling seas ; that he who guides the forked lightning, is " Jehovah," 
the " I am that I am," the Lord who has thus revealed himself to his people as their 
Ood. And the great Buler of nature is he who exercises loving-kindness, righteous- 
ness, and judgment in the earth, in order that he that glorieth may glory in the Lord. 

II. SnoH thoughts or God mat well evoke geatefdl song. They know not 
how ranch of gladness and inspiration they lose who cannot see God everywhere. To 
see law everywhere and God nowhere would be enough to crush us. To see God 
everywhere working by law inspires rest and joy : our " Father is at the helm." 
Maie ; Since we have such disclosures of God, we have : 1. Unity in diversity. The 
seemingly complicated question of " the origin of force " * is settled once for all hy the 

' " Sirion : " a proper name of the mountain-chain of Hermon among the Sidonians 
(Deut. iii. 9) ; sn oiiUerl from the resemblance to a breast-plate (Fiirat, »u6 verb.}. 

' The nnte-i of Professor Kirkpatriuk on tliis psalm are interesting and helpful (' Cam- 
bridge Bible ' series). 

» The works of Professor Drummond, Dr Hugh Macmillan, the Kev. Prebendary 
Reynolds, and Mr. St. Charles Mivart are charming illustrations of how Chrislian men 
may make their knowledge of natural science serve to the setting forth of the glory of God 
and of his truth. We purposely refrain from giving illustrations in the text of how thii 
may be done, as the advancing sciences will each year pour floods of new light on the 
" wonderful works of God." 

♦ Pee an able lecture on this subject by the late Sir John Hersohel, in 'Familial 
Lectures on Soientifc Subjects,' p. 460 (Strahan). 



216 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps, xxix. 1— H. 

man who sees Ood. And this privilege is reserved for " the pure in heart " (Matt. v. 
■~i). 2. Si7ice one God is over all, natural phenomena as well as providential incident may 
bj made fuel for the religious life. A thunderstorm may aid worship. 3. Since one 
Ileing is the Origin of all kinds of force, prayer for natural hlessings and temporal 
lercies is perfectly reasonable; e.g. prayer for ruin. It is quite true that prayer and 
laiu lie in totally distinct spheres.* But since the same Being who hears one sends 
the other, the spheres find their unity at his throne. 4. Since the God who governs all 
is One whom we know, we may read and sing of glory under all circumstances ami 
everywhere. (Ver. 9.) " In his temple every whit of it uttereth glory; " or, " In his 
tumple every one says, Glory I " Yes; we may triumph everywhere since our G-od is 
'■ iving for ever!" 5. Holy awe m,uy well combine with triumph, and loyalty with 
praise. For God "sits enthroned" — such is the sublime figure suggested here. Ana 
'■ his people" though we are by grace, his absolute sovereignty must never be forgotten 
liy us (ver. 2) ; ever must we give unto the Lord " the glory due unto his Name," * and 
" Worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness" — in holy attire, even in the " fine linen 
» hich is the righteousness of saints " (Rev. xix. 8), " having our hearts sprinkled from 
^11 evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water" (Heb. x. 22). 6. Amid 
<ill natural convulsions and national upheavings, let confidence and hope remain undis- 
turbed. " King for ever I" Then, however gloomy the outlook of events, nothing 
t;ni happen beyond the bounds of Divine control, nothing which he cannot make 
.-iil'servient to the iiibringino; of his everlasting kingdom. " Therefore will not we fear, 
though the earth be removed, and the mountains be carried into the midst of the sua " 
(Ps. xlvi. 2).— C. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — 77ie works and the Word of Qod should not be separated. They are 
both revelations, and the one is necessary to the right interpretation of the other. If 
we study God's works by themselves, we are apt to forget God's Word, and so forget 
God himself. If, on the other hand, we confine ourselves to God's Word, we are in 
danger of falling into a similar error — that of forgetting God's presence in his works, 
and so turning the world without us into a world without God. The psalmist shows 
us a more excellent way. " The occasion of this psalm is a thunderstorm ; but it 
does not limit itself to the external natural phenomenon, but in it [lerceives the self- 
attestation of the God of redemptive history " (Delitzsch). If Ps. viii. should be read at 
night when the sky is bright with stars, and Ps. xix. by day when the sun is high 
In the heavens, this shuuld be studied in the gloom of the storm, when the lightnings 
flash and the thunders roll, and the terrors of the Lord are on every side. It is then 
we can realize its deep grandeur and beauty, and feel its power to bring us nearer God. 
1. The first thing is that we should take the right standpoint. " Not to the earth 
confined ascend to heaven." We must rise above the things seen, above the varioua 
forces working around us, above the mere reasonings and imaginations of our own 
hearts. We must take our place by the side of the highest, " the God-like ones," " tha 
Suns of the mighty" — the angels, who are in truest sympathy with God. It is as we 
hear with their ears, and see with their eyes, and enter into fellowship with them in 
mind and spirit, that we can truly behold Jehovah's glory, and fitly sing his praise 
(ver. 1). 2. The true spirit with which to contemplate the magnificent spectacle is 
reverence and trust (ver. 2). Thus prepared, we are able to recognize Qod's presence. 
A " voice " implies a speaker. Behind all the glory of visible and natural things there 
is the glory of God. He is the Force of all forces, and the Life of all life. The man of 
science may see nothing in the thunderstorm but cold material law, and the savage 
may recognize only a mysterious power which fills his soul with fear and trembling ; 
but if we are of the same spirit as the psalmist, we can rise from the seen to the 
unseen, and acknowledge the presence and the glory of God. 3. Further, we are able 
to confess with humility and awe the supreme majesty of Ood. The storm in 
progress witnesses to his eternal power and Godhead. We heboid his glory as the 

' See articles on ' The Function of Prayer in the Economy of the Universe,' by Eev. 
Will. Knight, Dundee, in Contemporary Review, January and December, 1873. 

■' The psalmist is thought by some to call on the heavenly hosts to praise God (ver. 1) ; 
surely nut rs-nlusively, but rather along with the Church of God on earth (see Hengsten- 
borg hereou. uud Ps. ciii. 19--22). 



fs. XXIX. 1—11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 217 

Lord of heaven and earth. We see hira not only as the Lord of the "waters," but of 
the dry land ; not only of " the cedars," but of all living creatures ; not only of 
the children of men, but of all the host of heaven (vers. 3 — 9). 4. Lastly, we are able 
to rejoice in God as our God, the supreme Object of our fear and love. The psalm ends 
as it began, with Grod. At the beginning we are raised from earth to heaven, and in the 
close we have heaven brought down to earth. It is as we ascend with Christ to Gel 
that God will descend with Christ to us. Thus we are enabled to confide in God n.^ 
our almighty King and our gracious Redeemer. " The Lord will give strength untu 
his people." These are the two great blessinss of salvation. " Strength " we have lost 
through sin ; but it is recovered through Christ. God's people are stronjc to do, to 
sufl'er, and to endure, to overcome evil and daily to perform their vows in the service 
of their Lord (Phil. iv. 13). God's people have " pence " — that inner harmony and 
calm which results from oneness with God. Amidst all the stress and struggle of life, 
though there should come wars and famines and pestilences, when men's hearts are 
failing them for fear, they are able to say " It is the Lord I " He will keep us from 
evil; he will bless us with strength and with peace. — W. F. 

Ver. 11. — 2%e priestly benediction (Numb. vi. 22 — 27) may be said to be summed 
up in these two things, "strength" and "peace." Together they make tip all that is 
needed for daily life. When man goes forth in the morning to his work (Ps. civ. 23), 
what he requires is " stiengtli," that he may be able to do the will of God. When 
the evening comes, what he needs is "peace" — the rest and content of the heart in 
God. The two things cannot be separated. It is in the measure we use aright the 
" strength " God gives that we can have " peace." If we are unfaithful, if we alienate 
to selfish and unworthy purposes the "strength" which should have been wholly 
devoted to G^d, we mar our "peace." David has taught us the secret (Ps. c.xix. 165), 
and David's Son and Lord has made the truth still plainer (John xv. 10). "His 
people." There is nothing arbitrary in this. In one sense all are God's people, f. ir 
he is the Maker of all. Then in the higher sense all may become Goii's people if they 
so choose. But besides, the blessings of "strength" and "peace" can only be 
received by such as are in a fit state to receive them. There are blessings that are 
common. There are other blessiugs that are of a nobler kind, and are necessarily 
limited to those who can receive them (2 Cor. ii. 11, 12). The delights of art and 
science and literature are for those who have a certain preparedness. So it i-: in 
spiritual things. We must be weak before we are strong;. We must be of one mind 
with God in Christ before we can have peace (Bom. v. 1 ; John xiv. 27). — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The thunderstorm. Compare this with the nineteenth and eighth 
psalms — all nature psalms. This is a wonderful description of a thunderstorm. 

I. The omnipotence op God in nature inspires the devout mind with the 
SPIRIT of worship. Inspires the common mind with fear. The scientific mind with 
inquiry. Inflnmes the imagination of the poetic mind. But fills the devout mind 
with the spirit of worship of the great invisible Creator. "Give unto the Lord the 
honour [or, 'silory'] due unto his Name." Every manifestation of God is interesting 
to the religious man. 

II. That the devout man seeks foe sympathy and fellowship in his worship. 
(Vers. 1, 2.) He call- upon the whole invisible world of the sons of God to give glory 
to God in the " beauty of holiness," or in holy apparel, i.e. dressed as priests in 
spotless attire. 1. Human praise is poor and inadequate. And he uould have the 
angelic choir give full-voiced utterance to God's ghry in higher strains than he could 
reach. 2. The spirit of worship brings man into closer sympathy with his fellow-man. 
Hence the necessity cf public worship, because all our best emotions become deepened 
when shared with others. We are made for fellowship in Al the highest good of life. 

III. The God who is mighty in nature will give strenoth unto his peoplk. 
The crashing thunderstorm which awakens fear in ordinary minds awakens trust and 
confidence in the devout mind. 1. He who by his might raises the storm will give 
strength to the weak and persecuted. He sits above the storm, is Master and King 
over it ; and he sits above the storms of the mind and heart, to control them. 2. He 
who quells the storm is able to quell the tumults of the mind, and to give us peace. 



219 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. XXX. 1 — 12, 



Christ gave his peace to the disciples ; and " the peace of God which passeth all 
understanding is able to keep [guard] our hearts and minds." It is inward trust 
Aud rest, and not outward tranquillity. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXX. 



Thtb psalm 13 one of thanksgiving from 
tirst to last, an'1 commemorates a deliverance 
from a gnat daisjer. It is divided into 
tnO unequal portions — one of five and the 
other of seven verses. In the first part, 
the deliverance is mentioned, and thanks 
given for it, in the briefest possible way 
(vers. 1 — 3), after which the people are 
called upon to join in praising God, and 
reminded what cause they have for doing 
80 (vers. 4, ij). In the second part, the 
circumstances of the deliveranco are set out 
at greater length. First of all, the sin is 
confessed, which had drawn down God's 
anger (ver. 6); then mention is made of 
the trouble which came (ver. 7); next the 
psalmist tells us how the trouble was met 
(ver. 8); he gives us his prayer and 
expostulation with God (vers. 9, 10) ; then 
he relates how, on a sndden, there was 
relief — grief was turned into gladness — 
entreaty into thanksgiving (vers. 11, 12). 
Finally, in a burst of joy, he promises to 
ci intinue to praise and thank God for ever. 
The title ascribes the psalm to David ; 
and it is generally allowed to possess 
internal evidence of Davidic authorship. 
Ewald calls it "a model hymn of thanks- 
giving, composed in the best age of Hebrew 
poetry, for recitation in the temple." The 
particular occasion on which it was written 
is declared in the title to have been " the 
dedication of the house," by which (if 
David was the author) it is impossible to 
understand anything but the dedication 
of the altar (with its precinct) on the 
threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite, 
after the great plague sent to punish David 
for numbering the people, as related in 
2 Sim. xxiv. 1—25; 1 Chrdn. xxi, 1—28. 
With this occasion its contents are in 
pertVct liarinony. It was probably sung at 
the thanksgiving service with which 
David inaugurated his altar. The modern 
Jews still recite it at their Feaat ol the 
Dedication. 



Ver. 1. — ^I will extol thee, tor4j cr, 
I' I will exalt tliee," as the word is rendered 
in Ps3. xxxiv. 3 ; xcix. 5, 9 ; and elsewhere. 
For thou hast lifted me up ; or, " drawn me 
up," as a bucket is drawn up out of a well, 
or a man out of a duns;eon. And hast not 
made my foes to rejoice over me. David 
had still enemies at the time of his number- 
ing the people, as appears from 2 Sam. 
xxiv. 13. Indeed, it was doubtless with 
some reference to the number of his foes 
that he wished to know how many followers 
he could rally to his standard in case of 
need. If the plague had continued much 
longer, David's military strength would 
have been teriously crippled, and his foes 
would have rejoiced with reason. 

Ver. 2.— Lord my God, I cried unto 
thee, and thou hast healed me. "Heal" 
may be used metaphorically for the removal 
of mental sufferings (see Pss. xli. 4; cxlvii. 
3); but David's grief when he saw the 
sufferings of his people from the plague 
seems to have wholly prostrated him, both 
in mind and body. For the nature of 
the "cry" spoken of, comp. vers. 8 — 10, 
which are an expansion of the present 
verse. 

Ver. 3. — Lord, thou hast brought up 
my soul from the grave ; i.e. when I was on 
the verge of tlie grave, just ready to depart 
to the unseen world, thy interposition laved 
me, and brought me, as it were, back to life. 
Thou hast kept me alive. Lest the hyperbole 
of the preoi ding clause should be misunder- 
stood, the writer appends a prosaic account 
of what had happened. God had "kept 
him alive " when he was in peril of death, 
and saved him, that he should not go down 
to the pit. 

Ver. 4. — Sing unto the Lord, ye saints 
of his. David continually calls upon the 
peop e to join him in his praises of God. 
Even when the mercy vouchsafed has been 
granted specially to himself, he regards 
the people as interested, since he is their 
ruler in peace and their leader in war (see 
Pss. ix. 11 ; xxxiv. 3, etc.). On the present 
occasion, however, the people wljo had 
escaped tlie pestilence had almost exactly 
the same reason for praising and thanking 
Grud that David had, and were bound to 
join him in liis thnnks^iving service. And 
give thanks at the remembrance of his 
holiness ; literally, give thankt to the 
memorial of his holiness, which is explained, 
by reference to Exod. Ui, 15, as meanings 



PS. XXX. 1—12.] 



TUB BOOK OF PSALMS. 



219 



" Give thanks to his holy Name " (oomp. 
fss. ciii. 1 ; ovi. 47; oxiv. 21). 

Ver S. — For his anger endureth but a 
moment; in his favour is life; literally, /or 
a moment (is passed^ in his anger, a life- 
lime in hi$ favour. God's anger is short- 
lived in the case of those who, having 
riniied, repent, and confess their sin, and 
pray for meroy (see vers. 8 — 10). His 
favour, on the contrary, is enduring; it 
ciiatinues all their life. Weeping may 
eadure for a night; rather, at eveniiiie 
ii^eping comes to lodge, or to pass the night ; 
bat joy Cometh in the morning ; or, hut at 
mom joy arriveth (oomp. Job xxxiii. 26; 
Ua. xxvi 20 ; liv. 7). 

Vers. 6 — 12. — Now begins the expanded 
account of the deliverance in respect of 
whioli the thanksgiving is offered. And 
Hrst, with regard to the offence that had 
drawn down the Diviua chastisement; it 
was an offence of the lips, springing from 
an evil temper in the heart. 

Ver. 6. — And in my prosperity I said, 
I shall never be moved; rather, as in the 
lievised Version, and as for me, in my 
prosperity I said, etc. There is a marked 
pause, and introduction of a new subject 
in a new strophe. Prosperity had worked 
an ill eltect on the psalmist, had made him 
self-confident and pioud. He " said in his 
heart," as the wicked man in Pa. x. 6, only 
in still stronger phrase, "X shall not be 
moved ; " literally, I shall not he moved for 
ever. His heart was lifted up, and in 
the spirit of self-glorification he gave 
command for the numbering of the people. 
The result was the plague, and the death 
of seventy thousand of his subjects. Into 
these details he does not here enter. He 
is content to trace his sin to its bitter rout 
of pride, and to glance at its punishment 
(ver. 7) and his repentance (vers. 8 — 10). 

Ver. 7. — Lord, by thy favour thou hast 
(rather, hadst) made my mountain to stand 
strong. It was thy favour wliicli had given 
me the "prosperity" whereby 1 was exalted, 
and which I thought rooted in myself — 
which had made Zion strong, and enabled 
me to triumph over my enemies. But, lo ! 
suddenly all was changed — Thou didst hide 
thy face, and I was tro:ibled. God turned 
his iaoe away, declared himself angry with 
his servant (1 Ghron. xxi. 7—12), and sent 
the dreadful plague which in a single day 
destroyed seventy thousand lives. Then 
David, feeling that God's face was indeed 
turned from him, " was troubled." 

Ver. 8.— I cried to thee, Lord; and 
anto thee I made supplication (comfi. 2 
Sam. xxiv. 17; 1 Chron. xxi. 17). I'he 



part of his prayer most honourable to David 
is not recorded by himself, but by the 
historians. He tells us of his secret 
wrestlings with God, his complaints and 
expoatuliitions — his cries and pleadings as 
tliey remained in his memory ; he passes 
over the desire to die for his people, which 
the historians put on record. 

Ver. 9. — What profit is there in my 
blood, when I go down to the pit ? 
What advantage wilt thou derive from 
my death, if thou killest me, either by 
the plague, which may as well fasten upon 
me as upon any one else, or by the misery 
and mental strain of seeing my subjects, 
my innocent sheep, sufler? God has "no 
pleasure in the death of him that dieth" 
(Ezek. xviii. 32), and certainly can obtain 
no profit from the destruction of any of his 
creatures. Shall the dust praise thee 1 
(comp. Pss. vi. 5; Ixxxviii. JO; cxv. 17; 
La. xxxviii. IS). In death, so far as the 
power of death extends, there can be no 
action ; the lips cease to move, and therefore 
cannot hymn God's praise — the "dust" U 
inanimate, and, while it remaing dust, 
oanuot speak. What the freed soul may 
do, the psalmist does not consider. Very 
little was known under the old dispensation 
concerning the intermediate state. Shall it 
declare thy truth t The dust certainly 
could not do this, unless rev'"'Sed and 
formed into another living body. 

Ver. 10. — Hear, Lord, and ii%7e mercy 
npon me : Lord, be thou my Helper (comp. Ps. 
liv. 4; Heb. xiii. 6). Here the psalmist's 
prayer, uttered in his distress, ends, and lie 
proceeds to declare the result. 

Ver. 11. — Thou hast turned (rather, thou 
turnedst) for ma my mourning into dancing. 
Suddenly, in a moment, all was changed. 
The angel ceasei I to slay. God bade him 
hold his hand. The Prophet Gad was sent 
with the joyful news to David, and com- 
manded him at once to build an altar 
at Jehovah. Then the mourning ceased, 
and a joyful ceremonial was instituted, of 
which dancing, as so often, formed a part 
(see Exod. xv. 20 ; 1 Sam. xviii. 6 ; 2 Skui. 
vi. 14 — 16; Ps. cxlix 3; Jer. xxxi. 4). 
Thou hast put off (rather, didst put off) 
my sackclotn. That the king had clothed 
himself in saokeloth on the occasion, is 
mentionel tjy tne auihor of Chronicles 
(1 Chron. XXI. 16). And girded {girdedst) 
mj with gladness (comp, 1 Chron. xxi. 26). 

Ver. 12. — ro the end tiiat my glory miy 
sing praise to thee. If we allow the 
elli7*e of the personal pronoun supposed by 
our Translators and Revisers, we must 
regard David as calling his soul " his 
glory," aa in Ps. xvi. 9. But some com- 
mentators think that " glory " is here used 
aa we use "royalty," and designates the 



220 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



■ps. XXX. 1 — 12. 



royal person or the royal office (so Kay 
and Profeasor Alexander). And not be 
silent. Lord my God, I will give thanks 
onto thee for ever. 3reat mercies deserve 
perpetual remembrance. David regarded 



the mercy at this time vouclisafed him ai 
one which, like that vouchsafed Ilezekiah 
required to be commemorated "all the 
days of his life" (Isa. xxxviii. 20). 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ver. 5. — Mercy and judgment. " His anger ... a moment," etc. This pathttic 
and beautilul psalm ia a thanksgiving after dangerous, well-nigh fatal, .sickness. Its 
title calls it " a song at ihe dedication of the house ; by David " (see Revised Version) _ 
q.d. David's own palace, not the temple. But there is no reference to this in the 
psalm. This is of siiiall account. The most profitable study of Scripture is not tele- 
scopic, peering into the past ; nor microscopic, dissecting it like a corpse ; but stetho- 
scopic, laying your ear against its heart, and discerning the life that throbs there. 
The psalmist sings " of mercy and judgment." 

I. God's displeasubb, and its brief duration. There is nothing of which we 
need to speak more carefully and reverently than of God's anger. With men, anger 
ia rarely free from personal resentment, ill will, injustice, passion. None of these find 
place in God's anger. It is righteous displeasure against sin. At bottom, it is a 
manifestation of his love, which desires his children to be holy and happy. Its reality 
is shown, from the dawn of man's history, by the inseparable connection of suffering 
with sin (Eom. vi. 23). God loves sim.ers, though they are unworthy, but does not 
treat them as sinless. And " whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth." Tbe chasten- 
ing may be brief, "for a moment," but it is the expression of his unchangeable 
opposition to sin. The lightning flash is the expression of eternal forces, unchangeable 
laws. Are, then, the troubles of Christians always of the nature of punishments for 
particular sins ? Beware of hastily thinking so, for yourself or others. Trouble has 
another mission, discipline — the training and culture of Christian charstctor. The 
Sinless One himself learned in the school of sorrow (Heb. v. 8, 9 ; iv. 15). X>."8 we 
learn to "weep with those who weep." But trouble may be the direct fru:i «( our 
ijiu ; or sent to waken conscience — bring sin to mind. If so, remember thers js no 
tiuer exercise of God's love (Ps. cxix. 67). 

II. God's favour, and its life-giving power. The Hebrew seems hardly to 
bear the sense given in the margin of the Revised Version. " Lifetime " is ratlier an 
English than a Hebrew idea. God's favour — his loving-kindness and faithful care — is 
as truly exercised towards his children in adversity as in prosperity ; but not so seen 
a^adfelt. The clouds which hide the sun are really drawn up by the sun's rays, that 
tbey may " break in blessing;" but for the time they do hide it. The sense of God's 
lavoiir — the assurance of forgiveness, answer to prayer, removal of trial, opening of the 
path, comfort of promises, bounty of providence, shedding abroad of love in the heart 
by his Spirit, is like the life-giving sunshine ; " clear shining after rain." 

III. The law of Christian experience concerning trouble. Sorrow is joy's 
forerunner. The Hebrew is very terse and vigorous, though it may sound harsh if 
Englished verbatim, " For there is a moment in his anger ; life in his favour. At 
eventide weeping shall come to lodge; and at morn a shout of joy." Trouble is not 
for trouble's sake, but " for our profit." The end being gained, the process will cease 
(1 Pet. i. 1 ; 2 Cor. iv. 17). Joy is for its own sake; therefore inexhaustible (Isa. 
XXXV. 10; liv. 8). How if the process fails; the end is not gained; grace and chasten- 
ing both in vain? Then "his anger" against sin cannot be "for a moment," but 
must aliide (John iii. 36 ; Heb. vi. 8; x. 26, 27). 

Ver. 9. — A nolle view of life. " Shall the dust praise thee ? " etc. We must not 
take this cry of bitter anguish as an utterance of unbelief or irreligion. On the 
contrary, it contains a noble and religions view of life. Life, in the psalmist's view. 
is a scene and season in which to gloiify God. His quarrel with death is that it outs 
short this opportunity ; silences the tongue of testimony and the lips of praise ; arrests 
the busy worker, and buries his vigorous energies in the dust. Here, then, is — 

L The Church's complaint against death. There is no piety m ignoring 



M. XXX. 1— 12.J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 221 

mysteries, though there may be impiety either in our presumptuous attempts to 
explain them, or more presumptuous denials that there can be an explanation perfectly 
consistent with God's wisdom, justice, and goodness. We must not rashly try to lift 
the veil or rend it; but as we worship before it we feel that it is a veil (Isa. xlv. 15). 
<jod is a Sovereign, but not a Tyrant. Absolute obedience and trust are his due ; but 
he will not crush either our reason or our conscience (Jer. xii. 1 ). Among the imperish- 
able monuments which the Bible has placed over the graves of the good and wise and 
fnithful, are not only those of such as were garnered like the ripe shock ; but of others 
who came forth as a flower, and were out down ; not only Abraham, Israel, David, 
Daniel ; but Abel, Josiah, Stephen, James. Such cases are not rare exceptions, but 
so frequent in every age of the Church's history as to suggest the thought that there 
must be some deep, permanent, prevailmg reason why so many priceless lives are cut 
short in their prime, and the Church of Christ and the world made poor by the loss 
of such vast stores of unspent service. 

II. The enigma of lifk. For those who reject the gospel — the insoluble enigma. 
Close your Bible. Suppose, in the history of our race, no Incarnation, no Atonement, 
no Resurrection ; in our calendar, no Christmas, Good Friday, Easter. Then, what 
is human life ? A vast funeral procession ; not in ordered march, with the grey heads 
Always in the van. A confused blind hurry, in which not one of the crowd can tell 
but the next step may be into darkness and dust. Now the babe is snatched, now 
the mother. The child in his play, the youth in his pride and hope, the bride with 
her wreath ; the man of ripe power and rich experience, whose fall is like Samson's, 
bringing down the pillars on which the house rested. What does it mean t There 
are those who try to borrow the moral force and motive power of Christianity, while 
rejecting its facts, who are ready with an answer. " Man," they say, " is immortal 
in his work. All that is best of us survives." No more, we reply, than what is worst. 
*'The evil that men do lives after them." Noblest enterprises are rudely made abortive 
by death. The statesman, reformer, philanthropist (as dying Mirabeau said), cannot 
" bequeath his head " (Job xiv. 19, last clause). 

III. The qosfel supplies the key to the enigma, the beplt to the question. 
Tea. The dust shall praise God ; the grave does declare his truth. 1. From the open, 
empty tomb of Jesus comes the message of comfort, hope, life. Death is abolished 
(2 Tim. i. 10; 1 Cor. xv. 20). 2. Every Christian grave praises God, bearing witness 
to the faith which conquered death and robbed the grave of terror (Ps. xxiii. 4 ; 2 
Cor. V. 1, 6) ; in the recognition and comfort of Christian mourners (1 Thess. v. 13) ; 
in the promise of the Lord (John vi. 39 ; Kev. i. 18). Patience I " Fear not, only 
believe." The promise shall be fulQUed. Death shall be destroyed (John v. 28, 29 ; 
Phil. iii. 20, 21 ; 1 Cor. xv. 52, 53, 55). 

Meantime, who can doubt that the work which seems to us often so roughly and 
untimely broken off, is but raised to a higher sphere ? They who seem to enter into 
rest before their time do so because the Lord has made their place ready (John xiv. 2). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — A public thanksgiving on recovery from sickness. This psalm has 
a remarkable title, " A Psalm or Song at the dedication of the house of David." What 
house is referred to we have no means of knowing, nor is there any very manifest 
relation between the contents of the psalm and the dedication of any house whatso- 
ever.* We can scarcely read the psalm carefully without gathering therefrom that 
the writer had had a dangerous illness, from which he was not expecting to recover. 
But his life was mercifully spared ; and we may venture to gather also (by comparing 
the title of the psalm with ver. 3) that his recovery, and the dedication referred to 
nearly coincided in point of time ; and that he piously resolved to avail himself of 

' DelitzBoh has most serviceable remarks hereon in his introduotion to this psalm. Mr. 
Fausset's study on this psalm is most instructive, ' Horn Fsalmicts,' pp. 138 — 141. Kirk- 
Patrick's introduction and notes, in the ' Cambridge Bible ' series, will repay careful atten- 
tion, as will Dr. Green's note on ver. 5. 



222 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xxi 1—12 

such dedication service to return thanks for his recovery. This supposition is in itseli 
reasonable, and, so far as we can find, it is not inconsistent with any of the expressions 
in the psalm itself. We find herein an interesting blending of the psalmist's innrr 
thoughts and of his pleadings with God. We see from both, how the Old Testament 
saints were wont to think and pray concerning sickness and death ; both in thought 
and prayer we find here a decided reflection of the incompleteness of revelation under 
the Mosaic economy, and therefore, as Christians, privileged with fuller' light and 
larger truth, we shall be greatly to blame if we look at either affliction or death as 
gloomily as the psalmist did. At the same time, the varied stages of experience 
indicated here are so very frequently pa-iscd through, even now, that we may service- 
ably utilize this psalm for the purposes of studying the dealings of God with his saints 
in the olden time, and in the present time likewise. There are six stages of experienct 
rehearsed at this dedication service. 

I. First stage : tranquillity. (Ver. 6.) " In me& tranquillitate " (Buxtorf and 
Calvin). There had been a time, prior to the experience of trouble here recorded, in 
which the writer had enjoyed comparative rest tor a while. Some such interval of 
quiet is named in 2 Sam. vii. 1 (see also 2 Sam. xiii. 14, 15). And while he was 
calm and prosperous, he began to reckon securely on the future. He said, " I shall 
never be moved." We have no reason to think this was a sinful self-security, as one 
expositor intimates ; for in the text we are told that David attributed his ease to God'i 
good grace and favour. But, not unnaturally, he took it for granted that such quiet 
would last. God had made his " mountain " of prosperity to stand so firmly that it 
did not then seem as if he would again be seriously disturbed. Note : There is not 
only a sinful self-security into which the saints may fall for a while, but there is alsa 
a, thoughtless assumption which may fasten on us in times of ease, that things will 
remain calm and smooth. There is danger in this, however, if not sin. And it is mors 
than likely that God will send us something to disturb our treacherous calm. Hence— 

II. Second stage: trouble. (Ver. 7, latter part.) The references in the 
psalm show us what this trouble was; we can scarcely question that it was some 
dangerous illness, in which his life was very seriously threatened (of. vers. 2, 3, 8, 9). 
And he attributed this illness to, or at least he associated it with, the "hiding of God's 
face." There is no necessary connection between these two. If, indeed, spiritual 
pride and a careless walk have sullied our life, there will be a time of mental darkness 
and serious spiritual depression afterwards. And not only so ; but there are some 
diseases in which equanimity is so perturbed that spiritual distress may attend on 
bodily weakness through unhingement of the nervous system; and, subjectively, the 
effect may be as if God's face were hidden. The connection of bodily suffering with 
mental gloom was not understood in David's time, nor indeed till very recently. 
In the lives of Brainerd and other saints of their day, it is clear that a morbid intro- 
spection led them to associate the depression caused by fluctuating bodily health with 
corresponding spiritual ill. But we ought now to understand better both the laws of 
health and the love of God. So far from bodily affliction biing a sign of " the hiding 
of God's face," God himself is never nearer, and his love is never more tender, than 
in our times of suffering and distress. A dear friend who was seriously ill said to 
the writer one day, " Oh 1 I'm so weak, I cannot think, I cannot even pray I " We 
replied, '' Your little Ada was very ill some time ago, was she not? " " Very." " Was 
she not too ill to speak to you ? " " Yes." " Did you love her less because she could 
not speak to youV" " Nol I think I loved her more, if there was any difference." 
" Just so," was the reply. " Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth 
them that fear him." We must never associate trouble and sickness, pei- se, with " the 
hiding of God's face." i But David's trouble, and his views thereof, led to the — 

III. Third stage: prayer. And the prayer was woeful indeed. He thought he 
was going down to the grave — to Sheol (Hebrew), to Hades (LXX.), i.e. to the dim and 
drear underworld of the departed.* There are three views of the state immediately 

' In the second half of the fifth verse, weeping is personified, and represented by the 
figure of a wanderer, who leaves, in the morning, the lodging into which he had entered 
the preceding evening. After him, another guest arrives, viz. joy (Hensstenberg). 

' See the remarks of the present writer on Rev. i. 18, in that volume of the ' Pulpit 
Commentary.' 



PS. XM. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 223 

after death, which is intended by the terma above named, which carry with them no 
moral significance, unless such moral significance is conveyed by the connection in 
which they stand. "Sheol" denotes the realm of departed souls, looked at as the 
all-demanding world. "Hades" denotes the realm of departed souls, looked at as the 
anknown region. To the pagan world, Hades was all dark, and no light beyond. To 
the Hebrews it was a dim, shadowy realm, with light awaiting the righteous in the 
morning (of. Pss. xvii. 15 ; xlix. 14). To the Christian it is neither dark nor 
dim, but something " very far better " — it is being " with Christ." Hence it follows 
that such a moan as that in ver. 9 would be utterly out of place now ; " dying " to a 
believer is not "going down to the pit," and ought not to be thought of as such. 
The tenth verse can never be inappropriate. But note : 1. Times of anxiety and 
trouble often bring out agonizing prayer. 2. We may pour forth all our agonies 
before God. We speak to One who will never misunderstand, and who will do for 
us "above all that we ask or think." Hence we are not surprised to see the psalmist 
at a — 

IV. Fourth stage : eecoveey.* (Ver. 11 ; also ver. 1, " Thou hast lifted me 
up ; " ' ver. 'I, " Thou hast healed me.") The psalmist was i estored, and permitted 
again to sing of recovering mercy. Note: Whatever means may be used in sickness, 
it is only by the blessing of God thereon that they are efficacious. Therefore he 
should be praised for his goodness and loving-kindness therein. 

V. Fifth staqb : THANKsaiviso and peaise. (Ver. 5.) When the trouble is 
over, what seemed so prolonged a period before dwindles in the review to " a moment." 
There is a beautiful antithesis, moreover, in the fifth verse, which our Revisers have 
too cautiously put in the margin, " His anger is but for a moment ; his favour is for 
a lifetime." Bishop Perowne says, " n';n seems here to be used of duration of life, 
though it would be difficult to support the usage." ' But even if the word may not 
be used of the duration of life, surely it is used of life in reference to its continuous- 
ness, as in Pss. xxi. 6 and Ixiii. 6 ; and so is in complete antithesis to " a moment." 
We should render the text, " For a moment in his anger, life in his favour." (Even 
here, however, we must beware of always associating sickness with the anger of God.) 
How gloriously true it is, " He will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger 
for ever " (Ps. ciii. 9, 10 ; Isa. Ivii. 16 — 18) ! We may not only praise God that our 
joys vastly outnumber our sorrows, but also that ofttimes our sorrows become the 
greatest mercies of all. Thus we are brought in thought to the — 

VL Sixth stage : vow. (Ver. 12,* " Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee 
for ever.") Many illustrations are to be found in the Word of God, of vows following 
on the reception of special mercies from him (Gen. xxviii. 20 — 22 ; 1 Sam. i. 11 ; 
PsB, cxvL, oxxxii. 2). Note : At each instance of signal mercy in life, there should be 
as signal a repetition of our consecration vows. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — God's chastening hand. It is written, "No cfaastening for the 
present seemetb to be joyous, but grievous : nevertheless afterward it yieldeth the 
peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby " (Heb. xii. 11). 
This psalm teaches how we may reap much good from the chastening of sickness. 

L The first thing is to acknowledge God's hand. The heathen may be in doubt ; 
they may question whether it is " a chance " or the doing of God when great evil 
comes (1 Sam. vi. 9) ; but it ought not to be so with us. Behind the things seen, and 
all the causes we can trace, we should see the hand of God. " Thou hast lifted me 
up." What a blessed change this thought effects! It is like light breaking in on the 
darkness, and the sense of a loving presence bringing hope to our hearts in trouble. 

II. Again, we should confess God's mbeoy. However bad our case may be, it 

' Both terms in ver. 11 ('ISpa and ^'inn) convey the thought of a more demonstrative 
emotion than is usual now in such cases. 

' " Hast drawn me up, as out of a dunge-m " (Eogers). 

• It is questionable whether the word ni^D does not refer to the glory of God ; if so 
the word " my" is redundant and misleading (see Perowne and Hengstenberg hereon). 

* "If they weigh his anger and his /auoar in an equal balance, they will always find 
it verified, that while the furmei- is but for a moment, the latter continues to the end of 
life " (Calvin ; also see Dr. Green and Eirkpatrick hereon). 



224 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxx 1—12. 

might be worse. "Wherefore doth a living man complain — a man for the punishment 
of his sins? " (Lam. iii. 39 ; of. Micah vii. 9). Besides, there are alleviations. We meet 
with kindness and sympathy ; we are cheered by the ministry of loving friends; we 
have the teaching and experiences of other sufferers open to us in books ; above all, we 
have the consolations of our holy religion. 

III. Again, it is meet that we should seek to know God's will. He does not act 
from pasision or caprice. He has a purpose, and his purpose must be worthy of himself, 
as well as benign and gracious toward us. We know as a general truth that " the will 
of God is our sanctification " (1 Thess. iv. 3). But we should inquire, besides, as to 
what special end God may have in view in the particular trial that has come to us. It 
may be he wishes to teach us the brevity of life. " Work, therefore, while it is called 
to-day " (John ix. 4). Or his object may be to humble our hearts and to quicken our 
sympathies with others. " Look not, therefore, on your own things, but look also on 
the things of others " (Phil. ii. 4). Or his purpose mav be to loosen us from earthly 
things, and to bind us more closely to himself as our Saviour and our God. " Little 
children, keep yourselves Irum idols" (1 John v. 21). In any case, like Job, let us 
say, " That which I see not teach thou me : if I have done iniquity, I will do no 
more " (Job xxxiv. 32 ; of. Josh. vii. 6). 

IV. Again, we should pray that we may be able to straBBNDEB ottrselte8 wholly 
TO God. " The hardest, the severest, the last lesson which man has to learn upon 
this earth is submission to the will of God. It is the hardest lesson, because to our 
blinded eyesight it often seems a cruel will. It is the severest, because it can be only 
taught by the blighting of much that lias been most dear; it is the last lesson, because 
when a man has learned that, he is fit to be transplanted from a world of wilfulness to 
a world in which one will alone is loved and done. All that saintly experience ever 
had to teach resolves itself into this — the lesson how to say affectionately, "Not as I 
will, but as thou wilt " (F, W. Robertson). When we have learned this lesson, then 
we are able to see with thankfulness and joy that God's holiness and love are one 
(ver. 4), Besides, we have reached a height which, looking before and after, we recog- 
nize the gracious dealings of God with us all through, and are able to say that it was 
good for us to have been afflicted (vers. 6 — 12). Perhaps, like the psalmist, we may 
have been falling into carnal security. We have said to ourselves, " I shall never be 
moved." Our presumption has brought upon us chastisement. We presumed upon 
our health, and God sent sickness ; we presumed upon our friends and lovers, and God 
has put them far from us ; we presumed upon our reputation and worldly comforts, 
and God has brought us low ; we presumed upon our religious faith and privileges, and 
God has hid his face from us, and taught us that we must rely only on himself. Our 
trials have moved us to prayer (vers. 8 — 10) ; our prayer has brought us help and 
comfort from God (ver. 11), and now with renewed hope and joy we can sing God's 
praise (ver. 12). — W. F. 

Ver. 4. — The holiness of Ohrist. We may apply these words to Christ. We should 
" give thanks at the remembrance of his holiness " as — 

I. Gloriously independent. The lioliness of the creature is derived. It is not 
by will, ur by effort, or by discipline as something that has been wrought out by 
himself; it is of God. But the holiness of Christ was his own ; it was essential to his 
beiug ; it was the outshining of the glory that he had from eternity (Isa. vi. 3 ; John 
xii. 41). 

II. Absolutely pekfeot. Thank God, there have been, and there are, good men 
upon earth ; but none of them is perfect. None is good from the first ; none is wholly 
and always good. The holiness of the best is not only derived, but imperfect. This 
is the confession of every one that is godly when coming before God. But the holiness 
of Ohrist was perfect. Nothing could be added to it— nothing higher could be con- 
ceived. In this respect he stands alone, the first, and the last, and the only one, in 
human likeness, who had kept the Law perfectly, and who could say, in the face of 
enemies and of friends, " Which of you convinceth me of sin ? " (John viii. 46). 

III. Inviolably pubb. Some may seem pure because they have not been tried. 
But Christ was subjected to the severest trials and temptations ; yet his holy soul was 
uever stained by sin. He was born without sin (Luke i. 35); he lived in an evil 



P8. XXX. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSA . MS. 225 

world without sin (1 John iii. 5) ; he died without sin (Heb. ix. 14). " Such an High 
Priest became us " (Heb. vii. 26). 

IV. Eternally beautiful. We read of " the beauty of holiness," and it is the 
supreme and perlect beauty of- ohaiaoter. 1. Challenges our admiration. 2. Inspires 
our confidence. 3. Commands our love. Christ's holiness is not against us, but for 
us. It does not repel, but attract ; it shows us what we ought to be, and thus humbles 
us under a sense of our sins ; it shows us what we may become, and thus raises our 
hopes to heaven. It is because of his holiness he is fitted to be our Saviour. He not 
only perfectly represents God to man, hut also man to God. Never was it more 
needful than in our day to remember Christ's holiness. Men are ready enough to 
si'eak of Christ's truth, Christ's goodness, Clirist's self-sacrifice, and so forth; but few 
speak of his holiness. But in the Old Testament and the New holiness has a first 
place. Our Lord addressed God as " Holy Father " (John xvii. 11). He has taught 
us that without holiness no one shall see God ; aod he, and he alone, reveals to us the 
way whereby we who are simiers may cleanse ourselves from all fllthiness of the flesh 
and spirit, and perlect holiness in God's fear. It is as we become holy that we grow 
up into Christ, to the stature of the perfect man. It is as we are holy that we can best 
serve Christ here, and sing his praise for ever (1 Pet. 1. 15 ; ii. 5 ; Kev. iv. 8 ; xiv. 3). 
— W. F. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — Th« ehangei and consolations of life. I. The changes or lifb. 
Health may give place to sickness, prosperity to adversity, joy to sorrow. To-day we 
may be lifted up and rejoicing in God's favour, to-morrow we may be cast down and in 
trouble because God is hiding his face from us. There are two things to be guarded 
against, ^iist, presumption (ver. 6); next, despair. Come what will, we must cling 
to God (vers. 9, 10). 

II. The consolations of life. 1. All changes are under the control of God. 
2. That God's help is always available. Nothing can really prevent us from enjoying 
God's presence, but our own sin. 3. That the end of the Lord is merciful. The 
blessing will surely come to those who wait for it. " Anger " will give place to 
" favour ; " the pain of the " moment " will be forgotten in the joy ol renewed " life " 
and the ushering in of the glad eternal " day." The end is " praise." — W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — The mercy of Ood. This psalm composed after recovery from some 
chastisement for sin, which had very nearly proved fatal. He praises God for lifting 
him up out of it, and calls upon others of a similar experience to join him in his 
thanksgiving. 

I. He celebrates with jot the mbrot of God to him. 1. Sis recovery had 
put an end to the malicious exultation of his foes. (Ver. 1.) Wicked men rejoice in 
the downfall and calamity of the good ; they accept it as a sign of hypocrisy and of 
the approaching downfall of goodness and the good cause. And this was why the 
psalmist rejoiced that in his case they had been disappointed. We Bympathize in the 
success of the cause that is dearest to our heart — the good with the good ; the bad with 
the bad. 2. God had healed him of the sin which caused the chastisement. (Ver, 2.) 
What the instance of the sin was may be seen in the sixth verse — overweening pre- 
sumption and pride, produced by prosperity. It was that which threatened his safety, 
his very life ; and it imperils the safety of all who are guilty of it. " Pride goeth 
before destruction," etc. His faults nothing as compared to virtues. And in being 
healed of the sin he was restored and lifted back to life. 3. Ood had removed also the 
chastisement of his sin. (Ver. 3.) It would not have been good to remove the 
chastisement till it had wrought repentance and brought him humility and truit 
and watchfulness. God always removes the sin before he takes away the chastise- 
ment. 

II. He uses his own experience as a lesson of trust to others. (Vers. 4, 6.) 
1. Sympathy with men and gratitude to Ood both teach us to do this. Others who 
were then suffering what he had suffered were encouraged to trust in the goodness of 
God. But the special ground for praise here insisted on is : 2. That the dark expe- 
riences of the righteous are transient, like the tears of a night; hut their bright 
experiencts as quickly return as the morning after the niyht. (Ver. 6.) Long-continued 

PSALMS 



22« 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. XXXI. 1 — 24, 



Borrow kills ; joy il the life-giver which God sends when sorrow has brought us low 
The sorrow of the world worketh death, but godly sorrow life. — 8. 

Vers. 6 — 12. — Vain confidence. "And in my prosperity I said, I shall never b* 
moved," etc. Three stages here represented in the life of a good man. 

I. Worldly peosperitt a sboueitt. "In my prosperity I said, I shall never 
be moved." 1. We my this in youth. All our castles in the air, we think, are built 
upon mountains. We think we can become anything and achieve anything we please, 
2. We say this before we know our sinfulness. The ways of the world harden our 
hearts about our sins. Success in life and the means we employ to reach it will often 
harden the conscience. Money, luxury, praise, are dieadful things to blind man to 
their real character and state before God. 

II. The sense of danger and teoublb. 1. God hides his face. We, in our vain 
confidence, think it is God that has made our mountain to stand strong — till he hides 
his face, till a great black cloud (our sins) comes between us and God. This phraie, 
though often misapplied, expresses a very real fact. It is the blackness of darkness to 
many a terror-stricken sinner. 2. The terrors of death. Of death, natural and spiritual, 
get hold of us. The terror of death, natural and spiritual, is to be forsaken of God in 
it. This dreadful moment has come to nearly all good men. Some men never get 
beyond this second stage of life. 

IIL Eestoration to ebal peospebitt and skouritt. 1. The prosperity of th« 
believtr is real prosperity. It is the prosperity of the soul ; it is prosperity from &od, 
and not from man ; it is lasting, secure prosperity. 2. Ood is the Author of the second 
and third stages of a good man's life. " Thou didst hide thy face ; . . . thou halt 
turned for me my mourning into dancing," etc. — S« 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXL 



Tru putim il, in the main, a cry for deliver- 
ance ont of pressing danger and trouble; 
but it ia interapeised with passages of a 
more cheerful tone, expressive of faith and 
confidence (vers. 5—8, 14, 15) ; and it winds 
up with a eulogy of Gk>d's goodness (vers. 
19 — 22), and an exhortation to the saints 
of God to "be strong," and trust in him. 
The title declares it to be David's ; and it 
both breathes his spirit, and has many of hit 
tnrns of expression. It has been thought 
to I>elong to the period of his early persecu- 
tion by Saul ; but, on the whole, it seems 
rather suggestive of the later period of 
trouble connected with the rebellion of 
Absalom. Dr. Kay divides it into three 
main portions : (1) vers. 1 — 13 ; (2) vers. 
14—18 ; and (3) vers. 19—24 ; but part i. 
might be further subdivided into tliree, 
and part ii. into two portioL j. The psalm 
thus falls into six divisions: part i. (vers. 
1 — 4), prayer; part ii. (vers. S — 8), self- 
encouragement ; part iii. (vers. 9 — 13), 
causes of his trouble ; part. iv. (vers. 14— 
18), profession of faith and prayer: part v. 



(vers. 19 — 22), praise of God's goodnes; 
part vi. (vers. 23, 24), exhortation to th« 
people to praise God. 

Ver. 1. — ^In thee, Lord, do I put my 
trust. If prayer to God for aid in a special 
time of trouble is the main object of the 
psalm, the expression of full trust in God 
is a secondary object, and is maintained 
throughout (see vers. 3—8, 14, 19—21, 24). 
Notwithstanding the extremity of hii 
danger, his belief is firm in the coming 
overtlirow of liis enemies, and in his own 
deliverance and restoration. Let me nevet 
be ashamed (comp. ver. 17, where the idea 
is expanded). David's enemies having com* 
to an open rupture with him, and appealed 
to arms (2 Sam. xv. 10—12 ; xvii. 24—26), 
one party or the other must of necessity be 
put to siiaine. Here he prays that it may 
not be himself; in ver. 17 he goes a step 
further, and asks that the shame may faU 
upon his enemies. - Deliver me in thy 
righteousness. Seeing that my cause is the 
righteous one. 

Ver. 2. — Bow down thine ear to me j or, 
incline thine ear to me, as the same plirase 
is translated in Ps. Izxi. 2. Deliver me 
speedily. Not doubting of deliverance, he 
makes his request for speedy deliverance 
(comp. Pss. xxxviii. 22 ; xl. 17 ; Ixx. 1 j 
Ixxi. 12, etc.). Be thou my strong Bock, for 



f 8. XXXI. 1 — 24.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



227 



an House of defence to saye me ; rather, as 
in the Kevised Version, Be thou to me a 
strong Book, an House of defence, etc. (comp. 
Ps. xviii 2), 

Ver. 3. — For thou art my Eock ; or, my cliff 
('j;'?D, not nil). And my Fortress. David 
prays God to be his Bock and Fortreas in tlie 
future, because he has always looked to him 
aa his Bock and Fortress in the past. Faith 
establishes a claim to have Its anticipations 
made good. Therefore for thy Name's sake 
lead me, and guide me. Metaplioru dropped, 
and God ia simply asked for guidance and 
direction. In the sbuggle between Absalom 
and David more depended upon wise counsel 
than upon mere force (2 Sam. xv. 31 — 37 ; 
iTi. 15—23 : xvii. 5—23). 

Yer. 4. — ^Fnll me out of the net that they 
have laid priyily for me. Absalom let a 
trap for David when he asked permission 
to go to Hebron for the purpose of paying 
a vow, whereas his objeot was to get pos- 
session of a strongly fortified city (2 Sam. 
XV. 7 — 9). It was, perhaps, by a device of 
Ahlthophel's that David was induced to quit 
Jerusalem and go into exile. For thou 
art my Strength (comp. Fss. xviii. 1 ; xix. 
15 ; xxviii. 1, 7, 8, etc.). 

Ver. 5. — Into thine hand I oommit my 
spirit. Our Lord's adoption of these words, 
and application of them to himself and his 
own departure from earth, have given them 
a special sacredness beyond that which 
attaches to Scripture generally. At the 
same time, they have impressed on them a 
new meaning, since David was not think- 
ing of a final committal of his soul, as 
distinct from his body, into the hands of 
the Creator, but only intended solemnly to 
eommit himself, both soul and body, into 
the Divine keeping, to be preserved from 
the attacks of his enemies. Thou hast 
redeemed me, Lord God of truth ; or, thou 
halt delivered me, Lord God of truth. It 
is redemption in the general sense of 
"deliverance from peril," not redemption 
from sin, of which the psalmist speaks. 
David, having frequently expeiienced such 
deliverance in the past, is emboldened to 
expect now another deliverance. 

Ver. 6. — I have hated them that regard 
lying vanities. By "lying vanities" are 
meant idolatrous practices, or possibly such 
superstitious usages as recourse to witch- 
craft and divination. (For David's hatred 
of such persons as are here glanced at, see 
Ps. xxvi. 5.) But I trust in the Lord. Who 
is the direct opposite of all "lying vanities," 
being at once Almighty, and the " God of 
truth " (ver. 5). 

Ver. 7. — I will he glad and rejoioe in thy 
mercy. Anticipating the " mercy " which 
he has craved (vers. 2—4), the psalrnist 
determines to " be glad and rejoice in it." 



For thou hast considered my trouble. When 
God looks upon trouble and considers it, 
he is sure to ' cnmpas^ionate the sufferer, 
and to grant him some relief. Thou hast 
known my soul in adversities (comp. Ps. i. 
6, "The Lord knoweth the way of the 
righteous "). God is said to "know" those 
on whom he looks with approval. 

Ver. 8. — And hast not shut me up into the 
hand of the enemy ; i.e, " hast not delivered 
me up, without chance of escape, into the 
hands of my enemies" (comp. I Sam. xxiii. 
12). Thou hast set my feet in a large room. 
Given me, i.e., plenty of space and freedom 
for action ; not confined me, nor cramped 
me, nor hindered me in any way (comp. 
Pss. iv. 1; xviiL 36). Having cheered 
himself with the enumeration of these 
grounds of encouragement (vers. 5 — 8), the 
psalmist again returns to prayer. 

Ver. 9. — Have mercy upon me, Lord, 
for I am in trouble. The psalmist follows 
up his prayer for mercy by an exposition of 
his need of mercy. He is in trouble, in sore 
trouble — "hard pressed," as Hengstenberg 
translates — distressed both in mind and 
body. Mine eye is consumed with grief 
(comp. Ps. vi. 7, where the expression is 
almost identical). The grief intended is 
" that produced by provocation or spiteful 
treatment " (Kay). It causes him to weep 
so mcs^h that his eye is well-nigh " con- 
sumed" or "eaten away." Yea, my soul 
and my belly. Some explain this as mean- 
ing simply " my soul and my body " (Heng- 
stenberg, Alexander, Bevised Version); 
but others regard the " belly " as denoting 
" the very centre of physical life and of the 
Votions " (comp. Job xxxii. 19). 

Ver. 10. — For my life is spent with grief, 
and my years with sighing. The psalmist* i 
grief is of old standing. It dates from the 
time of his great sin (2 Sam. xi. 4 — 17X 
which is thought to have preceded the 
revolt of Absalom by the space of twelve 
years. This sin necessitated a lifelong 
repentance (Pss. xxxviii. 17; li. 3, etc). 
My strength fail.,ta because of mine iniquity. 
Other causes had, uo doubt, contributed to 
produce the profound depression of the 
psalmist at this period, but none was of 
equal force with this (comp. Pss. xxxviii. 
8—10; li. 1—14, etc.). It caused his 
strength to fail utterly, and led to com- 
plete prostration both of mind and body. Ani 
my bones are consumed; t.e. tacked with 
pain, as though they were being gnawed 
away. 

Ver. 11. — I was a reproach among all 
mine enemies; rather, I am become m 
reproach (Kay, Bevised Version). The 
psalmist complains of the loss of his repu- 
tation. Absalom's rebellion was preceded 
by a long course of calumnious accusation 



223 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[pa. XXXI. 1^ 24 



of David (2 Sam. xv. 1 — 4), whereby melius 
heartB were stolen away from him, and his 
character blackened. His enemies made 
the moot of these ill reports, and turned 
them to his reproach (comp. Ps. Ixix. 18 — 
20). But especially among my neighbonrs. 
Not that they reproached him more than 
others, but that he felt their reproachei 
more keenly. And a fear to mine aocinaint- 
anoe. His acquaintances were afraid of 
being recognized as such, and involved in 
his ill repute. They that did see me with- 
out ; «.«. " out of doors," or " in the street." 
Pled from me. Avoided my contact, not 
wishing to be seen with me (oomp. Ps. 
Ixxzvlii. 8). 

Yer. 12. — I am forgotten as a dead man 
out of mind (comp. Ps. Ixxxviii. 5). I am 
like a broken vessel. Of no value to any 
one J only fit to be thrown away. 

Ver. 13. — For I have heard the slander of 
many (see the comment on ver. 11). The 
calumnies circuluted against him had 
reached David's ears, and these had so 
affected him that he felt as described in the 
preceding verse. Fear was on every side, 
while they took counsel together against 
me. Fear Was "on every side" — in his 
own heart, and in the hearts of all his friends 
— when it came to the pniut of his enemies 
holding a formal council, in which the 
matter discussed was the best mode of 
proceeding against him to take away his 
Ufe. The particulars of such a council are 
given in 2 Sam. xvii. 1 — 14. They devised 
to take away my life. That David's life 
was souglit is apparent from the last clause 
of ver. 2, " I will smite the king only." 

Ver. 14. — But I trusted in thee, Lord. 
Having fully represented the miserable 
condition to which he is reduced (vers. 
9 — 13), David now returns to expiessions of 
trust in God, and to earnest piayer to him 
(oomp. ver. 6). I said, Thou art my God ; 
rather, I have said. In all my sufferings, 
dangers, and difficulties, I have always 
clung to thee, and said, "Thou, and thou 
alone, art, and ever slialt be, my God." 

Ver. 15. — My times are in thy hand. 
"My times," i.e. "all the varied events, 
happy 01 sad, which make up the parti- 
coloured web of life " (Kay). Not one of 
them but is shaped by thee and ordered by 
thee. Deliver me from the band of mine 
enemies, and from them that persecute me 
(oomp. vers. 1, 2, 4). The great need under 
existing circumstances was deliverance. 
Absalom was looked for daily to " pass over 
Jordan, and all the men of Israel with 
him" (2 Sam. xvii. 24). A battle was 
imminent. If the day went against David, 
and his army was defeated, he would 
necessarily fall into the handi of his 
"enemies" and "persecutors," in whioh 



case he could not hope that they would 
spare his life (2 Sam. xvii. 2, 12). 

Ver. 16. — Make thy face to shine upon 
thy servant. This expression is first used 
in the blessing of Moses (Numb. vi. 25). 
Its intrinsic beauty and poetry recom- 
mended it to the psalmists, vrith whom it 
recurs frequently (comp. Pss. iv. 6; Ixvii. 
1; Ixxx. 5, 7, 19; cxix. 185). It may be 
regarded as equivalent to " Be thou favour- 
able and gracious unto thy servant." Save 
me for thy mereiei' sake; literally, $ave me 
in thy meroy. 

Ver. 17. — Let me not be ashamed, Lord 
(see the comment on ver. 1). For I have 
called upon thee. " I have," i.*., " been 
ever thy true worshipper." Even when I 
have sinned (ver. 10), my sins have not 
been "sins of unfaithfulness," but laiisea, 
sins of infirmity, unpremeditated yield ngs 
to temptation. Let the wicked be ashamed. 
Bring shame, i.e., upon those who are at 
once my enemies and thine — the wicke4 
and impenitent generally — and, among 
them on my present adversaries, those who 
are collected together to carry on war 
against me. And let them he silent in the 
grave ; or, in Sheol. Let a stop be put to 
their slanders (ver. 13) and lying speeches 
(ver. 18); let them be tiUneed by removal 
&om this world to the land of the departed. 

Ver. 18. — Let the lying lips he put to 
silence, which speak grievous things 
proudly and contemptuously against the 
righteous; rather, whioh speak arrogancy 
(comp. 1 Sam. ii. 3). The pride and in- 
solence of David's enemies is Btron.;ly 
noted in the Second Book of Samuel (see 
xvi. 7, 8; xvii. 1—3). 

Ver. 19. — Oh how great is thy goodness, 
whioh thou hast laid up for them that fear 
thee! Another transition. David turns 
from prayer to praise, and in the four next 
verses (vers. 19 — 22) eulogizes the goud- 
ness and mercy and marvellous loving- 
kindness of God, who has wrought glori- 
ously tor his people in the past, and haa 
further au ample store of mercies laid up 
for them in the future. Whioh thou hast 
wrought for them that trust in thee before 
the sons of men! God had wrought hia 
mercies for his own people, but in the sight 
of men generally, whether good or bad. 

Ver. 20. — Thon shalt hide (or, thou hidest) 
them in the secret of thy presence from the 
pride (rather, conspiracies') of man. Intense 
light forms as good a hiding-place as 
intense darkness. No vision can penetrate 
it. It is "too dazzling bright for mortal 
eye." Thus those whom God brings close 
to himself, and on whom he poura the light 
of his countenance, need no other protection. 
Their life is hid in God. Thon shalt keef 
them (or, thoa keepest them) secretly in a 



rs. xxzi. 1 — 2#.'] 



THE BOOK OF FSAr.MS. 



22tf 



pavilion from the strife of tongues. God 
keepa liis own in a "pavilion," or leafy 
arbour, a place of oooltiess and refreshment, 
far away from the " lying lips " (ver. 18) 
and slanderoui tongues (ver. 13) of the 
ungodly. 

Yer. 21. — Blessed be the Lord : for he hath 
■howed me his marvellous kindness in a 
strong city. The "strong city" has been 
explained as Ziklag (Delitzsch), or Maha- 
nuim (2 Sam. zvii. 24), but is probably as 
much a figure of speech as the " pavilion " 
of ver. 20. God has showed David his 
marvellous loving-kindness by giving him 
an assurance of absolute security. 

Ver. 22. — For I said in my haste ; 
rather, and I indeed had said in my haste 
(oomp. Fs, ozvi. 11). David's faitli was 
not so firmly fixed but that he yfta liable, 
from time to time, to a sudden access of 
fear (see 1 Sam. xxvii. 1 ; 2 Sam. xv. 14 ; Fs. 
xxxi. 13). He had said to God in his heart, 
on one such occasion, I am out off from 
before thine eyes ; i.e. be bad despaired and 
given himself up for lost. It is somewli;it 
forced to understand the words as meaning, 
"I am banished from the city where the 
ark is placed " (' Speaker's Commentary 'J. 
Nevertheless, thou heardest the voice of my 
lupplioations when I cried onto thee. God 



did not forsake his servant on account of 
this temporary failure of faith. No sooner 
did the psalmist rid himself of his extreme 
alarm, and turn once more to God in, 
prayir, than he was heard, and bis prayer 
answered. 

Ver. 23.— love ye the Lord, all ye his 
saints. The psulmiat winds up with a 
short burst of song, in which his heart goes 
out to others. He onlls upon all GoJ's 
saints to "love" him, on the ground of liia 
own experience, whiih is that the lord 
preserveth the faithful (literally, those who 
stand firm, Kay), and plentifully rewardeth 
the proud doer; i.e. visits with ample 
vengeance such as in their pride set them- 
selves against liim and against his people. 

Ver. 24. — Be of good courage (see the 
comment on Ps. xxvii. 14). And he (it. 
6'hI) shall strengthen your heart. "To 
till >se who have it shall be given." If they 
did their belt to "be of good cour.ige" 
when danger and ditiiculty assailed them, 
then God vronld give them supernfitural 
aid, strengthening their hearts with liia 
gracious favour. All ye that hope in the 
Lord ; literally, all ye that hope for the Lord ; 
i.e. that hope for his help— that wait on 
him (see Job xiv. 14 ; and comp. Fs. xxxiii. 
18, 22), and look to him m your Deliveisfc 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ver. S.—A prayer for guidance, " For thy Name's sake ... guide me." Ood 
leads men, whether tliey ask him or not. He guides their lives, though they may not 
know him — even may deny his very existence. Belshazzar (Dan. v. 23, " in whose 
hand," etc.). Cyrus (Isa. xlv. 1 — 5). Heathen nations (Acts xvii. 26, 27). Does 
this make such a prayer as the text superfluous ? On the contrary, it is the very 
reason for it. God's guidance of men without their knowledge, or even against their 
will, is very different from his guidance of those who ask it for his Name's sake. (As 
you speak of " driving a horse," or " driving a friend " who asks a seat by your side.) 
Consider the meaning and the plea of the psalmist's prayer. 

I. What does this pbateb abk fob? In other words, how can God grant it? 
L £y the leading of his providence. Q.d. : his unfailing, unerring, unlimited control 
of all events and creatures, great or small. The old-fashioned phrase, " particular 
providence," is often strongly objected to ; rightly, if it be taken to mean some spioial 
interference with the course of things — here, not there; now, not then ; a touch to the 
helm occasionally, not the firm hand never taken off it. But remember, what cleverest 
people (busy with wide generalizations and laws) are most apt to forget — that all reality 
M particulwr, A pound of iron weighs a pound because each atom of iron is precisely 
like every other, and obeys exactly the same force. The harvest ripens because the 
same life is working in every several grain. A lifetime is not made up of weeks and 
years, but breaths and heart-beats. We must not liken God's knowledge to ours. 
We are compelled to store ours in abstract ideas, names, laws, etc., just as we arrang* 
books on shelves, with titles on their back— useless else. Divine knowledge, just 
because infinite, must take in every movement of every atom. Inconceivable I But 
not more inconceivable than that God has set going movements at the rate of hundreds 
afmillicmsof millions \n a second, which keep time throughout the universe. And 
what his power has called into being and sustains, and his knowledge surveys, hia 
wisdom and goodness guide. This, at once deepest truth and plain common sense, it 
the Bible doctrine of providence. "He rrmketh grass to grow on the mountains"— 



230 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxi. 1- 24, 

each blade from itg own root. Not a bird falls to the earth without our heavenly 
Father, " The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord " (Ps. czszix. 3, 9, 10). 2. 
By his Word. (2 Tim. iii. 15 ; Ps. cxix. 105.) What is a lamp for? To give light. 
How do I know that light is light? Simply by its shining. Light is its own evidence. 
If a lamp cannot be kindled, or, being kindled, refuses to burn, no argument will 
persuade you that it is a good lamp. If it burns bright and steady, shedding a clear 
light on the page you read, the work you handle, the path you walk in, no argument 
will persuade you that it is not a good lamp. Bo with God's Word. Men may dispute 
as they please about inspiration, pile up muuntaiiis of criticism, publish every few 
years a new work that is to finally dispose of the Bible ; they cannot stop the light from 
shining. This main fact remains solid, uuanswerable, that a life guided by this light 
rises to a level, gains a purity, strength, beauty, hopeful courage, and calm settled 
peace not otherwise attainable. The light, observe, not of mere precept. Pagan 
teachers — ^Buddha, Confucius, Seneca, and I know not how many, have given noble and 
lofty precepts, enabling men to say, with the old Roman poet, "I see and approve what 
is good, though I practise what is bad." But only from the Bible shines, along with 
precept, the light of pardon and the light of promise (1 John ii. 12, 25). Against 
the sceptics' learning and logic the plain Christian sets his experience. If you could 
find a grey-haired Christian saying, " I have framed my life according to the Bible, and 
/ loish I had not ; I have lived a life of prayer to God, and trust in Jesus as my 
Saviour, and obedience to his Word, and if I could begin again, I would be wiser," — 
then you would at least have something to set against the lives ruined by despising 
the Bible, and flinging faith and prayer away. But the testimony is the other way 
(Pss. cxix. 165 ; xix. 11 ; 2 Tim. It. 6—8). 3. By his Spirit. (John xiv. 13 ; Rom. 
viii. 14.) The Bible itself affords no countenance to the idea that life can be rightly 
guided by the written Word alone, severed from the living presence and personal 
teaching of the Holy Spirit. For three plain reasons. A rightly guided life means : (1) 
A life of faitli in Christ ; and this is the Holy Spirit's gift and work (Matt. xvi. 17). 
(2) A life of prayer; and the Holy Spirit is at once the Answer to prayer and the 
Inspirer of prayer (Luke xi. 13 ; Jude 20). (3) The true meaning of Scripture is hidden 
from an unspiritual mind (1 Cor. ii. 14). 

II. What ib the force op the plea hbeb ueoed— "For thy Name's sake"? 
If one may venture to put it so plainly, it is putting &od on his honour to fulfil his 
promises. The "Name" of God stands for all that he has made known to us of 
himself. Especially it includes his words of promise, because here his faithfulness 
stands pledged. Not that God promises to grant every request, wise or foolish, right 
or wrong. (Who would dare to pray ?) But he does promise to attend to our prayer — 
to give good things to those who ask. He has filled the Bible with encouragements 
and commands to pray, and with examples of prayer answered. As our Lord Jesus is 
himself the full Revelation of the Father, so he authorizes us to pray in his Name (John 
xiv. 13, 14). 

Conclusion. Of all prayers there is none we need to offer more earnestly, more 
constantly. 1. Without OocPs guidance we shall miss our way. A life at the mercy 
of passion, expediency, fashion, fancy, is like a rudderless ship. Especially in trouble 
and temptation. The traveller in fair, calm weather may think the mountain-track is 
plain enough without a guide ; but the snowstorm comes on, and he is lost. 2. If 
Ood be not your Guide, you will have some other. Conloimity to the world is practical 
submission to the enemy of souls (Eph. ii. 2, 3. " He who bows not to him has 
bowed to me," Byron's ' Cain '). Like a ship that has taken on board a false pilot, 
who steers her on the quicksand. 3. Life is a journey to be taken hut once. The 
wrong path cannot be retraced. 

Ver. 15. — Qod's sovereign will. " My times are in thy hand." " The stream cannot 
rise higher than its source." If this be true in the spiritual as in the material world, 
then the feelings, desires, trust, which rise so mightily to God in this psalm, and 
throughout the Book of Psalms, must have their fountain in God. The Psalter is the 
mouthpiece of the Bible, uttering the testimony of experience, not fictitious, but real, 
living, personal experience — if such ever was ; the genuine outcome of human heart* j 
yet wiihal superhuman. Divine; the hreath of God's own Spirit (Rom. viii. 26). 



PS. XXXI. 1—24.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 231 



I. HbKB 18 THE EBOOQNITION OF A DiVINB OUIDANOK AND PDJPOSE IN BACH 

one's life. " My times ; " q.d. the daily circumstances, and whole plan and arrange- 
ment of my life; the number of Its days and years, birth and death, seasons of joy and 
sorrow, strength and weakness, prosperity and adversity (Bccles. iii. 1 — 8). Scripture 
is full of examples of this special training. Abraham, Joseph, John the Baptist (at life 
seemingly broken off prematurely), S£. Paul. In each child of God there is a character 
to be formed, fruit ripened, an end attained. 

IL Perfect trust in God's wisdom, power, love. These words, "my" and 
" thy," express conscious personal relation to God. Personal trust forms the most 
sacred relation between man and man — the basis and cement of human society. It is 
the glory of the Bible, distinguishing its teaching from all human systems, that it 
rests religion on this personal trust. We are saved by faith. We walk by faith. We 
love God because we trust him and believe his Word (1 John iv. 16, 19). Because the 
psalmist can say, " I trusted," etc. (ver. 14), he fears not to say, " My times are in thy 
hand; "and to add vers. 19, 20, 24. Note that from this psalm (ver. 5) our Saviour 
drew his dying prayer. 

in. Dutiful submission to God's sovbreion will. If God did not rule all 
things, he could rule nothing. Each life — yours, mine — with all its vicissitudes, has 
its place in his great plan. " No man liveth to himself." The calm happiness and 
triumph of faith is not merely submission to God's will when manifest, but willingness 
that he shall choose (Phil. i. 20 — 25 ; iv. 5 — 7, 11 — 13). Sometimes we are tempted 
to shrink from this full surrender, from half-unconscious fear that trial may be good 
for us, which God is too faithful and wise to spare us; as we might dread to call in 
the most skilful surgeon, lest he should say the diseased limb must come off. 

CoNOLUSioN. The text has a special application to (1) the young ; (2) those in the 
full activity of mid-life ; (3) those who have reached old age. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 24. — The saint rehearsing his experitnce of the great Protector's eare. There 
is no good reason to doubt that this is one of David's psalms. Its forms of expression 
bear the marks of his pen,' and the " undesigned coincidences " ' between it and the 
history of his life are both interesting and striking. The old interpreters supposed the 
psalm to belong to the time when David fled from Saul into the wilderness of Maon ; 
others attribute it to the time of his deliverance from being shut up in Eeilab, with 
which, indeed, it seems well to agree. While, in some respects, the psalm resembles 
others, yet, in others, it has features exclusively its own. Its title, according to the 
LXX., is, " For the end, a Psalm of David, of extreme fear " (iKVTdtreus). The Vulgate 
has pro extasi. Under such emotion, it is not to be wondered at if the verses bid 
defiance to all logical order. There is, however, beneath the surface an order which is 
full of helpful teaching, by which, when perceived, the beauty of the psalm will stand 
revealed, as otherwise it could not have been. This order we will seek carefully to 
follow and to expound. m • 

I. God's saintb mat be at times in extreme distress. The list of troubles 
here specified is an unusually long one. 1. A net is spread for David (ver. 4). 2. 
There is a design on his life (ver. 13). 3. Bands of men are conspiring together (ver. 
20 Hebrew). 4. His friends forget him (ver. 12). 6. His enemies are guilty of 
falsehood (ver. 18), reproach (ver. 11), slander (ver. 13). 6. Others unfeelingly flee 
from him (ver. 11). 7. He is in perplexity (ver. 9). 8. His strength faileth, Ms 
bones are consumed, because the consciousness of his own sin adds its bitterness to his 
woe (ver 10). 9. His alarm (Hebrew) is so great, that he regards his case as one 
deserted by God (ver. 22). Here, surely, is a list of woes longer than most men could 
reckon up. There are few against whom enemies would take so much trouble to plot! 
But David was in a high position, and therefore he was a mark to be shot at ! Note : 

' See Dr. Maolaren's 'Life of David,' etc., pp. 132, 133. 

• As pointed out by Mr. Fausset, ' H orsB Psalmiose, leots. u., v., xu. ; see (Jeifcies 

•Hours wiih the Bible.' iii 164, 165. 



232 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxi. 1— 24 

The higher our poiition, and the greater our usefulness, the more likely is it that Satan 
will aim at us with his fiery darts. The more we disturb him, the more he will 
disturb us. And, for wise and holy reasons, the Lord mayaUow a messenger of Satan 
to buffet 1 us. 

II, Even when in the lowest depths, there is no mistakino the saint foe 
A 8INNEB, the believer for an alien, the godly one" for a godless man. Scarce any one 
could have a longer list of woes to enumerate than David had, but yet the saint shines 
through all. 1. He knows wher* to flee for protection. (Ver. 1, Hebrew.) The wsy 
in which he still speaks to God as his God, his strong Bock, etc., is inexpressibly 
touching. " -Be thou my Eock, . . . because thou art my Bock," is a wonderfully tender 
appeal to the loving heart of God. Even in the densest darkness the loving child must 
clasp the Father's hand, and cry, " Father I " Yea, because of the darkness, and the 
denser it is, the louder and more piercing will be his cry. 2. He knows to whom he flees 
—even to One who has redeemed him (ver. 5). (For the Scripture usage of this word 
" redeemed," see Deut. ix. 26 ; xxi. 8 ; 1 Ghron. xvii. 21 ; Isa. xxix. 22 ; Jer. xxxi. 11 ; 
Micah vi. 4 ; Pss. cxxx. 8 ; xxv. 22 ; Hos. xiii. 14.) David was one who knew God, not 
only as a Deliverer from earthly calamity, but as a Bedeemer from sin. And he could 
well put in this as a plea on which to base his petitions. The richest evangelical 
form of this argument is given in Kom. v. 10 ; viii. 32. If God has taught us and 
drawn us by his Spirit to plead with him, that is the witness of the Spirit to the fact 
that we are redeemed out of the world. 3. He knows he may tell all hit woes to Ood, 
just as they are. It has been no small comfort to us in writing these homilies to note, 
again and again, how the psalmist told God everything, just as he felt it. This toe, 
too, may do, knowing that God will accept the prayer of faith and will bury all its 
faults. 4. He can absolutely leave all with Ood, not as one who finds it useless to 
contend with the inevitable, but as one who can implicitly trust his redeeming God. 
(1) All his times are in God's hand ; the entire ordering of them ; nothing will be 
neglected or overlooked. (2) He trusts his spirit^ in God's hands' (ver. 5); i.e. his 
inner self, the immortal part of his being, wherein he is made in the image of God. 
Note : Since we know God as our redeeming God, who has graciously promised to be 
ourg to the end, in our deepest sorrows, we may trust everything with him. 

ILL God's SAniTS can scaboelt end their moan ebe thbib woeds tubn to 
80HO. When the Spirit of God presides at the soul's keyboard, the sounds may at first 
be in the minor key, but they will not long continue so. The plaint will be a diminu- 
endo, and will be substituted by a crescendo of joyful song. Hence so many of the 
psalms which begin woefully end joyfully. There are three several mercies here 
recorded. 1. Deliverance. (Vers. 7, 8.) The narrow straits in which Uavid was hedged 
up gave way, and he had amplitude of room. And sooner or later, in his own time and 
way, God will deliver the righteous out of the hands of the wicked.* 2. Treasures of 
goodness laid up. (Ver. 9.) The thought of this evokes a very shout of praise, as well it 
may. Let the student compare the three expressions in ver. 4, " the net which they 
have laid privily ; " ver. 19, "goodness . . . laid up secretly ;" ver. 20, "Thou shalt 
keep them secretly." Is not the antithesis beautiful ? The wicked have their nets 
laid in secret. But God's secrecy of love outwits theirs. He hides the saints it the 
secret place of his " pavilion," and prepares for them in secret " treasures of goodness," 
to be brought forth in all their richness as occasion requires. Note : God will be 
bringing forth from his secret treasury of love to all eternity. 3. Marvellous kindness 
manifested ; and this in a btseiged (Heb. v. 21) city (cf. Ps. xxiii. 5). At the very 
moment foes were encamping round him, God ministered such rich loving-kindness as 
to bear him up and bring him through. So it will ever be. The moment of man's 
fiercest plots will be that of God's most vigilant care (Ps. cxxi, 4). And within the 
walls of the thickest dungeon God can minister richest supplies of heavenly food! 

' 2 Cor. xii. 7. Ko\a(pt(eiv is " to give a blow on the face," or mouth, or ear. 

' Canon Girdlestone, in his 'Old Testament Synonyms,' has an admirable ohapter on 
the Bible use of the words tt'sj and m, eh. iv. jjp. 92, et seq. 

' Our Saviour quoted, on the cross, the first half of ver. 5. On these sympathetio 
quotations, liom One who was in all points tempted like as we are, see our remarks on 
Ps. xxii. 

* On the petitions against enemies, in vers. 17, 18, see our remarks on Ps. xxviii. 4. 



PS. xxxL 1—24.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 233 



IV. SUOH EXPERIENOBB WILL LEAD THE BAINTB TO CALL ON THEIB FELLOW- 
BBLIEVEBB TO HOPE IN THE LORD, AND TO WAIT FOB HIM. (VetS. 23, 24.) The 

new experience of God's loving- kindness and care, which is born of Buch delirerances 
in answer to prayer, gives believers wondrous vantage-ground in exhorting others to 
put their whole trust in the Lord. Note : 1. It is an infinite mercy tbat God's provi- 
dential care has preserved to us these records of the struggles, the prayers, and the 
triumphs of his saints. 2. Those who have known the most trouble are those who 
can afterwards minister most comfort to those who are troubled (2 Cor. i. 3 — 6). 3. 
Let those who have known the depths of sorrow, and who have learnt how God can 
deliver, make their experience known to others (Ps. Ixvi. 16—20). 4. How abundant 
even now is God's recompense for his people's sorrows, when he thereby gives them 
such tastes of his love as they could not else have had, and then makes them " soni of 
consolation " I — C. 

Vers. 5, 15. — Duty and destiny. Let us place these two texts together, and we 
shall find that they become the more intelligible and the richer in instruction and 
comfort. 

I. OuB TIMES ABB FIXED BT GoD. We have no choice in the matter, no more thun 
as to when we should be born. God is Sovereign. It is his prerogative to settle all 
things that concern us. Whatever comes of prosperity or adversity, or joy or sorrow, 
is of his ordering. It is for him to rule, it is for ns to trust and to ohey. 

II. OnE 8PIBIT CAN ONLY BE COMMITTED TO GoD BT ODB OWN DEED. We are bee. 

When we act, we express the feelings of our hearts. To commit our spirit to Otoi is 
to surrender ourselves wholly and for ever to his will. It is only when we know and 
believe in God's love towards us, that we can joyously do this transcendent thing that 
will settle our destiny for time and for eternity. 

IIL It IB ONLY WHEN WE HAVE IN TRUTH COMMITTED OUR SPIRITS TO GoD, THAT WE 
CAN TAKE COMFORT FROM THE KNOWLEDGE THAT OUB TIMES ARE IN HIS HAND. We 

should be careful to put that first which should be first (Matt. vi. 33). When the 
most precious thing is safe, we need not be much concerned as to the lesser things. 
God has given us the greatest proof of his love, for he has redeemed us ; we can 
therefore with quiet hearts leave to him the ordering of all things that concern us 
{Bom. V. 9, 10). " Mv times are in thy hand ; " and it is there I would have placed 
them if I had the choice (2 Sam. xxiv. 14). " My times are in thy hand ; " then 
come what will of vicissitude and trial, nothing can befall me but what is of the 
ordering of God. " My times are in thy hand ; " therefore I will be content and not fret ; 
I will trust, and not be afraid ; I will work, and not be weary in well-doing. I will be 
patient and hope to the end, knowing that " all things work together for good to them 
that love God." " Into thy hands I commend my spirit." This I did at the first, when 
the Lord Jesus called me ; this I would do evermore during my earthly course, after 
the example of thy saints ; this I would do in the end, as our Lord himself has taught 
us.— W. P. 

Ver. 8. Opportunity. The young are eager for opportunities. Conscious of power, 

they fondly think that, if only a fair chance were to come, they would be sure to 
make a name for themselves. But they are often disappointed. Perhaps they say 
it is not their fault ; but unprejudiced onlookers see that, through lack of insight, 
decision, or perseverance, they have failed. They have let the tide, which, taken at 
the flood, would have led on to fortune, pass by. Life is full of possibilities. It is our 
wisdom to watch, to be on the alert, to make the most of opportunities. We must be 
willing to be-^in where we are free to begin, and to do the duty, however humble, that 
lies nearest to us, as weU as we are able. Honest work is the best training and 
preparation for »dvancement. Above all, we must have regard to the will and doinm 
of God. If we ask of him, he will give us light. If we wait upon him, he will let us 
know his will. If we do with our might what he gives us to do, he will enlarjie our 
opportunities. We may take the text to illustrate what God does for his servants in 
the way of opportunity. The "large room" may apply to— 

I. Cultivation op oiiaeaoteb. There may be circumstances which are unfavour- 
able. It is much more difficult for some, from their birth and surroundings, to be 



284 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [Ps. xxxi. 1—24 

good and to do good, than for others. Let us acknowledge God's love in -lacing us 
where we have free pla.v for our minds, and every help and inducement to follow the 
things which are good. We are not in the dark, but in the light ; we are n't confined, 
and straitened, but in the enjoyment of freedom ; we are not denied the use of air ana 
food and exercise, but have the use of all that is good and fitted to nourish our 
strength and virtue, that we may grow up unto the stature of the perfect man in 
Christ Jesus. 

II. Employment of talent. There may be some, as the poet suggests, to whom 
opportunity has not come. 

" Knowledge to theii eyes her ample page, 
Bich wit£ the spoils of time, did ne'er nnrolL" 

But it is not so with us. God has not only u;iyen us talents, but also provided a 
sphere for their rightful and beneficent use. There are ditterences as regard natural 
kbility; unto some it is one talent, unto others two or more. But there is no 
difference as to opportunity. The command is laid upon all to work; and God's 
commands imply opportunity to all who choose to obey. If we are willing, " the 
large room " will be given us. 

III. Incbeasikg usefulness. We are placed in such relationship to others that 
we cannot but influence them one way or another. Whether this influence be for 
good or for evil will mainly depend upon our character. God prepares his servants for 
the place and work he has for them to do. When the time comes, they find that 
difBculties give way — ^that " a large and effectual door " has been opened to them. 
But to every one, however humble, there is opportunity given of doing good and of 
being helpful to others. Never a day dawns but it brings its own duties. Woe to us 
if, like Dives, we fail to recognize the claims of the poor and needy 1 They who »re at 
our gate to-day, so that we can do them good if we will, may be to-morrow in 
" Abraham's bosom," and our opportunity gone for ever. 

IV. HlOHEB HONOUBB. It bas been said of the government of Napoleon that it was 
remarkable for opening a career to talent. In old France, society was so constituted 
that it was only the highborn and the rich, the classes and not the masses, that bad 
any chance. Under Napoleon all this was changed. Not only could a man hope to 
rise by his merits, but he also knew that he served a master who would rigidly exact 
what was required in the way of duty, and reward only according to work done. 
Besides, he knew that what his master demanded of others he made a law to himself. 
Consequently, never did a sovereign inspire a greater enthusiasm of devotion. At the 
side of every soldier, from the highest to the lowest, seemed to stand the form of the 
emperor, ready to mark, ready to exact; but, above all, setting the example of his own 
immense activity, and stimulating all to do their part worthily in the great work in 
which they were engageil. If this was in a nieasurL' true of Napoleon and his soldiers, 
it is true in a far higher and nohler way of Christ and his soldiers. Take an example 
in Matthew. See what he was before Christ found him. See what he became when 
Christ called him away from bis " seat at the receipt of custom," and all his selfish, 
narrow, degrading ways, and placed him in the "large room," where he had not only 
the noblest society and the means of living the purest life, but where there was 
opened up to him ever more increasing opportunities of usefulness and honour. It is 
said that in his first love and joy he "made a great feast" to his friends; and this was 
but an unconscious prophecy of the " great feast " which he has spread for all people 
iu his glorious Gospel. But Levi was but a sample. "Such honour have all the 
saints."— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — A prayer for grace in trouble. Authorship uncertain. Some give it to 
David, in Ziklag; others to Jeremiah. Three divisions. (1) He prays God to be 
gracious to him in his trouble, expressing at the same time bis confidence in him, as 
if the prayer had been already fulfilled (vers. 1 — 8) ; (2) he pours out the story of his 
sufferings and sorrows, and repeating his prayer (vers. 9 — 18) ; (3) he concludes with 
praise and thanksgiving (vers. 19 — 24). 

I. The psalhist'b pbater. The trouble that oppressed him had been of long 
.'"•■iti'>n, as appears from the tenth versp. 1. He prays for deliverance from hit 



PS. XXXI. 1—24.] THE EOOK OF PSALMS. 235 

trouble. (Ver. 1.) Does not qualify the prayer, but seeks absolute deliverance. It was 
to iiim an unqualified evil, and, as evil, he had no thought it could be working any 
good for him. So the Lord's Prayer, " Deliver us from evil," would be put to shame 
if not delivered. 2. He pray t for protection and dffence. (Ver. 2.) He apart from God 
was weak against the united power of his enemies. " If God be for us, who can be 
against us" with any success? 8. He prays for hading wnd guidance. (Ver. 3.) 
That he may see and feel the way of safety amid the bewildering dangers of his path. 
Christ is our great Leader, " the Beginner and Finisher of our faith." Striking 
description of Christ. 4. He prays that he may escape out of the secret snares that were 
set for him. (Ver. 4.) We cannot fight against hidden dangers. 

II, The exulting faith in which he pleads with God. He trusts : 1. In Qod's 
righteousness. (Ver. 1.) God's righteousness demands that he should not give him 
over to the unrighteous. He could not doubt that. 2. Me knew that Qod was his 
Strength and Refuge. (Vers. 3, 4.) Prove thyself to be to me what I know thou 
art — my Eock and House of defence. "Thou art my Strength." 3. He knew that 
Qod had redtemed him. (Ver. 5.) And therefore he surrenders his spirit into his 
keepinii, knowing him to be a God of truth, i.e. faithful to his word and to his work. 
"He who hath begun a good work," etc. ; "Perfect that which concerneth me." 4. 
He knew that Qod saw his trouble and adversities. (Ver. 7.) And that therefore out 
of merciful compassion he would interpose to rescue him. " Like as a father pitierh 
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him," etc. 5. He enjoys deliverance 
already hy anticipation. (Ver. 8.) " Thou hast set my feet in wide, open spaces," 
where I can roam at liberty. Faith like this removes mountains of difficujtiea — 

" Laughs at impossibilities, 
And says, 'It shall be done."* 

S. 

Vers. 9 — 18. — A story of suffering and sorrow. The psalmist now, in the spirit of 
heartfelt trust in the helping grace of God, proceeds first to describe at length his 
trouble (vers. 9, 13) ; and second, to pray for deliverance (vers. 14 — 18). 

I. Causes or TROUBLE. (Vers. 9, 13.) 1. Consciousness of sin. (Veri. 9, 10.) This 
was the constant lifelong grief. None but good men feel their sinfulness so acutely. 
2. Loss of reputation. (Vers. 11, 12.) " A fear to mine acquaintance ; " so that they 
avoided him. " Like a broken vessel ; " equivalent to " an object of contempt." 3. 
Stood in constant da/nger of his life. (Ver. 13.) Through slander and misrepresenta- 
tion, he was in constant fear and dread. Like some kings who live in constant dread 
of assassinati(m. 

II. The cry fob delitebanoe. (Vers. 14 — 18.) 1. Seeks to reassure himself of hit 
personal relation to Ood. (Ver. 14.) Nothing more difficult, when we see our faith 
despised by the whole world, than to rest on the testimony of our own conscience 
that " God is our God." 2. Because his timet were in God^t hand, he was not left to 
the mercy of his enemies. (Ver. 15.) God conld transform evil into good, and danger 
into safety. 3. He was OocPs servant, a/nd on that ground he cried for protection. 
(Ver. 16.) " Make thy face to shine." The good Master would be merciful " for his 
own sake " towards his servant. 4. Qod would not allow his faith in him to be put 
to shame. (Ver. 17.) He puts God in remembrance of his promise that he will hear 
and help those who call upon him with heartfelt confidence. He prayi that his 
enemies may be struck dumb with the silence of the grave, so that they may be no 
longer able to slander him (ver. 18). His faith in God reached thu» to all the 
difficulties of his life, and might be called a working faith. — S. 

Vers. 19 — 24. — Praise and thcmksgiving. From ver. 1 to ver. 8 the Lord may, must, 
and will help him in his trouble, because he is his God. From ver. 9 to ver. 18 he 
describes at length his trouble, and brings it to God. From ver. 19 to ver. 24 — 

I. The psalmist obtains from God the heartfelt assurance of help, ahd 
PRAISES God fob it. 1. Ood's goodness is a treasure laid up for future as well as 
present use and Messing. (Isa.lxiv. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 9.) Same thought in substance in 
all these passages. Compare with the parable of " the treasure." 2. Qod hides and 
protects those who trust in him — as in a royal pavilion (ver. 20). 8. Qod was to tht 



236 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. xzxn. 1 — 11, 



psalmist what a atrong city is to those who seek safety. (Ver. 21.) 4. Ood^s great 
goodness was shown to him openly and secretly. (Vers. 19, 20.) The former to 
discomfit his enemies, and the latter for his own comfort and faith. 

II. Man's ukbblibf and thb Divinb faithfulness. (Ver. 22.) 1. He was in 
haste, flying from his enemies, when he said this. We say and do things in panic 
which we disown in calmer hours. " He that belie veth shall not make haste." 2. But 
Ood pardoned his unbelief, and answered the inarticulate cry of the heart. 

III. Lessons addbessed to the Chuech, deawn fkom his own bxpbeibnob. (Vers. 
23, 24.) 1. What low and reverence roe owe to Ood becazise of his retributive work t 
(Ver. 23.) He preserveth the faithful, and rewardeth the proud. This is good and 
just. 2. With what courage we should hope in Ood I (Ver. 24.) He strengthens us 
by his Spirit to hope and trust in him. From him must be derived the power f« 
«rery duty and every difSculty. This must be the ground of our courage. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXIL 
This psalm has been selected by the Church 
for one of the " seven penitential psalms." 
It forms a part of the service of the syna- 
gogue ou the great Day of Atonement. Yet 
it is almost as much jubilant as penitent. 
It opens with two beatitudes. The writer, 
while very sensible of his sin (vers. 3 — 5), is 
still more sensible of the fact tliat his sin 
is pardoned (vers. 1, 2, 7, 10). While his 
first words breathe content and gratitude, 
his last are a shont of rejoicing (ver. 10). 
It is allowed generally that the psalm is 
David's. Written probably soon after his 
repentance, but not immediately after, it 
expresses at once his sorrow for his grievous 
lapse, and his joy wiien he dwelt in thought 
upon the words, " The Lord also liath put 
away thy sin " (2 Sam. xii. 13). It likewise 
tells us something of bis state of feeling 
during the interval between the commission 
of the sin and Kathan's coming to him 
<vers. 3, 4). 

The last word of the title, "Maschll," 
is thought to mean that the psalm was 
mtended for instruction, warning, or ad- 
monition ; the word maschil, or rather maskil, 
being formed from askil, " to instruct " — the 
opening word of the eighth verse — used 
also in Fss. ii. 10; liii. 2, etc. There are 
thirteen psalms thus inscribed, all more 
or less of a didactic character. 

Bliythmioally, the psalm seems to be 
«omposed of six strophes, each of two verses ; 
but in the third strophe the two verses have 
been joined in one. 

Ver. 1. — ^Blessed is be whose transgression 
(s forgiven, and whose sin is covered. There 



are three aspects under which sin is viewed 
in Holy Scripture : 1. As an offence against 
God's Law. This is " transgression "—caro/ua. 
2. As an offence against the eternal and 

immutable rule of right. This is " sin " 

a/iapria. 3. As an internal depravation and 
defilement of the sinner's soul. Tiiia is 
" iniquity "—aSiKla (comp. Exod. xxxiv. 7). 
Eacii aspect of sin has its own especial 
remedy, or manner of removal. The " trans- 
gression" is « lifted up," " taken away "— 
alperai, hpaiperai — more vaguely cupUrcu. 
The " sin " is " covered," « hidden "— 
KoXiSiTTCTat, ^«Ka\iiirTfTo£. The " iniquity " 
is " not imputed "— o4 Xayi^eTai. The union 
of all three, as here in vers. 1, 2, is complete 
remission or forgiveness. 

Ver. 2. — Blessed is the man unto whom 
the Lord imputeth not iniquity. " Iniquity " 
—the defilement of the sinner's own soiil by 
sin — is not at once removable ; if removable 
at all, it is only so by long lapse of time, and 
God's special mercy. But God can, at his 
own will and at any moment, " not impute " 
it — not count it against the sinner to his 
detriment. Then in God's sight the man 
is clean ; it is as though the iniquity were 
not there. And in whose spirit there is no 
guile ; t.«. no false seeming — no hypocrisv— 
where repentance has iieen sincere and reaL 

Ver. 3. — When 1 kept silence ; i.e. so long 
as I did not acknowledge my sin — while I 
remained silent about it, quite aware that 
I had sinned grievously, suti'ering in con- 
science, but not confessing it even to myself 
The time spoken of is that which imme- 
diately followed the commission of the 
adultery, and which continued until Nathan 
uttered the words, " Thou art the man 1 " 
(2 Sam. xii. 7). My bones waxed old through 
my roaring all the day long ; t.e. I suffered 
grievous pain, botli bodily and mental. My 
bones aohed (oomp. Pss. Ti. 2 ; xxxi. 10) ; and 
I "roared,' or groaned, in spirit, "all the 
day long. ' Unconfessed sin rankles in the 
heart of a man who is not far gone in vice. 



PS. xxxn. 1—11.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



237 



bnt has been Burpriaed into a wicked action, 
no sooner done than regretted. Such a one, 
in Archbishop Leighton's words, « VulnuB 
alit venis et cbbco carpitur igne." 

Ver. 4.— For day and night thy hand was 
heavy upon me. David sees now that his 
Bufferings at this time came from God, and 
were a part of the punishment of his sin. 
Tiiey continued without intermission both 
by day and by night. His conscience was 
never wholly at rest. My moisture is turned 
into the drought of summer; literally, my 
tap was changed through summer drought; 
i.e. the vital principle, which had been 
•trong in him, was changed — burnt up and 
exhausted— by the heat of God's wrath. 

Ver. 5. — ^I acknowledged my sin unto thee 
femp. 2 Sam. xii. 13). Conscience once 
fully awakened, all reticence was broken 
down. David confessed his sin fully and 
freely — confessed it as "sin," as "trans- 
gression," and as " iniquity " (compare the 
comment on ver. 1). And mine iniquity 
have I not hid ; rather, did I not hide. I 
did not attempt to gloss over or conceal 
the extent of mj guilt, but laid my soul 
bare before thee. Hengstenberg well re- 
marks tliat the psalmiit is probably not 
speaking of a "making known by the 
mouth," but of "an inward confession, such 
as is accompanied with painful repentance 
and sorrow, with begging of pardon for sin 
and for the offence rendered to the Divine 
Majesty." I said, I will confess my trans- 
gressions unto the Lord ; and thou forgavest 
the iniquity of my sin. Upon David's con- 
fession, whether it were inward or outward, 
followed without any interval God's for- 
giveness — forgiveness which, however, did 
not preclude the exaction of a penalty re- 
quired for the justification of God's ways to 
man (2 Sam. xii. 14), and also, perhaps, for 
proper impressing of the offender himself, 
who would have been less sensible of the 
heinousnesB of his sin, if it had gone un- 
punished. 

Ver. 6. — For this ; or, heeaute of this; i.e. 
on account of this experience of mine — this 
immediate following of the grant of forgive- 
ness upon confession of sin — shall every one 
that is godly — i.e. that is sincere and earnest 
in religion, though he may be overtaken in 
a fault or surprised into a sin — pray unto 
thee in a time when thou mayest be found ; 
literally, tn a time of finding, which some 
understand as a time when God "finds," 
and visits, some iniquity in bis servants, 
and others, as the Authorized Version, " in 
a tune when thon art gracious, and allowest 
thyself to be found by those who approach 
thee." Surely in the floods of great waters 
they (t.e. the waters) shall not come nigh 
unto him; i.e. shall not approach snoh a 
man to injure him. 



Ver. 7.— Thou art my hiding-place (comp. 
Fss. xviL 8; xxvii. 5; xxxi. 20; cxliii. 9); 
thon Shalt preserve me lirom trouble. Hid- 
den in God, there can no harm happen to 
him. Thon Bhalt oompass me about with 
Bongs of deliverance. "Songs of deliver- 
ance" are such songs as men sing when 
they have been delivered from peril. God 
will make such songs to sound in the 
psalmist's ears or in his heart. 

Vers. 8, 9.— St. Jerome, and others after 
him, including Dr. Kay, have regarded this 
passage as an utterance of God, who first 
admonishes David, and then passes on to an 
admonition of the Israelites generally. But 
such a sudden intrusion of a Divine utter- 
ance, without any notice of a change of 
speaker, is without parallel in the Psalms, 
and should certainly not be admitted with- 
out some plain necessity. Here is no neces- 
sity at all. The words are quite suitable in 
the mouth of David, as an admonition to 
the Israelites of his time ; they accord with 
the title, which he himself seems to have 
prefixed to the psalm, and explain it j and 
they fulfil the promise made in Ps. U. 15. 

Ver. 8.— I will instruct thee and teach 
thee in the way which thou shalt go. We 
must suppose the "godly man" of ver. 6 
addressed, if we regari 1 David as the speaker. 
Such a man was not beyond the need of 
instruction and teaching, since he was liable 
to sins of infirmity, and even to grievous 
falls, as had been seen by David's example. 
I will guide thee with mine eye; t.e. "I will 
keep watoh over thee with mine eye, and 
guide thee as I see to be necessary." 

Ver. 9. — Be ye not as the horse, or as the 
mule, which have no understanding. The 
singular is exchanged for the plural, since 
the " instruction " is now intended, nut for 
the godly man only, but for all. Ibrael had 
been always stiff-necked (Exod. xxxii. 9; 
xxxiii. 3, 5; xxxi v. 9; Deut. ix. 6, 13; x. 
16; 2 Chron. xxx. 8; Acts vii. 51), like a 
restive horse or mule. David exhorts them 
to be so no more. The horse and mule are 
excusable, since they " have no understand- 
ing "—or, "no discernment "-Israel would 
be inexcusable, siuce it had the giift of 
reason. Whose mouth must be held in with 
bit and bridle ; rather, whose adomings are 
with, bit and bridle to hold them in (compare 
the Bevised Version). Lest they oome near 
unto thee. This clause is obscure. It may 
mean, " Lest they come too near to thee." 
so as to do thee damage, as when a riding 
horse tosses his head and strikes the rider 
in the face, or when a chariot horse rears 
and falls back upon the driver; oi it may 



238 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[PS. XXill. 1 — 11. 



mean, "Else they will not come near to 
thee," i.e. until they are trapped with bit and 
bridle, they will refuse to come near to thee. 

Ver. 10. — Uany sorrows rshall be to the 
wicked. A further warning to those ad- 
dressed in the preceding verse. The LXX. 
emphasize this by substituting for tlie 
generic " sorrows " the specific lidim-yes, 
" lashes," the usual punishment of the horse 
and mule. But he that trusteth in the 
Lord, mercy shall compass him about (comp. 
Deut. xxxii. 10). 

Ver. 11. — ^Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, 
yeiighteou. David's psalms almost always 



end with a note of joy, or at any rate in a 
tone that is cheerful and encouraging. The 
present psalm, though reckoned nmnng the 
penitential ones, both begins and ends with 
joyful utterances. In vers. 1, 2 David pours 
forth the fepling ot gladness which fills his 
own heart. Here he calls upon the " right- 
eous " generally, who yet need forgiveness, 
to rejoice with him. And shout for joy, all 
ye that are upright in heart. All ye, i.e., 
who are honest and sincere in your en- 
deavours after well-doing. The phrase 
explains the " righteous " of the preceding 
hemistich. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 1. — TOe hlessedneu of pardon. "Blessed is he," etc. The Old Testament 
Scriptures contain what we may call moral prophecies, no less striking than the his- 
torical and typical prophecies. This verse is among them. Beginnin<j with this grand 
Bible word " blessed " (like Ps. i.), it resembles an echo, a thousand years beforehand, 
of the Sermon on the Mount. We find here, not only " the shadow ot good things 
to come," but " the very image " of the gospel promises of pardon and justification. 
Accordingly, St. Paul quotes and argues from these words (Bom. iv. 5 — 8). (1) In 
what does this blessedness consist ? (2) How is it attained? 

I. In what does this blbbsbdness oossist ? 1. In the actual fact of deliverarun 
from the guilt and punishment of transgression. Forgiveness is a reality on God's 
part, because sin is a reality on our part. Forgiveness, or justification, is sometimes 
spoken of as " treating the sinner as though he had not sinned." This is but loose, 
figurative language. The reverse is the case. Forgiveness implies sin (Rom. iv. 5). 
Sin may have alleviations — ignorance, overpowering temptation, constitutional infirmity, 
and so furth — but as sin it is disobedience to God's Law. Therefore if God hag really 
given a moral law to men, he is bound as righteous (Gen. xviii. 25) to take account 
of sin — of every sin of every sinner. Men have sini,ed (Bom. iii. 23). Therefore 
(innocence being lost) every one must necessarily be either forgiven or condemned. 
Accordingly, our Saviour always speaks of forgiveness as a definite act (Matt. ix. 2, 6 ; 
Luke vii. 47). His apostles in like manner (1 John ii. 12 ; Acts ii. 38 ; xiii. 38, 39). 
2. In the joyful consciousness of pardon and reconciliation to God. These two — the 
fact and the consciousness — ought always to go tosjether; but, as matter of fact, they 
do not. It is a great mistake to confound faith with assurance. Perfect, undoubting 
faith in God's promise, if that promise be lightly understood, must needs bring with 
it the blessed and joyful certainty of the fulfilment of the promise. But faith may be 
real, yet far from perfect j clouded by ignorance or error ; enfeebled by doubt and fear 
shadowed by self-distrust, yet real, like the faith of sinking Peter. 3. In the holy 
and hajpy influence of this belief and sense of forgiveness on the heart and life ; making 
God loved, sin hated, self humbled, obedience happy and free from bondage. Deliver- 
ance Irom the punishment of sin is not to be overrated as the chief element in this 
blessedness ; yet it is a real and powerful source. 

II. How OBTAINBD? 1. The &Tststej>isa true sense of sin and oftheneed ofpardon. 
This height of joy is reached at a rebound from the dust of self-abasement. 2. Personal 
reliance on Christ, acceptance of his atonement, and ol God's offer and promise ot 
pardon through him. 3. The study of Ood's Word, with prayer for the Edy Spirit's 
teaching. (2 Cor. iv. 6 ; Epli. i. 17 — 19.) Make sure, first, what God's Word really 
declares; then talce God at his word. Beware of the subtile delusion of putting your 
own faith in place of Christ. 

Ver. 1. — (Second outline.) The blessedness qf pardon may belong to widely 
(liiferent stages of Christian experience. Take, e.g., those of which we have images in 
Bunyan's ' Pilgrim's Progress ' — in Christian's entering the wicket-gate, losing hia 



«?s. Kxn. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 239 

%urd«D, escaping from the dungeon of Giant Despair. First faith ; full faith ; recovered 
-faith. 

I. The blessedness ov a first faith. A first conscious, undoubting reception of 
-God's promise — the glad tidings (Luke xxiv. 47 ; Acts xiii. 32, 38) ; and pergonal 
.acceptance of Jesus Christ as Saviour and Lord (Acts xvi. 30 — 34). 

IL The blessedness of full faith. Unlimited trust in all that Ood has pro- 
•mised, and acceptance of all that he has given us in Christ. Christian was in the 
ipath of salvation, the way of hfe, from .the moment he entered the gate ; but he was not 
iquit of his burden till he came in full view of the cross of Christ (1 John iv. 16, 
19; V. 12). 

in. The blessedness or faith restored after failitbb. The joy of forgiveness, 
■-forfeitel by sin, recovered ; and love, faith, hope, again kindled by the Holy Spirit, in 
place of gloom and despair. Christian was far on in his journey when he and his com- 
rade strayed into By-path Meadow and fell into the clutches of the giant. This is the 
psalmist's experience. He had fallen into gross sin ; and, as long as he " kept silence," 
lefused to confess to God and to humble himself, he had no rest or peace (vers. 3, 4). 
When he turned in penitence and trust to God, the fount of joy was at once reopened 
3n his heart. He escaped from bondage into freedom (ver. 5 ; 1 John i. 8, 9 ; ii. 1, 2). 

Ver. S. — Hindrances to confession of sin. " I kept silence." 

I. Pride. Men cannot bear to think themselves wrong— to put themselves down on 
ithe common level ; still less, lelow those who have sought and obtained pardon. This 
f ride is itself a great sin (Jas. iv. 6 ; 1 Tim. iii. 4). 

n. Want of honesty of conscience. Even proper self-respect should make one 
<«ay, " Anything rather than self-deception ! Let me know the truth of myself 1 " 

in. Indolknob. Many are busy enough outwardly, but mentally indolent, spiritually 
latagnant. 

IV. Soke abb too bust. Too much occupied with the appendages of life ever to 
faiow what it is truly to live I 

v. Carelessness. Two kinds of hardness of heart noted in Scripture. 1. Stubborn 
«elf-will. 2. Want of feeling ("fat," Isa.vi. 10). 

VI. Inseksibilitt to God's claiub. Their greatness, urgency, inevitableness, the 
blessedness of yielding to them. This lies deep at the root of all the rest. Were 
-these felt, pride would bow, conscience wake, indolence and carelessness vanish ; all 
-worldly concerns and aims appear in comparison as " less than nothing, and vanity." 

VII. Hbnob low yibws of God's Law, of the absolute necessity of righteousness, 
■»ai the infinite evil of sin. 

Ver. 6. — Confession of sin. Let men argue u they please against the Bible; they 
«annot deny or alter the fact that this book has a power of laying hold on the heart 
«nd conscience, unrivalled and unique. One reason is its penetrating knowledge of 
liuman nature; another, its deep and wide sympathy. Our interest is quickened, 
«ympathy roused, because we are presented, not with abstract truth, dry dogma, but 
-with living experience. Conscience can be impartial, judgment cool, because it is 
Another's case, not our own, we contemplate. Suddenly, when we thought we were 
looking at a picture, we find it is a mirror. The still small voice says, "Thou art 
■the man I " 

I. A BUBDENEO SPIRIT HiDiNO ITSELF BEHIND DUUB LIPS. David " kept silence " — 
■would not acknowledge his sins even to himself, therefore, of course, not to God. 
Forget them, he coidd not. But (we may assume) he excused them--laid the blame 
<{as we so easily do) on temptation and circumstance and nature. Besides, was a king 
■to be bound within as strict limits as an ordinary person ? Had not his blackest crime 

the murder of his brave, faithful general— been in a manner forced on him? Hp 

■"kept silence" before others, — perhaps was specially exemplary in public worship and 
«ious ceremony ; " kept silence " before God,— perhaps kept up rigidly the form of 
prayer, but, though his lips prayed, his heart was dumb. Wonderful is the deceitful- 
4tess of sin ; the self-ignorance into which it betrays us (Jas. i. 14, 15) ! 

II. The bboken hoabt and oonteitb spirit pourino out its penitent con- 
WESsioN to God. As long as David " kept silence," the Lord had a controversy with 



240 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [rs. sxxii. 1— IJ, 

lii ra. His " hand was heavy.'' Possibly in some stroke of sickness ; perhaps only in thfr 
bodily disorder which springs from mental suffering. The ghastly secret refused to 
be buried in silence and oblivion. The burden grew intolerable. At last he said, " I will 
confess my transgressions." 1. To Ms own conscience. " The first step is the hardest;"^ 
and perhaps the hardest thing in frank confession is to acknowledge sin to one's self. It 
is easy to say, " We have erred and strayed," when everybody else gays so ; quite another 
thingtosay, in thelonelysilenceofyour own thought, "I am wrong." No one likes that. 
No one ought to like it. But it has to be done, or confession to God — or to man — is a 
vain form. 2. What next f The carrying out of the purpose ; the soul alone with- 
God, saying, " Father, I have sinned ! " Many a man blames himself inwardly, bitterly,, 
proudly; but it leads to nothing. He does not acknowledge liis sin to God. Here are 
three words which give three views of sin. (1) Sin. The Hebrew word properly means 
" error," " failure," "missing the mark." (2) Iniquity : perverseness, depravity, with the 
added idea of guilt : "The iniquity [or, 'guilt '] of my mW 3. Transgression : hieaking 
away, viz. firom obedience to God's Law; rebellion. (In vers. 1, 2 same words in 
different order.) 

III. THB immediate EBUBP and infinite COMFOKT found Df TDBNINO TO QOD. 

The guilty silence is broken. The veil of self-delusion is rent off. The sinner take& 
his right attitude, his true position before God. Not the same as though he had not 
sinned, — that is impossible ; but that which belongs to him in fact. There is a dawn of 
comfort in this. At least we have done with falsehood, come on to the firm ground 
of truth. But the only real comfort is, not in our penitence, but in God's promises. 
Confession and repentance do not lay the ground of forgiveness, or of the hope and 
certainty of it. God has laid that (2 Cor. v. 19 — 21). The narne of God ii significant 
here: not "God" the Almighty Creator, but "the Lord," i.e. Jehovah — God'» 
covenant name with Israel. Nature holds out no inducement to confess sin, no hope 
of pardon. Its law is, " Eeap what you have sown." If the ground of acceptance were 
our repentance, we never could be assured that it was adequate. But God's faithfulness 
and justice are pledged to grant what his love has already provided in the gift of his 
Son (1 John i. 9). Confession is just the breaking down of the barrier raiseil, not by 
our sin, but by impenitence and unbelief; at once the stream of Divine mercy flows 
unhindered, " Thou forgavest," etc. 

CoNOLirsiON. This experience was too exemplary, too instructive, too precious, to 
be permitted to perish in forgetfulness. The Holy Spirit (as we said) does not merely 
paint a picture, but holds up a mirror, David's experience may be oars. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Divine forgiveness. This psalm is one of those historically established 
as David's.* It has long been a favourite with the greatest saints, who are the very 
ones that own themselves the greatest sinners. Luther referred to it as one of his 
special psalms. So Dr. Chalmers, who, it is said, could scarcely read its first three 
verses without tears filling his eyes. The compression necessary to keep this work 
within moderate limits renders it impossible to do more than point out how it might 
profitably be expanded and expounded in a course of sermons. It is headed, " a Psalm, 
giving instruction ; " «.e. a didactic psalm — a doctrinal one, in fact, and as such is to 
be one of the songs of the sanctuary. Note : They fall into error who do not regard 
the rehearsal of Divine truth as a fitting method of sacred song. We may not only 
sing praise to God, but may speak "to one another in psalms, and hymns,' and 
spiritual songs, singing with grace in our hearts to the Lord." This psalm is sL grateful 
rehearsal of the blessedness of Divine forgiveness. We see therein — 

I. Forgiveness needed. Here, indeed, the expositor must be clear, firm, direct, 
swift, pointed. We have : 1. Sin committed. The Hebrew language, poor as is its 
Tooahiilary in many directions, is abundant in the terms used in connection with sin.* 

' Bwald, in 'Revelation, its Nature and Record,' p. 278, note (T. and T. Olark). 
* Dr. Watts's grand hymn, " The mighty frame of glorious grace," is a noble, yea, a inb^ 
lime illustration of this. 
' See Mr. Girdlestone's ' Synonyms of the Old Testament.' 



««. xxxii. 1—11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 241 

It is and ever -will remain the differential feature of the education of the Hebrew 
people, that they wore taught so emphatically and constantly the evil of sin. For this 
purpose the Law was their child-guide with a view to Christ (Q-al. iii. 24). Of the 
•several terms used to express sin, three are employed here.* One, which denotes 
" missing the mark ; " a second, which denotes " overstepping the nnark ; " a third, which 
.denotes " crookedness or unevenness." Over and above corresponding terms in the New 
Testament, we have two detinitions of sin. One in 1 John iii. 4, "Sin is the trans- 
gression of law ; " another in 1 John v. 1, " All injustice is sin," We can never show 
men the value of the gospel until they see the evil of sin. Some minds are most 
effectively reached by one aspect of truth, and others by another ; but surely from one 
or other of these Scripture terras or phrases the preacher may prepare a set of arrows 
sthat by God's blessing will pierce some through the joints of their armour. Nor can 
the reality or evil of sin be fairly evaded by any plea drawn from the modern doctrine 
of evolution ; since, even if that theory be valid, the emergence of conscioiisness and of 
moral responsihility at a certain stage of evolution is as certain a phenomenon as any 
<itber. Men know they have done wrong, and it behoves the preacher not to quit 
tis hold of them till he has driven conviction of the evil of sin against God deeply 
into the soull 2. Sin concealed. (Ver. 2.) "I kept silence," i.e. towards God. in 
the specific case referred to here, sin had disclosed its fearful reality by breaking out 
openly; it was known, yet unacknowledged. Hence: 3. Sin rankled within (ver. 2, 
*my bones," etc.). Eemorse and self-reproach succeeded to the numbness which was 
the first effect of the sin. There was a reaction — restlessness seized on the guilty one. 
The action of a guilty conscience brings within a man the most terribly consuming 
■of all agitation. He cannot flee from himself, and his guilt and dread pursue him 
everywhere (Job xv. 20—25; xviii. 11; xx. 11 — 29 ;» Prov. xxviii. 1). Hence it 
is a great relief to note the next stage. 4. Sin confessed. (Ver. 5.) What a mercy 
that our God is one to whom we can unburden our guilt, telling him all, knowing 
ihat in the storehouse of infinite gracB and love there is exhaustless mercy that will 
" multiply pardons " (Isa. Iv. 7, Hebrew) ! 5. Sin put away. (Ver. 2.) " In whose spirit 
there is no guile ; " i.e. no deceit, no reserve, no concealment, no continuing in the sin 
which is thus bemoaned, but, at the moment it is confessed towards God, honestly 
«iid entirely putting it away. And when once the sin and guilt are thus put away 
before God, it will not be long ere the penitent has to recount the experience of— 

II. FoBQiVBNESs OBTA.INBD AND ENJOYED. He who gullelcssly puts away sin by 
lepentance will surely find that God lovingly puts it away by pardon (ver. 5). And 
AS the Hebrew is ample in its terms for sin, so also is it in the varied words and 
phrases to express Divine forgiveness. Three of these are used here ; but in the Hebrew 
there are, at least, ten others.' 1. " Forgiven." (Ver. 1.) The Hebrew word means 
"lifted off; " in this case the LXX. render " remitted," but sometimes they translate 
the Hebrew term literally, by a word which also means "to lift off," "to lift up," 
-"to bear," and "to bear away"* (cf. John i. 29; 1 John iii. 5; Matt. ix. 5, 6). 
In Divine forgiveness, the burden of sin is lifted off from us and borne away by the 
■Son of God; the penitsnt is also " let go." His indictment is cancelled, and from sin's 
penalty he is set free.^ 2. Covered ; as with a lid, or a veil : put out of sight. God 
looks on it no more (Micah vii. 18). 3. "Iniquity not imputed." It is no more 
.reckoned to the penitent. With absolution there is complete and entire acquittal, and 
with the non-imputation of sin there is the imputation of righteousness (Rom. ni., 
iv., v.), or the full and free reception of the pardoned one into the Divine favour, in 

' The following terms are used for " sin : " Snn, " foolishness," " vanity ; " «nn, •' missing 
the mark ; " yB*B, " overstepping the mark ; " u^f$, " departure from good; " ji?, " perverse- 
mess;" pi*, "sinfulness"— vanity, nothincj. 

« Though Job's three friends were wrong in applying these words to him, they are true 
4Bnoua;h in reference to the wicked. i. j- j 

• The varied terms to express Divine forgiveness should each be carefully studied . 
they may be found in Fiirst's ' Lexicon,' sub verb. ]^. 

«'See Cremer'g 'Lexicon of New Testament Greek,' sub verb. a.<^lrtiu and olpa; and 
fiehl.uaner on Old Testament Greek. ,, .^ * , i T^ t> i • 

' See the introduction to Dr. Simon's ' Discussions on the Atonement ; also Dr. Dale b 
work on the Atonement; and Perowne'a notes on the whole psalm. 

PSALMS. 



242 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xxxii. 1— IJ, 

wlilch a standing of privilege, that in his own right he could not claim, is freel<> 
accoi'ded to him through the aboundings of Divine grace. 

III. FOBQIVENESS BBABING FRUIT. This psalm is itself the product of a forgiven 
mail's pen. It would he a psychological impossibility for an unregenerate and 
unpardoned man ever to liave written it. The psalmist's experience of forgiving love 
hears fruit: 1. In grateful song. (Ver. 7.) "Songs of deliverance " will now take the- 
place of consuming remorse and penitential groans. 2. In new thoughts of God. (Ver. 7.^ 
" Thou art my Hiding-place," etc. In the God whose pardoning love he has known, he 
will now find a perpetual Protector and Friend. 3. In Joyous declaration to others, 
(Vers. 1, 2.) " Blessed , . . hlesstd," etc. The emphasis is doubly intense. (1) Ther& 
is a blessedness in forgiveness itself. To have the burden of guilt lifted off, and the» 
sentence of condemnation cancelled, wliat blessedness is here ! (2) There is blessednesa 
which follows on forgiveness. New freedom. New joy in God. New ties of love. 
New citizenship. New heirship. New prospects. Oh I the blessedness ! 4:. In exhor- 
tation. (Vers. 8, 9.) We regard these as the psalmist's words,' in whic'a he uses hi» 
own experience to counsel others. Broken-hearted penitents make the best evangelists.. 
The exhortation is threefold. (1) He bids us not to be perverse and obstinate, ».e. iik 
attempting to conceal our guilt ; but rather to show the reason of reasonable men in. 
confessing and abandoning it (ver. 9). (2) He reminds us that, while resistance to 
God will only surround us with woes, trust in God will ensure our being encompassed 
with mercies (ver. 10). (3) He bids truly sincert, upright, penitent souls — men 
without guile — to rejoice in God, yea, even to shout for joy, because of that forgiving 
love which buries all the past guilt of the penitent in the ocean of redeeming grace^ 
and enriches the pardoned one with the heirship of everlasting life. — C. 

Ver. 1. — 2%e hlessednest offorgiveness. What our Lord said to Simon before his falV 
seems to have been said to David after his great transgression, "When thou art 
converted, strengthen the brethren " (Luke xxii. 32 ; Ps. li. 12, 13). Nobly was the 
duty performed. Many who were walking in darkness have here found light. Many 
who were deluding themselves with false hopes have here been taught the way of 
peace ; many who have been hardening their hearts in sin have here been laid bold 
of, and led, as with cords of love, back to God. The burden of the psalm is th» 
blessedness of forgiveness. 

I. In the first place, we are taught that this is a soctbine ACcoBDiNa to aoDUNEBik. 
(Vers. 1, 2.) Three things are set forth. 1. What sin is. The terms used are very 
significant, and deserve the deepest study : " transgression,'' " sin," " iniquity." The- 
evil is traced to the root. Our unhappiness is caused by sin (vers. 3, 4). 2. Then we- 
are shown how sin may he taken away. This is God's doing. There is a twofold 
work — something done for us, and something done in us. God thus meets th« 
necessities of our case by not only removing guilt, but by renovating character.. 
3. The result is blessedness. This is the doctrine of the Law and the prophets (Esod. 
xxxiv. 6, 7 ; Lev. xvi. 21 ; Isa. liii. 5, 6 ; Dan. ix. 24). It is also the doctrine of the- 
New Testament. The Law is fulfilled in Christ. In him God is reconciled to us, and 
we are reconciled to God. Paul and David agree (Rom. iv. 6, 7). Justification is not 
of works, but of grace. There can be no true happiness till w ith all frankness and 
sincerity we confess our sins, and cast ourselve-i with simple faith on the mercy of God 
in Christ Jesus (Prov. xxviii. 13 ; Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24 ; 2 Cor. v. 19, 21). 

II. In the second place, the blessedness op forgiveness is illustrated from 
PEBSONAL experience. The Bible contains both doctrines and facts, and while the 
doctrines explain the facts, the facts enforce the doctrines. When a man speaks of 
what he knows, when he tells of what he has himself gone through, when he sets forth 

' There are some who regard the eighth verse as the utterance of Otoi; so Geikie, 
introduoing the words, "Thou sayest," after ver. 7. Such sudden change of person is nol 
infrequent i-n the Hebrew, and mlglit be assumed here, if the passage required it. But 
as there is a steady flow of statements following naturally one on the nther, there is no- 
need for such a supposition here. Hengstenberg, Walford, Calvin, Delitzsoh, and othere- 
regard the wurdsastlioseofDavid. Calvin remnrks thereon, ' We are reconciled to God upni» 
condition that every man endeavours to make his brethien partakers of the same benefit."" 
See, however. Dr. Maclaren's ' Life of Daviil as reflected in his Psalms ' (xiii. pp. 205 — 231> 



PS. xxxn. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 24£ 

facts bearing on our personal life and needs, we readily listen to his story. 1. First, we 
are shown the misery of the man who keeps silence as to his sins before Qod. (Vers. 3, 4.) 
For long David kept his sins to himself, in pride and suUenness. This was not only 
doing an injury to his own soul, but it was lying to men, and grievously offending 
against God. The result was wretchedness. He suffered in body and spirit. He 
could find no rest. Every effort that he made to better himself, so long as he refused 
to humble his heart before God by confession, only aggravated his pain. Wherever 
he went, his sins haunted him. Whatever he did, he could not rid himself of the 
terrible thought that God's judgments would fall upon him. How vividly does this 
bring out the evil of sin and the mercy of God 1 If left to ourselves, our sins would 
be our ruin ; but God mercifully will not let us alone. His hand is laid upon us, in 
loTing counsel and chastisement, till we are brought to repentance. 2. We are next 
shown the way of recovering ike blessedness we have lost. (Vers. 5, 6.) There had 
been a long and painful struggle. Now it is eniied. Instead of pride, there is humility. 
Instead of hiding of sin, there is frank and full confession. Instead of holding back 
in sullenness from God, there is absolute surrender to his righteous judgment. The 
relief is instantaneous. What a blessed change! It is coming out of the dark into the 
light. It is abandoning all concealment and guile, and finding peace in God's love 
and mercy. How beautifully does the picture here agree with that other picture 
drawn by the band of our Saviour ! — " I said, I will confess my transgressions unto tho 
Lord J " " i will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him. Father, I have sinned 
against heaven, and before thee." "Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin; " " When 
he was yet a great way off, his father saw hiin, and had compassion, and ran, and fell 
on his neck, and kissed him" (ver. 5; Luke xv. 18 — 20). 

III. In the third place, the blessedness of forgiveness is commended bt tbe 
TESTIMONY OF God's SAINTS. Augustiue and others have given us their Confessions. 
These are not only a tale, but a testimony. They noi only agree as witnessing for 
God, but they are a directory for the benefit of all anxious inquirers. So it was with 
David. He speaks not only for himself, but for others. He as much as says, " My case 
is not singular; God has dealt with others in the same way; this is the law of the 
kingdom." " He that oovereth his sins shall not prosper ; but whoso confesseth and 
foisaketh them shall find mercy." The lessons are — that forgiveness is a blessing 
greatly to be desired ; that it is surely attainable by all who seek it in the right way ; 
and that when enjoyed it brings new and abiding joys into life. There is both counsel 
and warning. God has his own way and his own time for showing mercy. There is 
a limit (Isa. Iv. 6, 7; Heb. iii. 1). Every pain of body, every remonstrance of reason, 
every compunction of conscience, are premonitions of judgment, and call for instant 
action. God in his providence and in his Word saith, "Now is the accepted 
time." 

IV. In the last place, we are shown how the blessedness of foboivbnebs is in 

AGREEMENT WITH God's OBA0I0D8 PUEPOSES TOWARDS HIS PEOPLE. When God 

begins, he will make an end. Forgiveness is the first thing, but it is introductory 
to other and greater blessings. Among men, when a criminal is released, he goes forth 
into society as with the brand of Cain on his brow. But God's ways are not as our 
ways. When he brings the sinner into a right relation to himself, he not only fully 
forgives, but he continues his love and mercy to the end. Life henceforth is divinely 
guided. Obedience is no longer a restraint, but a delight. The future is bright with 
hope, and will bring new blessings, calling for ever new gratitude and joy. When 
we can truly say, like Paul, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" then we can 
look on without fear to the end. — W. F. 

Ver. 8. — Ood's guidance. Leam^ 

I. The place of guidance. Unless we are able to see God's eye, we cannot be 
guided. What hinders ? Our sins. " Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that 
I am not able to look up" (Ps. xl. 12). The great thing, therefore, is to confess our 
sins, that they m.ay be put away, and then, " accepted in the Beloved," we can " look 
up" with childlike trust, and cry, "Abba, Father! " 

II. The manner of guidance. 1. Authoritative. As master and servant (P». 
cxxiii. 2). 2. Kindly. Loving as a faUier, >;eutle as a mother (Jer. xxiv. 6; PruT. 



244 THE BOOK OF P3ALMS. [ps. xxxii. 1— IL 

iv. 3). 8. Swe. Moses knew the desert well, but he might err. He was glad, there- 
fore, of the help of Hobab, " Thou mayest be to us instead of eyes " (Numb. x. 31). 
How much more surely may we depend upon Grod in our wilderness journey! " Except 
the eye of the Lord be put out, we cannot be put out of his sight and care " (Donne). 

III. The HAPpr results of guidance. 1. Peace. We cannot guide ourselves; 
nor can we trust to others, even the wisest and the best, to guide us ; but when we 
put ourselves under the care and direction «f God, we feel that all is well (Jer. x. 23 ; 
Prf. cxii. 165). 2. Freedom. God does not take pleasure in "the bit and bridle." 
He would have us be guided through our reason and heart rather than by restraint 
and force. He works in us both "to will and to do." He makes us free by the truth, 
that our service may be not from fear, but love. 3. Oourageousness. (2 Chron. xx. 12.) 
God's eye upon us is an inspiration. Gideon felt a new man when the Lord looked 
upon him (Judg. vi. 14). Paul had a heart for any fate when Christ stood by him 
in the storm (Acts xxvii. 23). Stephen went to a cruel death with love and joy 
under the eye of his Master (Acts vii. 56 — 60). 4. Sope. In humble, trustful self- 
surrender and love we can go forward with confidence, God's eye upon us, and our 
eye upon God, we are safe for time and for eternity. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — From great misery to greater blessedness. There can be little doubt 
that David composed this psalm after Nathan came to him. Fs. li. was the 
confession of his great sin, and the prayer for forgiveness. This is the record of the 
confession made and the forgiveness obtained, and the blessedness of his position as 
a SOD restored to his Father's house. 

I. The obbatest misebt. 1. The knowledge that we have sinned. That we have 
been guilty of one great sin leading on to another, as David had been ; and not of some 
isolated sin of infirmity, or of some transient temper that spends itself at the moment. 
None but a good man would feel the awful misery here described. Bad, burdened 
men sin and feel no bunien of shame or guilt. 2. The attempt to reason away ow 
guilt. " In whose spirit there is no guile," or self-deception. David was an Eastern 
monarch, whose temptation would be to think he might do as he pleased, and thus 
to reduce his sin to the minimum point. We extenuate our evil deeds by pleading 
circumstances, temptation, temperament, and we deceive ourselves. 3. The attempt 
to suppress the consciousness of guilt. We "keep silence," and try to hide from 
ourselves our sin, and relapse into only a dull consciousness of it. But there was a 
smouldering fire beneath that dried up the vital moisture of his bein^; and consumed his 
very bones. Afraid to confess his sin either to God or to himself, he could not escape 
the burden which the Divine hand kid upon his conscience; and hence his misery. 
He "roared" all the day long under it. This is God's mercy and anger towards our 
sin — to drive us to seek release and forgiveness. 

II. The greatest blessedness. 1. We must legin hy the fullest acknowledgment 
of oar sin to ourselves. This must be done before we can sincerely make confession 
to <iod. We must be angry with ourselves before we can feel God's anger or his mercy 
towards us. 2, The fullest, most penitent confession to God. (Ver. 5.) " Against 
thee, thee only, have I sinned." Most sins have a threefold aspect — as done against 
anothfr, against ourselves, and against Ood, the Fatherly Lawgiver. 3. The conscious- 
ness of forgiveness. This includes two things — the free remission and the inner cleansing. 
(1) The transgression is taken away; (2) covered by God, not by the sinner; and 
(3) not imputed, because taken away. It is throughout a real transaction, not a 
fictitious one. Then is a man blessed with the peace of God. — S. 

Vers. 6 — 11. — The attitude of the penitent. Because of the grace thus vouchsafed 
to every penitent, David would encourage all the godly to seek him who deals so 
graciously with sinners. Out of his past and present experience he will now counsel 
others, and especially those who are still impenitent, and the tenor of his counsel is 
that they should not, like brutes, refuse submission till they are forced into it. 
The passage may be divided into two parts : (1) the attitude of the forgiven penitent 
towards God; (2) his attitude as a teacher of the impenitent. 

I. The attitude op the forgiven penitent towards God. (Vers. 6, 7.) 
1. Confidence in Ood for others. (Ver. 6.) What God has done for him, he will do 



PS. xxxm. 1—22.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



245 



for all the penitent and godly. Not a partial God, but his piineiples of action are 
universal. God can always be found by the truly penitent ; i.e. he always hears them 
when they call upon him (ver. 6). He averts from them the judgments ("great 
waters") that threaten to overwhelm the wicked (ver. 6). 2. Cor^dence in God 
for himself. (Ver. 7.) He lives in God as bis Oastle or Hiding-place, secure from 
danger and trouble. This idea is enlarged and exalted by Christianity. "Tour life 
is hid mth Christ in God." The security is all the greater because we are joined vnth 
Ghrist in God. God will surround him with abundant causes of thankful songs — songs 
I if deliverance. Turn where he may, he finds the delivering hand of God at work on 
his behalf. 

IL His attitude as a teacher of the impenitent. (Vers. 8 — 11.) 1. Sis 
experience qualifies him to show men the way they should go. " Then — after thou hast 
delivered me — will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto 
thee." He knew the road which he urged them to take — ^knew it from experience, 
not from any theory, 2, This made him a gentle, sympathetic guide. He will guide 
them with the gentle guidance of the eye. A look is enough for those who are willinij; 
to go in the right way — a look in the direction which is to be pointed out. Experience 
taught him to be pitiful. 3. He exhorts men against a brutish and stubborn impeni- 
tence. (Ver. 9.) Do not be like the brute, which must be compelled to service, " who 
doth not willingly come unto thee ; " but as reasonable religious creatures, be willing 
for the service which is great and blessed. 4. He sums up the whole question. (Ver. 
10.) The sorrows which encompass the wicked, and the mercy that follows those who 
trust in Gi id. "Mercy;" equivalent to "loving-kindness." A tremendous contrast. 
5. An exhortation to the righteous to realize their blessed estate. (Ver. 11.) — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXIII. 
This psalm has no title in the Hebrew, and 
in some manuscripts it is joined on to the 
preceding psalm, and forms one with it. 
But the difference of subject-matter and of 
tone render it highly improbable that that 
arrangement is the correct one. The two 
psalms are best regarded as wholly separate 
compositions, though the writer of the present 
one took for his key-note the last verse of 
Pa. xxxii The Septuagint makes David 
the author, but with no support from the 
■ Hebrew. An author in the reign of Asa 
or Jeboshaphat, and again one in the reign 
of Josiah, has been suggested, but the psalm 
itself scarcely gives a hint towards fixing 
the date. 

As a simple psalm of praise and thanks- 
giving, intended for the service of the 
temple, it is well worthy of admiration, 
being " singularly bright, and replete with 
beautiful imagery " (' Speaker's Com- 
mentary'). Metrically, it consists of six 
strophes, the first and last containing three 
verses each, and the intermediate ones each 
four verses. 

Ver. 1. — Bejoice in the Lord, ye light- 
•ous (see the first clause of Fs. xxxii. 11, of 



which this is almost a repetition; sujl 
comp. also Pss. Ixviii. 3; xcvii. 12> For 
praise ia comely for the upright. The 
Prayer-book Version gives the meaning, less 
literally, but in more idiomatic English, 
"For it becometh well the just to be 
thankful" 

Ver. 2. — Praise the Lord with harp. The 
harp obtains mention here for the first time 
in the Psalms. Reference, however, had 
been mide to it previously in Genesis, Job, 
and the First Book of Samuel. There is 
reason to believe that the instrument, as 
known to the Hebrews, was u simple one, 
consiating of a nearly triangular framework 
of wood, oroased by seven strings. The 
Egyptians were acquainted from early times 
with a very much more elaborate instrument 
— harps which stood aix feet high upon a 
broad base of their own, and had aa many 
as twenty-two strings (Bawlinaon, 'History 
of Ancient Egypt,' vol. i. p. 521). i The harp 
was regarded by the Hebrews as peculiarly 
fitted for saored music (see 1 Sam. x. 5 ; 
2 Sam. vi. 5 ; 1 Chron. xv. 16 ; xxv. 1, 3, 6 ; 
2Chron. V. 12; xxix. 25; Neh. xii. 27, etc.). 
Sing unto him with the psaltery and an 
instrument of ten strings ; rather, sing unto 
him with the lute of ten string'. One instru- 
ment only is here mentioned — a lute or 
psaltery (nebel), having ten strings (comp. 
Pss. xoii. 3 ; cxliv. 9). The nebel was an 
instrument differing from the harp chiefly 
in the arrangement of the strings. It was 



246 



THE BOOK OF -PSALMS. 



[vs. xxxm. 1 — 22. 



used in tlie temple service, as nppears from 
1 Ohron. xv. 6, 28 ; xxv. 1, 6 ; 2 Chron. v. 12 ; 
xxix. 25, etc. 

Ver. 3. — Sing unto Mm a new song (comp. 
PsB. il. 3; xovi. 1 ; xcriii. 1 ; Isa. xlii. 10; 
Kev. V. 9 ; liv. 3). Not necessiiiily a song 
unheard before, but one fresli from the 
singer's heart. Play skilfully with a loud 
noise. The loudness of a thanksgiving song 
was regarded as an indication ot its hearti- 
ness (comp. PsB. xcviii. 4 ; u. 1 ; cl. 5 ; and 
see also 2 Chron. xx. 19; xxx. 21 ; Ezra iii. 
11—13; Nell. xii. 42). 

Ver. 4. — The psalmist proceeds to give 
reasons why God is to be praised, and puts 
in the forefiont this reason : For the word 
of the lord is right ; i.e. the revealed will 
of God is exactly in accord with the eternal 
rule of right. We cannot imagine it other- 
wise, for God would contradict his own 
nature, if he ordained by a positive law 
anything contrary to that rule. But still 
we may be thankful that there is no such 
contradiction — that "tlie Law is holy, just, 
and good" (Eom. vii. 12). And all his 
works are done in truth (comp. Ps. cxi. 7. 8, 
"The works of his hands are verity and 
judgment ; all his commandments are sure. 
They stand fast for ever and ever, and are 
(Inne in trutli and equity"). All God's 
v.orking (nfeipD), all his dealings with his 
cieatures have trutli and equity and faith- 
fulness for their basis. He can be thoroughly 
trusted. This is a second and very strong 
ground for thanksgiving. 

Yer. 5. — He loveth lighteousness and 
judgment. " KiKhteousneas " is the essential 
principle of justice ; "judgment," the carry- 
ing out of the principle in act. God loves 
both — a further ground for praising him. 
The earth is full of the goodness (nT,lomng- 
Mndneas) of the Lord (comp. Ps. cxix. 64). 
The earth is full, not only of God's glory 
(Isa. vi. 3) and of his riches (Ps. civ. 24), 
but also of his mercy, or loving-kindness 
(non)— a ground of thankfulness that all will 
acknowledge, 

Ver. 6. — By the word of the Lord were 
the heavens made. God is to be praised, 
not I inly for his goodness, but also for his 
greatne-s, and especially for his greatness 
in creation (see Ps. xii. 1 — 6). The heavens 
were made " by his word " in a double 
sense — by the Word, who is the Second 
Person of the Trinity (John i. 3; Heb. i. 2, 
J 0), and by a mere utterance, without the 
employment of any mechanical means, as 
«e learn from Gen, i. 6 — H. And all the 
host of them by the breath of his mouth. 
The " host of heaven " is here, undoubtedly, 
the host of heavenly bodies — the sun, moon, 
and stars— as in Gen, ii. 1, These were 
made "by the breath of God's mouth ; " i.e. 
by his simple utterance of the command — 



"Let there be lights in the firmament of 
the heaven, to divide the day from the 
niglit" (Gen. i. 14; comp. Job xxvi. 13). 

Ver. 7. — He gathereth the waters of ths 
sea together as an heap An allusion u> 
Gen. i. 8, but with a glance also at Exod xv 
8 aud- Josh. iii. 13 — 16; as if the original 
gathering, and continued retention, of the 
sea in one convex mass were as great a 
proof of omnipotence as the miracles related 
in those passages. A'e» (pi), "a heap," 
occurs only in the places cited, here, and in 
Pa. Ixxviii. 13. He layeth up the depth in 
storshouses; literally, the deept. The 
waters of the great deep are regarded iS 
stored up by the Almighty in the huge 
cavities of the ocean bed for his own use, 
to be employed at some time or other in 
carrying out his purposes (comp. Gen. vii. 11 
and Jub xxxviii. 22, 23). 

Vers. 8—11. — From the exhortation in 
ver. 1, addressed to the righteous, to praise 
the Lord, the psalmist passes now to a 
second exhortation, addressed to all mankind, 
to fear the Lord. And as before in vers. 
4 — 7, so now in vers. 9 — 11, he assigns 
reasons. God is to be feared (1) on account 
of the power which he showed in creation 
(ver. 9) ; (2) on account of his ability to 
baffle all human counsels that are opposed 
to him (ver. 10) ; and (3) on account of the 
unchangeableuess and perpetuity of his 
own counsels, which nothing can alter 
(ver. 11). 

Ver. 8, — Let all the earth feai the Lord. 
The righteous alone have a right to "praise " 
God (see ver. 1), but "all the earth"— i.e. 
all mankind — may be called upon to " fear" 
him. He is an object of awe and true 
" godly fear " to godly men ; to the uugodl}' 
he is an object of terror and servile fear. 
Let all the inhabitants of the world stand 
in awe of him. Here again, as so often, 
the second hemistich luerely echoes the 
first. 

Ver. 9. — For he spake, audit was done; 
rather, and it wat; the thing of which he 
spake at once existed. See the passaire of 
(Jenesis which Longinns thought so striking 
an instance of the sublime, "And God said. 
Let there be light; and there wa$ light" 
(Gen. i. 8). He commanded, and it stood 
fast; literally, and it stood, Goil's lightest 
word, once uttered, is a standing law, to 
which nature absolutely conforms, and man 
ought to conform (comp. Ps. cxix, 90, 91). 

Ver. 10. — The Lord bringeth the counsel 
of the heathen to nought ; literally, frus- 
trates the counsel of the heathen, causes it lo 
fail (see 2 Kings vi. 8—12 ; Dan vi. 5- 28). 



P8. XXXIII. 1 — 22.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



24') 



He maketh the deviceB of the people — rather, 
thepeoples— of uone effect. Another instanoe 
of the mere repetition of a thought in other 
words. 

Ver. 11. — ^Ihe counsel of the Lord standeth 
for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all 
generations ; or, the devices of his heat t — the 
saiue word as in the latter clause of the 
preceding verse. The contrast is made as 
complete as possib e. Human counaelsand 
devices fail and come to nought, the Divine 
counsels and devices abide, stand fast, and 
remain tirm lor ever (comp. Prov. six. 21 ; 
Isa. XXV. 1 ; Jas. i. 17). 

Vers. 12 — 19. — Further reasons for prais- 
ing God are now assigned, the recitation of 
them being itself a sort of praise. 1. God 
has blessed especially one nation — the 
nation now called upon to praise him 
(ver. 12). 2. His providence and care are 
extended over all mankind (vers. 13, 14). 
a. His gracious influences are poured out 
on the hearts of all (ver. 15). 4. He is the 
sole Protector and Deliverer of men from 
danger and death (vers. 16 — 19). 

Ver. 12. — Blessed is the nation whose 
God is the Lord (eomp. Ps. cxliv. 15), In 
other words, "Blessed is tlje people of 
Israt-1." Other nations did not know God 
as Jehovah — the Self-existent One — or, 
indeed, as a general rule, recognize any one 
and only God. And the people whom he 
hath chosen for his own ii^eritance. The 
intrusion of the word "and " is unfortunate. 
One "nation" or "people" only is spoken 
of, viz. tlie Hebrews. They are " blessed " 
in two respects : first, because they know 
God as Jehovah; and secondly, liecause he 
has oliosen them out of all the nations of 
the earth to be his " peculiar people " (see 
Exod. xix. 5; D. ut. iv. 20; vii, 6; xiv. 2; 
1 Kings viii. 53 ; Ps. cxxxv. 4, etc.). 

Ver. 13. — The Lord looketh from heaven ; 
he beholdeth all the sons of men (comp. 
Pss. xi. 4 ; xlv. 2 ; oii. 19). God's having 
any care at all for man is a wondrous 
condescension, and so worthy of all praise ; 
his having regard to all men — all the frail 
sons of weak and sinful Adam — is still more 
wonderful, still more deserving of eulogy. 

Ver. 14. — From the place of his habitation 
(i.e. heaven) he looketh upon all the inhabit- 
ants of the eaith. A repetition of the 
thought expressed in ver. 13 for the sake of 
emphasis. 

Ver. 15. — He fashioneth their hearts 
alike; rather, he muuldeth the hearts of 
them aU. The hearts of all men are in 
God's keeping, and his gracious influences 
ere exerted to " mould" them aright. Some 
hearts are too stubborn to yield themselves 



np to his fashioning, and refuse to take the 
impress which he desires to impart ; but all, 
or almost all, owe it to him that they are 
not worse than they are. He considereth 
all their works ; rather, he underdandelh all 
their Mjor&s— estimates, i.e., all they do at 
its just value, knowing the true nature of 
each act, its motive, aim, essence. 

Ver. 16. — There is no king saved by the 
multitude of an host j literally, the king is 
not saved by the greatness of his host. The 
article, however, is used generically, bs it is 
with " horse" in the next verse, so that the 
translation of the Authorized Version gives 
the true sense. (For illustration of the 
sentiment, see 2 Chron. xiv. 11 ; 1 Maeo. 
iii. 19.) A mighty man is not delivered by 
much strength (comp. 1 Sam. xvii. 47). 

Ver. 17. — A horse is a vain thing for 
safety; literally, tlie horse; i.e. the species, 
horse, is not to be depended on for safety — 
it is " a vain thing," quite unable to secure 
victory, or even escape, to those who trust 
in it. The use of the horse in war seems 
certainly to be implied here as familiar to 
the writer, whence it is rightly concluded 
that he must have lived later than the 
time of David. Solomon was the first 
Israelite king who enrolled a chariot and a 
cavalry force (1 Kings x. 26). Neither shall 
he deliver any by his great strength. (On 
the " great strength " of the horse, see Job 
xxxix. 19 ; Ps. cxlvii. 10.) 

Ver. 18. — Behold, the eye of the Lord is 
npott them that fear him, upon them that 
hope in his meroy. The eye of tbe Lord is in 
a certain sense upon all (vers. 13, 14), but 
it rests especially upon the righteous. He 
notes how all men act. but carefully watches 
over the safety and prosperity of his faith- 
ful ones. 

Ver. 19. — To deliver their soul from death. 
The protection and deliverance, which a 
man's own strength cannot give, which no 
host, however numerous, can afibrd(ver. 16), 
wliich are not to be obtained from the 
largest chariot or cavalry force (ver. 17), 
can be and will be furnished freely by God, 
who alone keeps souls from death, and 
" delivers " those who are in peril. And to 
keep them alive in famine. Famine was a 
calamity from which Palestine often suffered 
(see Gen. xii. 10; xx\i. 1; xlii. 5; Euth i. 
1 ; 2 Sam. xxi. 1 ; 1 Kings xviii. 5; 2 Kings 
viii. 1, etc.). The righteous were sometimes 
"kept alive" through a time of famine by 
miraculous means (1 Kings xvii. 6, 16;. 

Vers. 20— 22.— A brief address of the 
people to God, arising out of what has been 
declared concerning his goodness (vers. 4, 5, 
12—19) and his power (vers. 6 — 11), which 
oonstitute a call upon theiu for praise and 
adoration. 



248 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. xxxin. 1 — 22. 



Ver. 20. — Our soul waiteth for the lord 
(oomp. Pea. xxv. 21 ; Ixii. 1, 5 ; cxxx. 5, 6, 
etc.). Oonfident in God's good will, and in 
his power to help us, we wait patiently and 
cheerfully for him to manifest himself in 
his own good time. He is our Help and 
our Shield. We trust in no one and nothing 
but him — ^not in armies (ver. 16), not in 
liorses (ver. 17), not in our own strength 
(ver. 16). He alone is our depenriaiioe. 
(For the use of the metaphor "shitld" for 
defence, see Fss. v. 12 ; xviii. 2 ; xxviii. 7 ; 
xci. i ; cxix. 114, etc.) 

Ver. 21. — ^For our heart shall rejoice in 



him, 1)eoause we have trusted in his holy 
Name (comp. Ps. xiii. 5, where the sentiment 
is the same). Trust in God secures hii 
help, and this brings the deliverance at 
which the heart rejoices. 

Ver. 22. — let thy mercy, Lord, be npoa 
us, according as we hope in thee. The 
measure of men's hope and trust in God is 
the measure of his mercy and gooilness to 
them. Those who are assured that they 
have a full trust in him may confidently 
expect a full and complete deliverance. 
Thus, " according as " — l^M — is emphatic. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — (First sermon.) Spiritual worship. " Rejoice," etc. Worship is worth- 
less if it be not spiritual. " God is a Spirit," etc. (John iv. 24). But worship simply 
siiiritual, with no outward expression, no material symbol, would not suffice man's 
nature. Man is not spirit only; he is also flesh. His eye, ear, voice, nerves, brain, 
are as much God's work as his spirit. The worship he owes to God is that of his whole 
nature — body, soul, and spirit. Spiritual life cannot live on public worship only. 
There are chambers in the temple of the soul which are secret from every eye but 
God's. " Thou, when thou prayest," etc. (Matt. vi. 6). But if public worship alone 
will not satisfy our religious need, neither will secret worship. Man's nature is sooiaL 
Even in sorrow, though we may shrink from company, we like sympathy to follow ui 
into our solitude. But joy naturally seeks partners, longs to express itself, is sociable, 
outspoken, and sympathetic. Hence public worship is not an artificial contrivance, 
such as warm, vigorous piety can afford to dispense with or despise ; it is the natural and 
fitting outcome of spiritual life, and one of the most powerful means for its nourishment. 
It is indispensable, and the full, complete exercise of Christian fellowship. Let us speak 
of the reasons and motives which make praise alike a duty and a privilege. 

I. The goodness and faithfulness of God. (Vers. 4, 5.) Characteristic of Bible to 
place moral attributes in the foreground, as chief reason for " rejoicing in the Lord." 
A poet would have put first (what here comes second) the splendour and variety of 
God's works. A philosopher, the infinity, eternity, absolute existence of God. Scrip- 
ture puts that first which at once concerns us most, and is God's highest glory — his 
character. 

II. Globy of God in cebation. His all-wise design and all-powerful will — both 
included in " the word of the Lord " (vers. 6 — 9). 

III. God's all-embracing pkovidbnce. Controlling all human affairs; baflSing 
and making void, when he sees fit, all human counsels ; creating, reading, ruling the 
minds of men (vers. 10 — 15). 

IV. God's special cake and mercy towards his people. Those who love and 
trust him (vers. 10 — 22). This is contrasted with the vanity of earthly power (vers. 
16, 17). Yet, in this boundless prospect, the higliest, deepest, strongest reason for 
praise is not included. To the Old Testament saints the veil still hung before the 
holy of holies. The Holy Spirit gave them the hope and promise of things as yet hid 
in mystery (Matt. xiii. 16, 17 ; Eph. iii. 5 ; 1 John iv. 10). This is the main theme 
of the worship of heaven (Eev. v. 9, 12). 

Only as we have received Chiist into our hearts can we " rejoice in the Lord " as 
our God and Father. Only thus is our worship a preparation for heaven. 

Vers. 1 — 3.— (Second sermon.) Methods of worship. The forms of temple-worship 
to which this psalm refers were unsuited to the Christian Church, because the gospel 
leaves no room for a central holy place on earth. The heavenly sanctuary is open 
to faith, and the whole world has become like the court of God's temple (Heb. ix. 8, 
24 ; John iv. 21, 23). But as our reasons for praising God are not less, but infinitely 
more, than the Old "Testauient saints knew, so Christian worship should not fall below. 



n. xxxiii. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 249 



but rise above theirs. Here are three characters which it should possess : (1) outward 
at well as spiritual ; (2) hearty and Joyful ; (3) collective and puhlic. 

I. Outward as well as spiritual. All strong emotion seeks and prompts utter- 
ance. For grief, because it is often solitary and speechless, God has provided the 
silent language of tears (sometimes, too, for joy, when too big for words). But the 
impulse of joy is to shout and sing. Examples: A troop of children when school ia 
over ; victors in a race or game ; multitude welcoming a sovereign. Prom the begiu- 
ning of the gospel, vocal praise, the worship of song, has had a place of honour in the 
Christian Church (Eph. v. 19 ; Col. iii. 16 ; Acts xvi. 25). What would heaven be 
without it (Rev. xiv. 2; xv. 3)? God might have given language without song; 
voice and hearing without music. Man alone of living creatures can produce music 
(for the song of birds is not music. That some birds can be taught tunes proves that 
they can perceive music, but they have no power to produce it). It is one of God's 
choicest gifts, and its highest use is in his praise. 

II. Heaett and jov tiL. " With a loud noise." The word here used is elsewhere 
translatnl " shout " (N liuj b. xxiii. 21). Also used for the sound of the trumpet (comp. 
Ps. xoviii. 4 — 6). Does the value of our praise, then, depend on its noisings? Is God 
pleased, or man made devout, by noise and shouting ? Certainly not. What these 
passages teach is heartiness in praise. We should throw our soul as well as our voice 
into It. Drawling languor, indolent affectation, mumbling negligence, should be utterly 
banished. I'o be silent, except from infirmity (as lack of ear or voice), in God's praise, 
should be held a disgrace. If " do it heartily " (Col. iii. 23) applies to any duty, surely 
to this. 

III. Collective and public. When the Apostles Peter and John returned " to 
their own company," after their noble testimony before the Sanhedrin, we read that 
" they lifted up their voice to God with one accord " (Acts iv. 24). Not " their 
voices," but " their voice," which must mean either that one spoke for the rest, or 
that they joined in holy song ; for in music many voices become one. Accordingly, 
what follows may well be regarded as a psalm of praise and prsyer, in which one 
prophet led and the rest joined in chorus. It is a very significant fact, that neither in 
the Jewish temple nor in ancient heathen temples was there harmony in our sense of 
the word. The full, rich blending of the four kinds of voice, each in its part, is an art 
for which the world may thank the Church. 

The duty and privilege of praise is one chief lesson of the whole Book of Psalms. 
It draws to a close, as if with the unrisen sunlight of the new covenant shining on it, 
with exhortations to universal praise (Pss. cxlviii. 12 ; cl. 6). This part_ of public 
worship, therefore — praise — as one of the noblest duties and highest privileges of 
Christians, is the concern of the whole Church ; not to be left to a handful of choristers 
or a speciallv excellent voice here and there. Preparation intelligently and harmoni- 
ously to join in psalmody should be part of Christian education. Hearty, skilful, 
joyful, sympathetic psalmody is no mean part of our education for heaven. 

Ver. 6. — Creation. " By the word of the Lord," etc. The Apostle Peter, warning 
us against applying our hasty reckonings to God's dealings, reminds us that "one day 
is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day." This he puts 
in conjunctiun with the fact that "by the word of the Lord the heavens were of old, 
and the earth standing out of the water and in the water," and with the declaration 
that "the heavens and earth which are now, ly the same word are kept in store, 
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment" (2 Pet. iii. 5—8). In like manner 
St. Paul speaks of the Son of God, " by whom also he made the woilds," as " uphold- 
ing all things 6y the word of his power " (Heb. i. 2, 3). God's creatine word is no 
momentary /a<, but a fixed and lasting power and purpose, of which it may bo said, 
as of his written truth, "The Word of God liveth and abideth for ever" (1 Pet. i. 

23 24). 

i. The word op command ; i.e. the putting forth of Divine will and power. The 
fact of oieation stands in the forefront of Bible teacihing. The existence of God is 
never treated in Scripture as needing argument or proof; it is assumed, as self-evident 
to every sane and intelligent mind. The starting-point, therefore, of Bible teaching ia 
that all things owe their origin to his will and power. " lu the beginniug," etc. (Gen. 



260 THE BGOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xxxin. 1— 22. 

i. 1). All other being has its being In him (Acts xvii. 24, 28). Scientific men tell 
us there is a perpetual dissipation of energy in the universal frame of things ; q.d. 
that all the forces of nature are constantly tending to change into heat, and heat is 
constantly passing away and wasting itself in infinite space. If so, it cannot fly beyond 
God's presence and control. The unfathomable fountain of all force, physical and 
spiritual, is with him. He who m ide uU things " in the beginning " can, when he 
pleases, " make all things new " (Ps. cxix. 89 — 91). 

II. The word of wisdom. All man's most laboiioas discoveries — what he calls his 
idence — consist in slowly finding out the truths embodied in God's works. The great 
astronomer Kepler, enraptured with the wonderful results his calculations revealed, 
exclaimed, "0 God, I think thy thoughts after thee!" Mathematics, astronomy, 
chemistry — all the sciences — teach us portions of that Divine wisdom on which nature 
rests. Much of man's wisdom and progress consists in finding out his mistakes. New 
inventions are superseded by newtr. Theories which one generation regards as the 
most advanced truths, the next generation treats as obsolete and exploded. But the 
lapse of time brings to light no mistakes, no miscalculations or oversights, in Gud's 
work. The history of the past, as far as we can decipher it, shows perpetual progress, 
but progress for which preparation was made at the very beginning. 

III. Therefore it is the word op Divine faithfulness. (1 Pet. iv. 19.) These 
three — commanding power, foreseeing wisdom, unchanging faithfulness — make up 
together the great idea of law. The laws of nature are the laws of God — " the word 
of the Lord." The constancy of nature is the image (because the result) of Divine 
unchangeableness (Jer. xxxi. 35, 36 ; xxxiii. 20). 

Inferences. 1. There can be no real opposition between faith and science. Men 
may misunderstand Scripture or misinterpret nature ; but one part of God's truth 
cannot contradict another. 2. The study of God's works is a religious and Christian 
duty (measured, of course, by opportunity and ability). The New Testament teaches 
that the glory of creation is the glory of Christ (John i. 3 ; Col. L 16 ; Heb. L 2), 
It many students of science are atheists or sceptics, that is their fault or their calamity. 
NatTire is full of God. 3. The more we study the revelation of God in nature, the 
more we are struck with its silence as to what we most need to know — what only the 
gospel reveals. " The heavens declare the glory of God," but not his grace. Is there 
a God who created all things ? Is he almighty, all-wise, good, bountiful, patient, just, 
unchangeable? Nature, with innumerable voices, cries aloud, "res/" But is he 
merciful to sinners? Will he pardon the breakers of his laws? Is there atonement 
for sin ; forgiveness ; restoration ; eternal life ? Nature is silent. The Bible alone 
answers these questions (Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7 ; 2 Cor. v. 19, 21). 

Ver. 11. — Permanence of Divine purpose. " The counsel ... for ever." In this 
world of change what is there that abides ? Can we count on anything as unchange- 
able ? One generation passeth away, and another cometh. Laws, customs, languages, 
empires, races, decay and perish. Even " the everlasting mountains " are so only by 
comparis n. " The waters wear the stones." " The mountain falling cometh to 
nought." The answer which our modern science gives to this question is summed up 
in the word " evolution ; " i.e. unfolding, progress, development. Nothing abides ; 
but all things advance to some higher stage, or decay and are dissipated. Scripture 
teaches the doctrine of evolution, only with this difference — not development of a blind 
tiecessity, evolution of law without a Lawgiver, perpetual motion of a self-acting 
machine that is always winding itself up; but the carrying out of a Divine plan, the 
unfolding of the eternal thought and all-comprehending purpose of God (vers. 6, 9, 11). 

I. God acts according to settled plan, UKOHANaBABLE purpose. 1. Not accord- 
ing to the sudden exigency of occasion. " Known unto God," etc. (Acts xv. 18, 
Anthorizi d Version). Nothing is more incomprehensible, yet nothing more certain, 
than that God knows the futun^ as perfectly as the present and the past (Heb. iv. 13). 
Else he neither could have made the world nor could rule it. One great use of Scrip- 
ture prophecy is to make this plain (Isa. xlv. 21 ; xlvi. 10). 2. Not according to blind 
necessity. What we call " laws of nature " are the laws which man discovers in nature 
because God has long ago fixed them there (Ps. cxix. 89 — 91). They are unchange- 
able because he changes not. But to suppose that God's laies interfere with God's will 



PS. xxs'ii. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 261 

is absurd ; it is to make God less powerful than man. Men cannot break or suspend 
the least law of nature, but men use the laws of nature to carry out their will. 3. Not 
according to arbitrary caprice. The will of God, which we are to pray to have done 
(Matt. vi. 10; xxvi. 39), is guided by perfect wisdom, righteousness, and love. Not 
simply " his will," but " the counsel of his will " (Eph. i. 11). 

II. This Divine purpose is unchangeable. Change would imply imperfection 
in the plan or in God himself, want of foresight or instability of purpose (Mai. iii. 6). 
But the manifestation of God's purpose may and must change. The Bible is the 
history of this manifestation (Eph. iii. 4, 5 ; Col. i. 26). What we do not need, or 
could not bear, to know, God still hides (Acts i. 7). 

III. This Divine pukposb shall finally triumph over all that oppose it. Even 
men's wickedness is overruled to bring about (against their will) God's purposes (Acts 
ii. 23 ; iii. 18 ; Ps. Ixxvi. 10). To reconcile this all-embraoing, persistent, victorious 
purpose with human freedom and responsibility is beyond our limited power. True 
wisdom lies in accepting both. But a small part of the great circle of truth is above 
our horizon. 

Lessons. 1. This truth is the greatest encouragement to prayer. If all were not fore- 
seen and provided for, prayer would he useless. Prayer avails, not to change God's 
purposes, but as the appointed condition of the fulfilment of his promises (1 Jolin v. 
1^, 15). 2. The resting-place of faith (Dan. iv. 85 ; Bom. viii. 28). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—22. — Joy in Qod. In this section of the Commentary we aim at discovering 
the unity of the psalm, and of dealing with it accordingly, reserving the treatment of 
specific verses as separate texts, for another department. This psalm has neither title nor 
author's name appended thereto. It is manifestly an outburst of glad and gladdening 
song from some Old Testament believer, and is a glorious anticipation of Phil. iv. 4. It 
is refreshing to the spirit to find that in the olden times there were pious and holy souls, 
receptive of the revelation which God had even then given of himself, and who could 
gather up their thoughts in grateful calm as they mused on the perfections of their 
ever-reignino; Lord. In this psalm there are no historic considerations presented, nor 
is there any individual experience suggested at which we have to look in studying this 
amazing illustration of joy in God. It is the •' itself by itself" — ^the pure thing, the 
uplifting of a soul from the cloudland of earth to the sunland of heaven. Here is — 

I. An enrapturino view of the glort of oub revealed God. We use this 
word "revealed," as indicated by this psalm, advisedly on two grounds. For (1) the 
name " Jehovah " (ver. 1) is the name by which God revealed himself to Israel (Exod. 
vi. 3), The name "I am that I am" at once removes the God of the 'Hebrews far 
above all anthropomorphism. Then (2) in ver. 4 we are told, " The Word of the Lord 
is right ; " so that, as the word ii the expression of thought, and as expressed thought 
indicates will, it is here declared that God had made known his will (see Ps. ciii. 7; 
Heb. i. 1). How far God's early disclosures of himself went, our Lord Jesus Christ 
tells us (Matt. xxii. 31, 32). And it is by the light from words of God that we read his 
natural works. Having, then, God revealed by name and by word, what are the con- 
tents of that revelation which ai e here pointed oat ? 1. Bight. (Ver. 4.) The Word 
of God, as given under the Old Testament, was pre-eminently right. As being such, 
the whole of the hundred and nineteenth psalm extols it. And now no nobler ethical 
code does the world possess than that given to Moses and the prophets, and confirmed 
by Christ. 2. Truth. (Ver. 4.) I.e. faithfulness. As righteousness marks the Word, 
so fidelity to the Word marks the works of God. 3. Goodness. (Ver. 5.) I.e. loving- 
kindness. The earth is full of it. The sound eye rejoices m the sunshine ; and the 
pure heart reads the goodness of God everywhere. 4. Fo^iier. (Vers. 6, 7,> 9.) We 
cannot rejoice in bare power ; but when infinite power is in alliance with perfect good- 
ness and with lovin,«j-kindnes3, then we can. 5. Wisdom. (Ver. 10.) There is not 

' See Kirkpatrlok's interesting note on ver. 7. Throughout the whole psalm, indeed, 
his brief notes are most suggestive and helpful. See also Dr. Green on ver. 7. 



-53 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxiii. 1—22. 

only a power that sways matter, but a wisdom which controls mind, so that among 
the nations there can never be any plotting which can frustrate or intercept his plans, 
'i. Omniscience. (Vers. 14, 15.) He espias from afar the hidden thought of every 
soul (Prov. XV. 3 ; Ps. cxxxix.). He knows men's hearts, as having created them 
(ver. 15) " alike," j.e. altogether, in one. There are variations in miud, but yet all 
minds act responsively to some necessary laws of thought inlaid in their original 
structure. 7. Steadfast counsels. (Ver. 11.) This is true of the plans of providence ; 
but it is most gloriously true of the hidden mysteries and triumphs of his grace (1 Cor. 
ii. 7 ; Bph. iii. 9 ; Acts xv. 18). 8. All his counsels are in alliance with a holiness 
which wa/rrants and invites confidence. (Ver. 21.) He cannot do wrong ; he caunut 
be unfaithful or unkind (Ps. xcii. 15). 9. On some he looks with special favour and 
love. (Vers. 18, 19 ; see Ps. xviil. 25, 26.) Those who trust God most fully and 
follow him most faithfully will find that their lot is as beautifully ordered for them as 
if God had no one else to occupy his care. They will be guarded in peril, supplied in 
need, and comforted in sorrow ; the loving glances of a gracious eye and the cheering 
words from a loving heart will give to such many a song in the night. Let all these 
nine features of God's glory be put together and looked at in blended sweetness, and 
see if they will not raise to an ecstasy of delight. 

II. The joy which upright souls have in such a God is unbodndbd. Yes. 

1. ITie joy has uprightness for its condition. Upright souls I Only such. But this does 
not mean absolutely perfect men, but men who mourn over the wrong, who have 
confessed it before God, who have received his pardoning mercy, and who loyally 
confoim their lives to God's holy will and Word, who would not knowingly harbour 
any sin or anght that would grieve their God — men who have gone, in fact, through 
the experiences of Ps. xxxii. (of which, indeed, this may possibly be a continuation). 

2. This joy has grace for its resting-place. (Vers. 18, 22.) "Mercy." The joy would 
have no ground stable enough if it were settled on any other basis than God himself, 
nor unless that basis were " mercy." "0 God, be merciful to mel " is the cry which 
goes up from the penitent's lips more and more pleadingly as he moves forward in the 
pardoned life. 3. This joy has all that Ood is, has, and does for its contents. So the 
whole psalm teaches us; for the pardoning mercy of God has brought us so near to 
him that we know there is for us such an outpouring of love Divine as makes us 
infinitely rich for time and eternity. 4. 2%is Joy has boundless hope for its outlook. 
(Ver. 22.) As Bishop Pcrowne well remarks, " hope " indicates the perpetual attitude 
of a trusting and waiting Church. Believers know that God will do exceeding 
abundantly for them above all they can ask or think. As the rich disclosures of God 
under the prophets have advanced to their unveiling in the unsearchable riches of 
Christ, so will the wonders of Christ in grace move forward to those of Chiist in his 
glory. We yet seek a Fatherland. " God is not ashamed to be called our God, for he 
liath prepared for us a city." 5. This joy has prayer for its upward expression. 
(Ver. 22, "Let thy mercy, Lord, be upon us," etc.) Not that this is its only 
form of expression (fur see below), but it is a joy which must and will find outlet in 
prayer for the constant supply of that mercy which feeds and sustains it. 

III. The joy is such that it may well ripen into a holy fellowship op 
Musio AND song. Here in vers. 1 — 3 the psalmist calls on all upright souls to join 
him in sounding forth the praises of the Lord. 1. Ood having taken off all our 
burdens of guilt and care, the tongue is set free for praise. 2. A common joy in Ood 
may well suggest a grand concert of song. Fellowship in trouble is soothing ; fellowship 
in peril is uniting; fellowship in need touches common sympathy; fellowship in 
gladness creates a grand inspiration and a mighty burst ot praise. 3. In giving vent 
to our joy musical instruments may be " skilfully" made subservient thereto. (Ver. 3.) 
To plead against this verse tljat we live in another dispensation, is not in place; for 
musical instruments in the hands of sanctified men are the servants of the Spirit, and 
we do but utilize God's own world of harmony when we press them into the service of 
celebrating redeeming love. 4. The right use and ample enjoyment in hallowed mirth, 
as we celebrate the praises of the Loid, may be made a holy and blessed means of 
grace. It is of no mean importance to recruit the bodily powers for God by means of 
the enjoyment of sacred music and song. And if, indeed, Christian people of musical 
tastes would seek to sanctify their special powers for God and his Church, many an 



PS. xxxni. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 253 

abuse of their talents might be prevented, and many a holy outlet for their use secured. 
Well might Frances R. Havergal write — 

" Take my voice, and let me sing 
Always, only, for my King." 

5. ITie largest scope for the noblest music is opened up by the wonders of redeeming 
love. Poetry, painting, sculpture, music, — all are grandest when inspired by the 
Cross. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — This is a hymn of praise to God, as at once the Almighty Creator and 
Ruler of the world, and the Protector of his chosen people. Ver, 12 may be regarded 
as the pivot on which the whole psalm turns. What was true ideally, and in part of 
Israel, is true in fact and perfectly of God's people. " Blessed " — 

I. Because the Lobd is theib God. The prophets delight to mark the contrast 
between the gods of the heathen and Jehovah (Deut. xzxii. 31 ; Pb. Izxxvi. 8 ; Isa. xl. 
18 — 25). The vital difference between the false and the true was brought out 
powerfully in Egypt (Exod. viii. 10), and with still more intense and dramatic effect on 
Mount Carmel iu the day of Elijah (1 Kings xviii. 24). Nu doubt some of the heathen 
attained to high views of duty, but amongst the people it was otherwise. As has been 
said, their gods were like themselves — 

** Oods partial, changeful, passionate, unjuBt, 
Whose attributes were rage, revenge, and lust." 

But our God is the living and true God. His character commands onr highest 
admiration (vers. 1 — 3). His Word and his works call forth our most devoted homage 
and praise (vers. 4 — 11). Idolaters and all with idol-loving hearts may be constrained 
to say, in the day of their trouble, "They have taken away my gods, and what have I 
more ? " (Judg. xviii. 24). But no power can take away our God. He says to us, " I 
will never leave thee." And we cry to him with exulting faith, " Whom have I in 
heaven but thee ? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee " (Ps. Lxxiii. 
23 — ^28). To Israel God appealed as the God of Abraham, and claimed their obedience 
as the Lord their God, who had brought them out of the land of Egypt (Exod. iii. 6 ; 
XX. 1) ; but he stands in a nearer relationship, and has higher claims upon us, as the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ (Eph. i. 3, 7 ; 1 Pet. i. 3, 7). 

XL BeOAUSE nNDEB GhlD's GOVERNMENT THEY ABB BEING FOEMBD I'D THE 

OHABACTEB OF BIQHTE0U8NB8S. Rigliteousncss is the great want of the world. Get 
people made righteous — right in their being and their life, and there would be an end 
to the great evils that afflict society. Righteousness is the craving of all consciences 
and the hope of all troubled hearts. God's great aim is to make his people righteous. 
For tills end he has given his Law ; for this he sent his Son into the world ; for this, 
as the potter with the clay, he is continually working in his gracious providence, 
"fashioning" the hearts of men. Well, therefore, has Paul said, "We are his 
workmanship" (Eph. ii. 10). God is blessed because he is righteous; and he would 
have his people made happy after the same fashion (Isa. xxxiL 17). "Righteousness 
exalteth a nation" (Prov. xiv. 34) ; and this holds true also of individuals. " Blessed 
are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness ; for they shall be filled " 

(Matt. V. 6). XT • 1. 

III. Because thet have a gbeat future befobb them. Nations have their 
decline and fall. Even Israel, because unfaithful, have been scattered (Deut. xxix. 
24—28); but the true Israel shall be under the eye and the keeping of the Lord for 
ever. They are his own inheritance (cf. Eph. i. 18). Therefore they are encouraged to 
" hope," to " wait," to " trust," Their golden age is not in the past, but in the future. 
What Jacob said on his death-bed may be said with joy by all his true children, " I 
have waited for thy salvation, Lordl" (Gen. xlix. 18; cf. Luke li. 28—32 ; 1 Pet. i. 
10-13).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 11. A call to praise Ood. The psalm is anonymous, and was composed 

apparently to celebrate some deliverance of the nation from heathen oppression, 
lesuIVo-g from God's interposition and without war. Vers. 1 — 3 are a summons to 



264 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS 



[ps. XXXIV. 1— 25i, 



praise God, the song to be aoocitniaaied with instrumental music. God ii to be 
[■raised — 

I. As THE God of eevblatiox. (Vers. 4, 5.) 1. His Word is upright, always 
fulfilling itself. 2. All his conduct is faithful and righteoua. 3. All his manifestatiom 
of himself are full of loving-kindness. 

II. As THE Orbatob of THE WORLD. (Vers. 6 — 9.) 1. His WoM — the breath of 
his mouth— was sufficient for the creation of the heavens. 2. He gathered together 
the waters of the sea. 3. Such manifestations of his power ought to fill us with, 
reverence and awe. Study God's works as well as his Word. In the nineteenth verso 
we have the thought of the sixth verse repeated. 

III. As THE IRRESISTIBLE RuLER IN THE HISTORY OF MEN. (Vers. 10, 11.) Con- 
trast here between what God does with the thoughts and counsels of men — bringing 
them to nought — and what he does with his own — makinc; them to stan<l fast to all 
generations. The counsels which he brings to nought are evil counsels ; he prosper* 
and establishes the counsels of the righteous, and fulfils his own plans and pm'poses. — S. 

Vers. 12 — ^22. — What God's people possess in him. The call to praise God is sup- 
ported by a setting forth of that which his people possess in him. The theme of thi& 
second part of the psalm is set forth in the twelfth verse, "Blessed is the nation 
whose God is Jehovah." 

I. Because God is the Creator he has the most perfect knowlbdoe. 
(Vers. 13 — 15.) He not only observes men's doings, but knows their hearts, as having 
created them. You cannot know a man perfectly from his acts ; you must know his 
thoughts and purposes to know his character. 

II. His PEOPLE have IN GoD A STRONGER DePBNOB THAN THE GREATEST WORLDLY 

POWER WOULD BE. (Vers. 16 — 12.) 1. The victory of the king and the safety of the 
warrior are not their own works. Even the war-horse, a thing that promises much 
in strength, can in reality do nothing apart from God's overruling power. 2. The eye 
of Ood is directed towards those that fear him, to deliver them from danger and death. 

III. The Church acknowledges God as its Help, its Shield, and its Sourob. 
OF JOY. (Vers. 20— 22.) 1. The Chwch waiU fm- Qod. (Ver. 20.) To be its Help 
and Shield. 2. The Church rejoices in the holiness of Ood. If he were not perfectly 
good we should have to tremble with terror and not rejoice. 3. The Church hopes in 
Ood. Hope has been the attitude of the Church through all the ages. It must be our 
personal attitude towards God in Christ. " Which hope we have as the anchor of the 
soul, both sure and steadfast," etc. What can sufferers do but hope ? — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXIV. 



This is the third of the alphabetical psalms, 
and appears to have a special connection 
with the second of them, Ps. xxv. Like 
that psalm, it omits the vau, and has a 
second pe at the end, which, moreover, 
is furnished by the same word (podeh}. 
According to the title, it is a psalm of 
David, and written on the partioulur occa- 
sion of liis dismissal by Aohish (Abimeleoh), 
when lie had foolishly feigned himself mad 
in consequence of what he had heard the 
servants of Achish say (1 Sam. xxi. 10 — 15). 
As there is nothing in the psalm specially 
suggestive of this occasion, the statement 
in the title must, it would seem, embody 
Bn ancient tradition. It is a comnositinn of 



a mixed character, being in part didaotio 
(vers. 11 — 22), in part a psalm of thanks- 
giving (vers. 1 — 10). Metrically, it has 
been divided into four strophes (Kay), the 
first and second of five verses each, the 
third and fourth each of six versos. But 
there is no corresponding division of the- 
matter. 

Ver. 1.— I will bless the Lord at aU. 
times ; i.e. even in times of adversity. If 
the statement in the title may be relied 
upon, David's fortunes were now at the 
lowest ebb. He had fled from the court of 
Saul on finding that Saul was determined 
to put him to death (1 Sam. xx. 31). He 
had hoped to find a safe refuge with Aohish, 
but had been disappointed. He was on the 
point of becoming a fugitive and an outlaw,. 
a dweller in dens and caves of the eartb 



w. XXXIV. 1 — 22.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



255 



(1 Sam. xxii. 1). He had as yet no body 
of followers. We cannot but admire his 
piety in composing, at such a timi', a song 
of thanksgiving to God. His praise sliall 
continually be in my mouth (com p. Pss. 
xoii. 1, 2 ; cxlv. 1, 2 ; oxlvi. 1, 2 ; Eph. v. 
20; 1 Thess. V. 18). "Continually" must 
be understood as meaning either "every 
day " or " many times eveiy day," but must 
not be taken quite literally, or the business 
of life would be at a stand. 

Yer. 2. — Uy soul shall make her hoast in 
the Lord (comp. Fs. 'xliv. 8; and for the 
meaning of "boasting in the Lord," see 
Jer. ix. 24, "Let him that glorieth glory 
in this, that he understandeth and knowetb 
me, that I am the Lord which executeth 
loving-kindness, judgment, and righteous- 
ness, in the earth "). The humble shall hear 
thereof, and he glad. They will anticipate 
joy for themselvea when they hear of my 
rejoicing. 

Yer. 3. — magnify the lord with me, and 
let us exalt his Name together. Xot con- 
tent with praising God in his own person, 
the psalmist calls on Israel generally to 
praise the Lord witli him. He then pro- 
ceeds to assign reasons why God should be 
praised (vers. 4 — 10). 

Yer. 4. — I sought the Lord, and he heard 
me. To " seek the Lord " is not merely to 
trust in him, but to fly to him, and make 
our requests of him in our troubles. David 
apparently speaks of some special occasion 
on which he "sought the Lord," and some 
special request which he made of him, but 
does not tell us what the occasion or request 
was. We may presume that it was in some 
way connected witli liis "escape to the cave 
AduUam " (1 Sam. xxii. 1). And delivered 
me from all my fears; literally, from all 
the things which I feared (comp. Isa. Ixvi. 4). 

Yer. 5. — They looked unto him, and were 
lightened ; or, were brightened (Hengsten- 
berg); i.e. had their countenances liglited 
up and cheered. And their faces were 
not ashamed. As they would have been if 
God had made no response to their appeal 
(comp. Pss. XXV. 2, 3 ; Ixxiv. 21). 

Yer. 6. — ^Ihis poor man oried, and the 
Lord heard him, and saved him out of all 
his troubles. Almost a repetition of ver. 4, 
but in the third person instead of the first. 
The " poor man " intended is David him- 
self, not ail ideal poor man. Otiierwise the 
demonstrative " this " (ni) would not have 
been employed. 

Ver. 7. — The angel of the Lord enoampeth 
round about them that fear him, and de- 
livereth them. According to some com- 
mentators (Eosenmiiller, 'Four Friends,' 
and others), the expression, " angel of the 
Lord," is here used as a, collective, and 
means the angels generally. Willi ihii 



certainly agrees the statement that the 
angel "encampeth round about them that 
fear him;" and the illustration from 2 
Kings vi. 14 — 18 is tlms exactly apposite. 
But others deny that "the angel of the 
Lord " has ever a collective sense, and 
think a single personality must necessarily 
be inteudeu, which they regard as identical 
with " the captain of the Lord's host," who 
appeared to Joshua (Josh. v. 14, 15), and 
"the angel of the Lord's presence" spoken 
of by Isaiah (Ixiii. 9) ; so Kay, Hengsten- 
berg. Bishop Horsley, Professor Alexander, 
and the ' Speaker's Commentary.' When 
pressed to say how this one angel can 
" encamp round " a number of persons, tliey 
reply that, of course, he has liis subordinates 
with him — a "spangled host," tliat"keep 
watch in squadrons bright ; " and that he is 
said to do what they do, which is no dout>t 
quite in accordance with ordinary modes of 
speech. Thus, however, the tno expositiont 
become nearly identical, since, according to 
botli, it is the augelio host which " encamps 
around " the faithful. 

Ver. 8. — taste and see that the Lord is 
good; i.e. put the matter to the test of 
experience (comp. I Pet. ii. 3). There is 
no other way of really knowing how good 
God is. Blessed is the man that trnsteth 
in him (comp. Pss. ii. 12 ; Ixxxiv. 12 ; Prov. 
xvi. 20 ; Isa. xxx. 18 ; Jer. xvii. 7). Trust 
in God is a feeling which is blessed in 
itself. God also showers blessings on such 
as trust in him. 

Yer. 9 — fear the Lord, ye his saints. 
Fear of God, a reverent and godly fear, will 
always accompany trust in God, snoh as 
God approves. The saints of God both 
love and fear him (comp. Po. xxxi, 23). 
There is no want to them that fear him, 
since God supplies all their wants. 

Yer. 10. — The young lions do laok, and 
suffer hunger. Some suppose the "young 
lions" here to represent the proud and 
violent, as in Job iv. 10. But it is simpler 
to take the present passage literally. In 
God's animal creation even tlie strongest 
suffer want for a time, and have no remedy; 
his human creatures need never be in want, 
since they that seek the Lord shall not 
want any good thing. It is open to them 
to " seek the Lord " at any time. 

Yers. 11 — 22. — The second, didactic, part 
of the psalm here begins. The writer 
assumes the rdle of the teacher, and, 
addressing his readers as "sons," under- 
takes to " teach them tlie fear of the Lord " 
(ver. 11), or, in other words, to point out to 
them in what true religion consists. This 
he does in two remarkable verses (vera. 13, 
14); after which he oroceeda, ia the re- 



256 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 



[pB. XXXIV. 1 — aa. 



mainder of the psalm, to give reasons which 
may incline them to the practice of it (vers. 
15—22). The reasons resolve themselves 
into two main grounds — the tender love 
and care of God for the righteous (vers. 15, 
17 — 20, 22), and his hostility to and punish- 
ment of the wicked (vers. 16, 21). 

Yer. 11. — Come, ye children, hearken onto 
me (comp. ProT. iv. 1 ; viii. 32 ; 1 John 
ii. 1, 18 ; iii. 18 ; iv. 4, etc.). I will teach 
yon the fear of the Lord ; i.e. I will teach 
you the nature of true religion. Note the 
absence from what follows of any merely 
legal requirements, and the simple insist- 
ance on right moral conduct (vers. 13, 14). 

Ver. 12. — What man is he that desiieth 
life? Like most moralists, David begins 
with asking men — Do they wish for happi- 
ness ? If so, and he assumes that it is so 
(oomp. Arist., * Eth. Nic.,' L i. — vii.), then 
he will point them out the way to it. And 
loveth many days, that he may see good t 
Mere life, mere length of days, would not 
suffice for men, would be no object of desire, 
unless it were assumed that the days would 
bring them " good " — in other words, that 
they would be happy days. 

Ver. 13. — Keep thy tongue from evil, and 
thy lips_ from speaking gvile. If the end 
be happiness, the means will be right moral 
conduct; and, first of all, right government 
of the tongue. Sins of the tongue are 
numerous, and abundantly noted in the 
Psalms (Pss. v. 9 ; x. 7 ; xii. 3 ; xv. 3 ; L 
19 ; Ivii. 4 ; Ixxiii. 8, 9, etc.). They are 
more difficult to avoid than any others; 
they cling closer to us ; they are scarcely 
ever wholly laid aside. " If any man offend 
not in word, the same is a perfect man, and 
able also to bridle the whole body " (Jas. 
iii 2). The meek Moses " spake unadvisedly 
with his lips" fPs. cvi. 38). Job "darkened 
counsel by words without knowledge "(Job 
xxxviii. 2). St. Peter's words on one 
occasion drew upon him the rebuke, " Get 
thee behind me, Satan " (Matt. xvi. 23). 

Ver. 14. — Depart from evil, and do good. 
From words the psalmist proceeds to acts, 
and, in the briefest possible way, says all 
that can be said. First, he enjoins negative 
goodness — "depart from evil," «.e. do 
nothing that is wrong; brealc no laws of 
God, no command of oonsoience; have a 
conscience void of offence, both towards 
God and towards man. Secondly, he 
requires positive goodness — "Do good ; " i.e. 
actively perform the will of God from the 
heart; discharge every duty ; practise every 
virtue ; carry out the precepts of the moral 
law in every particular. Seek peace, and 
pursue it. It is not clear why this virtue 
-K>ue of many — is specially enjoined ; but 



probably some circumstances of the time 
made the recommendation advisable. 

Ver. 15. — The eyes of the lord are upon 
the righteous (oomp. Job xxxvi. 7; Pss. 
xxxiii. 18 ; 1 Pet. iii. 12 ; and see the 
comment on Ps. xxxiii. 18). And his ears 
are open unto their cry. The specific 
statement of ver. 6 is now generalized. 
What Qoi had done in the case of the 
psalmist, he will do in all other similar 
cases. His eyes will be open to his people's 
needs, and his earsattent unto their prayers 
(2 Chron. vi. 40). 

Ver. 16. — The face of the Lord is against 
them that do evil, to out off the remembranoe 
of them from the earth. Conversely, God 
turns away his face from tlie wicked, and 
punishes them by causing their very mtmory 
to perish from among men (comp. Job xviii. 
17 ; Ps. cix. 13 ; Prov. x. 7). The natural 
wish for continuance, which causes men to 
build themselves monuments, and erect 
other great works, and delight in offspring, 
and seek to establish their families, and 
create entails, and have their portraits 
taken, and " call the lands after their own 
names" (Ps. xlix. 11), was especially strong 
in the Hebrew race, and made the threat 
that tlieir remembrance should be cut off 
peculiarly terrible to them. 

Ver. 17. — The righteous cry, and the lord 
heareth; literally, they cry, and the Lord 
heareth. " Cry," which by the ordinary 
rules of grammar should have for its 
subject tlie "evil-doers" of the preceding 
verse, must, it is obvious from the context, 
refer to the "righteous" of ver. 15, who 
are the predominant subject of the entire 
passage (vers. 15 — 22). And delivereth them 
out of all their troubles (comp. ver. 19 and 
Ps. liv. 7). 

Ver. 18.— The Lord is nigh onto then 
that are of a broken heart ; and saveth snob 
as be of a contrite spirit. On the value in 
God's sight of a broken and contrite heart, 
see Ps. li. 17 ; and on his mercy towards 
the truly contrite, see Ps. cxlvii. 3 ; Isa. 
Ivii. 15; Ixix. 2. He "is nigh" to such 
persons, he " dwells with" them, " looks to 
them," "revives their heart," "heals" 
them, " saves " them. 

Ver. 19. — Uany are the afBiotions of the 
righteons (oomp. Job xxxvi. 8—10; Acts 
xiv. 22; 1 Cor. xv. 19; 2 Tim. iii. 12; 
Heb. xi. 33—38 ; xii. 6—10, etc.). The 
righteous suffer afSictions because they are 
so imperfectly righteous. They need 
purging, purifying, chastening, to rid them 
of the dross and defilement of sin which 
still clings to them, and from which they 
are never wholly freed while they continue 
in the flesh. " We must through much 
tribulation enter into the kingdom of God " 
(Acts xiv. 22). We must, like the Captain 



PB. XXXIV. 1 — 22.] 



THB BOOK OF PSALMS. 



267 



of OUT salvation, be. " made perfect through 
suffering" (Heb. ii. 10). But the Lord 
delivereth him out of them all. When they 
have done their appointed work of purging, 
purifying, instructing, improving, or what- 
ever else their work may be, God removes the 
aiSictions with which he has visited us or 
allowed us to be visited, ultimately, when 
he takes us to himself, mercifully delivering 
ui " out of them all." 

Yer. 20. — He keepeth all his bones : not 
one of them is broken. Tlie " bones " are 
put for the entire frame, or body, of a man 
(comp. Pss. vi. 2 ; xxxi. 10 ; xxxii. 3 ; xxxviii. 
3; xlii. 10; cii. 3). God "keepeth," i.e. 
watches over, keeps from barm, the entire 
persons of the righteous, letting no hurt 
touch them, but such as he permits and 
sees to be needful. In using tlie phrase, 
"not one of them is broken," the psalmist 
probably alludes to Exod. xii. 46 and Numb, 
ix. 12, taking the Pasehal lamb as a type 
of innocence, and so of godliness. 

Yer. 21. — Evil shall slay the wicked. Hii 



own misconduct shall bring destruction 
upon the wicked man — destruction of the 
body in many oases (Ps. vii. 15, 16), in all, 
if he persists in his wickedness, destruction 
of the soul. And they that hate the 
righteous shall he desolate ; rather, shall be 
held guilty (comp. Ps. v. 10, and the 
comment ad loc). 

Yer. 22. — The Lord redeemeth the soul of 
his servants (comp. Fas. xxv. 22 ; cxxx. 
8). Some translate, " The Lord delivers" 
etc. But the LXX. have \VTpiiaeTiu. 
And the verb used means primarily, as Dr. 
Kay says, " to sever," then " to set free, 
release, emancipate ; especially to set free 
by paying a price ; to redeem, or ransom." 
And none of them that trust in hiis shall be 
desolate ; rather, sliall be held gviUy, or 
shall be condemned — the same word as it the 
preceding verse (comp. Eom. viii. 33, 34). 
Those whom God has redeemed he justifies, 
and saves from all condemnation. They 
are " passed from death unto life " (John 
T. 24). 



H0MILBTIC8. 

Ver. 1. — A duty, a privilege, a purpose. " I will bless,*" etc. A Christian man, 
burdened and oppressed with many troubles, was seeking relief in prayer. But even 
prayer was difficult. Suddenly these words came into his mind, " I will bless the 
LotA at all times." "At all times?" bethought; "tbea now." He began to think 
of his reasons for blessing God, and as the scale in which he weighed God's mercies 
grew heavy, the scale in wMch he weighed his trials grew light by comparison. His 
sorrowful prayer was turned into thanksgiving; and he rose up strengthened and 
comforted. These words express a duty, a privilege, a purpose. 

I. A DUTY — of perpetual obligation. God's mercies are " new every morning " 
(Lam. iii. 23), nay, every moment. Some signal instance may be the Moses' rod to 
make the stream of thankfulness gush forth, as, according to the title, was the case 
with this psalm. But as the clock is silently marking time every moment, and not 
only when it strikes the hour, so the silent sense of God's goodness should never die 
out of the Christian's heart, though there are special times for his lips to utter praise. 
Every breath, every heart-beat, is a new gift of life (Acts xvii. 28 ; Ps. cvii. 1, 8). 

IL A PBiviLEGE — of the noblest kind. If it is true that every duty brinos reward 
in some sense with it, this is eminently true here. 1. Gcd accepts our praise, as 
glorifying him (Ps. 1. 23). 2. Praise hallows our enjoyments (Deut. vii. 11, 12) ; and 
brings sunshine into our darkest seasons (Acts xvi. 25). 3. It is the noblest employ- 
ment, that in which we rise nearest to heaven. Not seeking, as in prayer, from God, 
but striving to render somewhat to him, we lay our hearts open for his best blessings. 

III. A thoughtful, wise, and holy ptjbpose. The fulfilment of this duty and exercise 
of this privilege are not to be left to transient impulse or to rare occasions. " I wiU . . . 
at all Umea." There are set occasions when " praise is comely." And there are sunny 
seasons, when God puts "a new song" in our mouth. But the text points to the 
habitual culture of a thankful spirit. 

Conclusion. 1. Forget not God's mercies. Review them. 2. Place over against; 
them thy unworthiness. 3. Let the heart be often lifted up in thankfulness, when 
the lips are silent and the hands and eyes busy with the world. "At all times; " 
" for his mercy endureth for ever." 

Yer. 8.— The test of experience. " Oh, taste and see I " The glory of our age is its 
experimental science. The method of the old philosophers, against which Lord Bacon 

PSALMS. ' 



258 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxiv. i— 22, 



wrote, was to assume certain principles as true, and reason down to the facts. The 
new method, to which all the victories of modern science are due, is to reason back 
from facts to principles ; first carefully observing, then testing your conclusions ; first 
learning by experience, then verifying by experience. This method, which in human 
s'^ience is but some three centuries old, is the method of the Bible from the beginning. 
Ood has led his Church step by step ; taught his children by experience (Gral. iii. 23 — ■ 
26). The lessons of the Bible are the voice of experience. The aim of the Gospels, as 
of the entire Bible, is not merely to convey instruction, but to create a supernatural 
experience. And its invitation to each of us is to put Divine truth to the test, 
and make this experience our own. " Oh, taste and see," etc. ! (1) The goodness of 
God can be truly known only by personal experience. (2) If there be any truth to 
which experience bears convincing testimony, it is this : " that the Lord is good," (3) 
This experience is within reach of every one to whom the gospel is preached. 

I. If you wotjld see, you must taste; and if Yotr do taste, you will see. 
Certainty is to be had, and this is the road to it. "Taste" is the most expressive 
image for personal experience. It is personal. Tastes difiFer. What to one is delicious, 
to another is insipid, to a third nauseous. To taste fully, you must not slightly touch 
with your tongue, but eat or drink — receiving its substance. So, in Scripture langua,L;e, 
to taste death means to die. To taste God's goodness means to receive and enjoy it in 
heart-felt experience (Eom. v. fi). For example : 1. God's goodness in pardoning sin 
can be known only by the pardoned sinner — by actual repentance and faith. Illust.: 
Matt. ix. 2 — 7. 2. God's goodm ss in answering prayer can be known only by those 
who pray (ver. 6). Illust. : Disobedient, spendthrift, runaway ion, writing in sore 
extremity from a foreign land to his father. Under the sea, over the hills and plains, 
the wire carries the swift message, " Come home. Money sent. All forgiven." That 
son knows his father's heart as he never knew it before. 3. The goodness of God, 
revealed and stored in the Bible, can be known only by long study and diligent search 
(Ps. cxix. 97, 103). Ps. oxix. 72 would be unmeaning cant in the mouth of a good many 
Christians. They are on visiting terms with their Bible ; know it as you know one 
whom you meet daily in the street and call on for a few minutes now and then. Spend 
a day with him in his home or yours, talking over your troubles, and you will learn 
what twenty years of morning calls would never teach. 

II. EXPEBIENOB HAS NO SUKEB LESSON THAN THIS: "THE LOBD IS GOOD.'' The 

Bible is our great storehouse of experience (Ps. cxvi. 1 ; 2 Tim. i. 12). Christian 
experience in all ages continues and confirms this testimony — the most remarkable 
body of practical testimony on record (' Basis of Faith,' pp. 358 — 360). Our lack of 
experience constitutes no reason for questioning the reality of this experience, or doubt- 
ing the truth to which it bears witness. Truth is truth, believed or not. The earth 
went round before Copernicus was bom ; and still would, if all men relapsed into the 
old superstition that it is immovable. The world would be full of God's goodness, 
though all were idolaters or atheists (Acts xiv. 17). But personal experience begets 
invincible certainty (John ix. 25). 

III. If this bxpeeienoe be not toubs, it ought to be ; IT MAY BE. God offers 
it. These words are an invitation — a warrant. Beware of turning them into an 
upbraiding — a condemnation (John v. 40 ; Lam. iv. 2 ; Luke xix. 42). Are you 
young, happy, prosperous? I'hank God for his goodness. But he has better gifts, 
which vnll last when these fail (Matt. vi. 19). Are you poor, friendless, sorrowful 
(Isa. Iv. 1 ; Matt. xi. 28) ? Are you lost, helpless against temptation, burdened with 
tin ? Oh, taste and see the goodness God waits to pour out upon you (Eev. xx. 17 ; 
Rom. X. 11—13) 1 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — Life's experiences turned to manifold uses.'^ There is no sufiScient reason 
for severing this psalm from the detail of history to which its title refers; and it is 

' Another direction in which the unity of this psalm may be made use of in pulpit 
exposition would be, " The experiences of the fathers recorded for the use of their children : 
a sermon to the young." 



vs. xxxiv. 1— 22,J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 269 

much to be wished that its writer had uniformly turned his own experience to a use 
as wise as that which he here urges upon others.^ But David's pen might be golden, 
though sometimes his spirit was leaden ; and we may study with great advantage the 
ideal of life which he sets before us, learning from his experience how we may realize 
that ideal, even though, in such a dimly lighted and corrupt age as his, he fell beneath 
it. We, who have far more than David's privileges, ought to rise to a level far beyond 
that to which he attained. Let us first note the experience here recorded, and then 
see how varied are the uses to be made thereof. 

I. Here is a touchins bbcokd or life's expbeienob. In many respects it is 
such a one as thousands on thousands of G-od's people may have passed through, and 
may be passing through now. If we number the points of experience one by one, the 
preacher may expand such as may be most appropriate to any case or cases with which 
he may be dealing. Here is: 1. A first line of experience — man wanting help from 
Ood. (1) TVouhle. (Ver. 6.) A general term, yet conveying often the idea of strait- 
aess, narrowness, and perplexity. This may arise from bodily weakness, domestic 
trouble, personal bereavement, or any other of those manifold causes of anxiety to 
•which we are liable. (2) Fear. (Ver. 4.) The dread of the future is often a heavier 
care than the distress of the present. How often would it be a great relief if we could 
flee the forthcoming issue of things 1 But this cannot be. Hence fears arise, and we 
are tempted to say, "I shall one day perish." (3) Looking up. (Ver. 5.) We may, 
we can, look up above our weakness and helplessness to One who is a " Stronghold in 
the day of trouble " (Psa. Ixi. 2 ; cxxi. 1). Note : It is a part of the high and holy 
•education of the saints that trouble teaches them to look up ; and thus their whole 
natures become elevated, as they feel and know that they belong to a higher world 
than this. (4) Crying. (Ver. 6 ; see Ps. xviii. 6.) In our darkest hours we know to 
whom we speak (Ps. Ixii. 1). However dark the night and lonely the path, the child 
cannot help crying, " Father 1 " even when he cannot see him. (5) Seeking. (Ver. 4.) 
This is a prolongation of the cry. It indicates the attitude of the soul, continuously 
directed towards the great Friend and Helper. (6) All this is in common with others. 
<Ver. 5.) " They looked," etc. Not one alone, but millions, are at each moment looking 
up trustingly and hopefully, away from life's cares and sorrows, to him who ruleth over 
all. Hence we need not wonder at : 2. .^ second line of experience — God granting the 
hdp that is implored. As there are six stages along the first, so are there six features 
of the second. (1) The prayer is heard. (Vers. 4, 6.) Here is a grand field for 
exploration — the Divine answers to prayer. To enumerate these would require 
Tolumes. The saint may well store them up in his memory for the encouragement of 
troubled ones afterwards. If we did but "give others the Bunshine," and " tell Jesus 
the rest," how rich would be the tokens of mercy with which we should rise from our 
knees 1 (2) Angelic ministry is granted. (Ver. 7.*) The existence and ministry of 
angels are clearly revealed in the Word of God. Abraham; Jacob; Elijah; Daniel 
(Heb. i. 14 ; Ps. Ixviii. 17). The phrase, " delivereth them " is equivalent to " sets 
them free." (3) Supplies are sent. (Vers. 9, 10.) It is one of the testimonies most 
frequently given to those who visit God's people in trouble, that supplies are sent to 
them exactly as they require them (Ps. xxxvii. 25). (4) Deliverance is sent down. 
■(Vers. 4, 7.) God, in trouble, makes and shows "a way of escape." The dart has 
been turned aside just as it has seemed to be on the point of striking. (5) The 
face has leen brightened. (Ver. 5.) The anxious look departs when help comes; a 
lightened heart makes a brightened face. (6) Gonsequenthj, it is proved that those who 
wait on God will not he put to shame. (Ver. 5, Revised Version.') No ! it cannot be. 
The covenant of Gud's promise is "ordered in all things, and sure. Not from one 
alone, but from a great multitude which no man can number, will the testimony 
come. "Not one thing hath failed of all that the Lord hath spoken. "Thus saith 
the Lord, They shall not be ashamed that wait for me." 

' See Mr. Faussefs remarks on this psalm, and Dr. Maclaren's reference to its historic 
«risin. See Kirkpatrick's introduction. , t^u ..>■ 

... . Tlie angel ' (in the singular), not simply ' angels,' suggests the angel of the covenant 

ifii. Green). 

• See Heugsteiiberg and Perowne hereon. 



260 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxiv. 1—22. 

n. These varied expeeibnobs or life are here turned to manifold uses.* 
1. Towa/rda Qod. (Vers. 1, 2.) The psalmist vows that, having such manifold proof 
of what God is to bim, and of his faithfulness to all his promises, his life shall be a 
perpetual song of praise ; that he will make his boast in God's goodness and grace, so 
that those who have, like him, beec in the depths of afBiction, may also, like him, be 
brought forth into a wealthy place. Note : Deliverances brought about in answer to 
prayer should be followed by long-continued and grateful praise. 2. Towards the 
saints. The psalmist (1) exhorts the saints to join him in thankful song (ver. 3). 
(2) He bids them try for themselves how good the Lord is (ver. 8), and he would have 
them know the blessedness of those who trust in him (ver. 8). (3) He bids them 
loyally obey their God : this is what is meant by the word " fear in ver. 9 : not a 
fear of dread or of servility, but of loyal and obedient reverence. Note : However 
severe the pressure or great the trouble, we never need depart from the strict line of 
obedience to Otoi. (4) He assures them that no loyal souls shall ever be deserted 
(vers. 9, 10). God will see to it that his feithful ones have all needful supplies. 3. 
Towards all who have life before them. (Vers. 11, 12.) (1) He invites the young to 
come and listen to him, as out of the depths of his own experience he would show them 
the value of a godly life. (2) He propounds a question, which may well evoke a 
response in many a young aspiring heart (ver. 12). See the use to wMch the Apostle 
Peter puts this passage (1 Pet. iii. 10 — 16). (3) Hfe gives a clear and definite answer, 
directing them how to govern the lips and the feet. The lips are to shun guile, and 
to speak peace and truth. The feet are to avoid evil, and to press after righteousness. 
(4) He lays down for them a number of axiomata, which may well be their guide 
through life, (a) That the Lord does hear and answer prayer (vers. 15, 17 — 20). The 
experience of the faithful gives an overwhelming amount of proof of this. (6) That 
in pressing on in life, they will find God's judgments abroad in the earth, making a 
distinction between those who serve him and those who serve him not; rewarding one 
and condemning the other (ver. 21, Revised Version), (e) That Divine delirerancea 
will compass the righteous around (ver. 22, Revised Version). Loyal souls will ever 
be receiving new proofs of the goodness of the Lord, and of the blessedness of such as 
put their trust in him I " The wicked flee when no man pursueth, but the righteous 
are bold as a lion I " 

Note : 1. Amid all the changeful currents of human thought and sentiment, there 
are ever, ever, in all ages, climes, and lands, these two great lines of indisputable fact 
(vers. 16, 16), to which we do well to take heed — that the Lord is on the side of good, 
and that " the face of the Lord is against them that do evU." No perplexity in the 
mazes of metaphysical or theological controversy ought ever to conceal or obscure 
these plain facts from view. 2. It behoves the young to profit by the experience of 
the old ; for, though no two experiences are precisely the same in all details, and though 
each one must bear his own burden, yet the lives of our fathers, as rehearsed to us by 
them, do set forth clearly and distinctly certain great principles according to which 
God governed and guided them — principles which are the same in every age, and which 
we cannot ignore, save at imminent peril both for the life that now is, and for that 
which is to come. 3. It behoves us to treasure up the experiences of life, to recount 
and to record them for the use and help of those who have yet to set out on life's 
journey. We know not how our young ones may be exposed in life. Gladly would 
we give them the constant screen of home. But that cannot be. Out into the world 
they must go. With God's Spirit in their hearts, they are safe anywhere. Without 
God, they are safe nowhere. We need not talk at them nor try to preach religion 
obnoxiously to them ; but we may, we can, we must, tell them of our God and Saviour, 
telling them how he has helped us, and will help all who follow him ; that they, too, 
may "taste and see how good the Lord is " I — 0. 

Vers, 1 — 10. — Links of grace. I. In this hymn we have first of all peaise. 
Praise is not an impulse, or an outburst of enthusiasm soon to die out, but it is 
the expression of the heart and the exercise of the life. It is good to have stated 

' There is enough in this psalm (and, we hope, in this expository homily theieon) to 
suggest twenty pulpit expositions ; but we are compelled to aim at the extreme of ooiir 
pression. 



PS. XXXIV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



261 




but praise, in its highest sense, is called forth by contemplation of God, as he is in 
himself— infinite, eternal, and unchangeable in his Being, wisdom, power, holiness, 
justice, goodness, and truth. " The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him " 
^"^ " ^« *™'y fear him we shall learn the " secret " of praising him " continually." 
iirl °™ P™^^® *^® psalmist proceeds to oonpession. He does not speak of himself 
When he does so it is not to exalt, but to humble himself. "Boasting is excluded." 
But he speaks ot God, and proclaims with gratitude and joy his glorious Name. When- 
soever we exalt God, there will be sure to be sympathizers. The confession of our 
faith will call forth like confessions from others, and "the humble shall be glad." 
When Paul was converted there were some who were " amazed," and others who were 
"afraid;" but when they knew the truth, "that he which persecuted the Churches in 
times past, now preacheth the faith which once he destroyed," then, savs Paul. " thev 
glorifledGodinme"(Ga]. i. 23). •J' 

IIL The psalmist next advances to fellowship. (Ver. 3.) " It is not good for 
man tobe alone." This holds true of religion. There is something inspiring and 
comforting in being associated with others in worship. What we have found true, 
others also have found true ; what we have seen of the glory of God, others also havu 
seen, and with one mind and one heart we can rejoice together. We cannot by anything 
we do make God greater than he is, but we can "magnify" him as we make his glory 
more widely known; we can "exalt his Name" as we make his character stand higher 
in the sight of men, and as we more fully manifest our devotion to him as the Supreme 
Object of our trust and love. Thus not only with God's people on earth, but " with 
angels and archangels, and all the company of heaven, we laud and magnify God's 
glorious Name." 

IV. Lastly, we find here GRATEruL oommemoeation of dblivebanob. First the 
psalmist speakg for himself (ver. 4). But what is true of one is true of many (ver. 5). 
Let each of us put himself in "this poor man's" place. Recall the peril and the 
prayer. Give thanks for the gracious deliverance. There may have been times when 
we too may have been in sore straits. In our perplexity and fear we may have 
resorted to our own devices, and stained our souls with sin. But God is mercitul. He 
did not cast us off. When we cried to him, he forgave us our iniquity, and delivered 
us from all our fears. God's deliverances bring gladness. We see in them the out- 
shining of his love. We have looked to him in faith, and he has looked on us in mercy. 
His response has been quick and gracious — as when the wounded Israelites looked to 
the brazen serpent, and were healed (Numb. xxi. 91 ; as when Gideon looked to God, 
and was made strong (Judg. vi. 13, 14). There ^s not only the grateful acknow- 
ledgment of past deliverances, but the sweet sense of security for all time to come, 
under the loving guardianship of God (ver. 27). Whether we take " the angel " here 
as one of the angelic host, or as the angel of Jehovah, the great Head and Lord of all, 
the meaning is the same. The great truth taught is the same which we find so often 
in the New Testament, as in the Hebrews, where it is said of the angels, " Are they not 
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation ? " 
(Heb. i. 14) ; and in John's Gospel, where we find our Lord saying, concerning his 
people, " I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall aiv 
pluck them out of my hand " (John x. 28).— W. F. 

Vers. 8 — 10. — Proving what is good. There are two things in this exhortation 
I. A CALL TO MAKE TEIAL OP KBLiGiON. The Spirit of religion is, " The Lord is 
good." But how are we to know this ? Not by hearing, or inquiring, or believing on 
the word of others, but by making trial for ourselves. This is in accordance with 
reason and practical experience. The best way to find out whether anything is really 
good is to subject it to the test of trial. Experience is founded on experiment. The 
knowledge thus acquired can be safely acted upon. So it is in human life. It is the 
friend we have found kind and helpful in time of need that we trust. So it is also in 
religion. " Taste and see : " this is the settled order. If we act in this way, the result 
will be sure, and we shall joyfully add our witness to that of others, " The Lord is good ; 



262 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. £pg ixxiv. 1- -22. 



blessed is the man that trusteth in him." This call, " Taste ami sec," is tlie call of 
(Jhrist in the gospel. Those who hear it must make a choice. They must hear or 
retuse. But considering who it is that gives the call, and the manifold and powerful 
arj^iiments by which it is enforced, surely it would he wise and reasonable to take 
(Jurist at his word, and to make honest trial of his relidon. "If any man willeth to 
d(i his will, he shall know of the teaching whether it be of God " (John vii. 17, Bevised 
\'eision). Try the word, try prayer, try the Christian life, try if Christ is to be 
trusted ; not until you have done this can you say whether God is good or not. 

II. A CHARGE TO LIVE UP TO THK HIGHEST STANDAED Or BBLIGION. " Oh, fear the 

Lord, ye his saints." This is due to God. We are not our own, to live as we like. 
We belong to God, and are bound to live according to his Law. God says to us, "Ye 
are my witnesses." This is necessary to our true welfare. The very name " saints " 
implies that we have been separated from the world, that we have been called unto 
hiiliness. But holiness and happiness are indissoluble. The more we " fear God " the 
On ire shall we advance in holiness, and the more we advance in holiness the more shall 
we enjoy of true happiness. " Want " there will be to us as to others of many things, 
but we learn to be content with such things as we have, knowing that God is with us, 
and that he will withhold no "good thing" from us (Ps. Ixxxiv. 11; Heb. iv. 16). 
This is the best way of commending religion to others. We influence others more by 
example than by precept. The more pertisctly we live and act as God's saints, keeping 
truth and doing right always, serving others in love, following peace and holiness, in 
a word, the more perfectly we live and act in the spirit of Christ, the greater will be 
our influence for good in the world. What we have tried and found good, we can 
honestly commend. What we have pnwed, and are continually showing in its bene- 
ficent effect on our own character and life, to be of the highest worth and virtue, must 
have a powerful claim to the faith of all reasonable and right thinking men. Let men 
say of a I hristian, " If there be a saint on earth, that is one ; " and the next thing will 
he, " If Jesus could make such a character, is not this the Christ ? " — W. F. 

Ver. 12. — " Long life." We may learn here — 

I. That the desibb for long life is natural to man. There may be times, 
when, under the pressure of trial and weariness, we are ready to say, with Job, " I would 
not live alway." But this is a temporary feeling. Our natural desire is to live, and 
to live long. This desire has been implanted by God, and works in many ways for good. 

II. That long life, when spent in the skevice of God, is a great blessing. 
We should desire life, not from fear of death, nor from the pain of parting with dear 
friends, but " to see good," and that we may do the more work lor God. The present 
world, so far as we know, is the only one in which we can serve God by overcoming 
evil, and by patience under trial, and by converting sinners. Besides, the longer we 
live, the more good we can do to others, and the more we can glorify (Tod. To glorify 
God by the service of our youth is good ; to glorify him by the service of youth and 
manhood is better; but to glorify him by faithful service from first to last, through all 
i-tages of life, is best of all (Prov. xvi. 21 ; Phil. i. 23—26 ; 2 Tim. iv. 6—8). How 
different is it with the wicked! Prolonged life is to them a curse instead of a blessing. 
Tue more time, the more sin ; the more sin, the more evil ; till at last it might be said, 
" Would that he died early ! " or, as of Judas, " It had been good for that man if he had 
not been born " (Matt. xxvi. 24). 

in. That long life can be best secured by attention to the laws of 
BisHTBOusNESS. There is an intimate connection between the body and the soul. We 
may disregard the laws of health as to the body, and then we must suffer. The care 
(if the body is as needful, in its place, as the care of the soul. The tendency of vice is 
undoubtedly to shorten life. How often does it happen, that young men, naturally 
possessed of good constitutions, bring on weakness and disease by dissolute living I On 
the other hand, the practice of self-denial and virtue is favourable to longevity. " Ths 
fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened" 
(Prov. X. 2 — 7). The question of the psalmist meets a response in our hearts, " What 
man is he that desireth life ? " and his wise and fatherly counsel should find an echo in 
Dur lives, "Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it." The laws of 
health are largely studied in our days. We have Acts of Parliament on "Public 



re. XXXIV. 1—22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



263 



Health, and much is done to promote the physical comfort and health of the people. 
This IS good. It is of mncli advantage that the people, down to the poorest, should 
have pure air and wholesome food and favourable surroundings, and it is the duty of 
the Church, as well as the state, to look to these things. But more is needed. There 
must be proper education of the people. They must be taught, not only the care of the 
body, but the care of the soul. The only complete education is that which embraces 
tlie whole man— body and soul and spirit. We are only perfectly educated when we 
are taught of God, " that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, \»e should live 
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world" (Titus ii. 13). Longevity was 
not only a promise of the Old Testament (Deut. iv. 40; Bccles. xii. 13), but it is a 
promise of the latter-day glory (Isa. Ixv. 20). W. P. 

_ Ver. 13. — Here are three great things. 1. A great gift. Speech is one of our 
highest endowments. It enables us to utter our thoughts and to converse one with 
another. Man's advancement in knowledge and virtue lias mainly followed from his 
possessing this faculty. _ There have been many ingenious speculations as to how speech 
has been obtained, but it is enough for us to say that it is from God. When we see a 
dumb man, we may learn the worth from the want, and should bless God for his 
goodness in having given us this noble gift. 

II. A OBEAT PEBIL. The best things may be tamed to bad uses. So with the 
tongue. If rightly used, it is a great blessing ; if wrongly used, it is a great curse. 
"Evil" and "guile" are the common ways in which speech is abused, much to the 
hurt of the speaker and of the hearers. There is thus not only great waste, but 
manifold and great evils. "Life and death are in the power of the tongue" 
(Prov. xviii.21). 

III. A GREAT AOBIBVEMENT. It IB possible to " keep " the tongue. To do this we 
must go back from the tongue to the heart (Prov. iv. 23). When the heart is right, 
the tongue will be right also (Matt. xii. 33, 34). Such mastery can only be acquTred 
by earnest effort and patience and loving contemplation of Christ. St. James says he 
who has attained to this rare power is a " perfect man " (Jas. iii. 5, 6). — W. P. 

Ver. 16. — Ood'aface. " The face " is the organ of expression. The thoughts, the 
feelings, the inward movements of the soul, show themselves by the face. Therefore 
" the fece " stands for the man (Gen. xlviii. 11) ; and when God is spoken of after the 
manner of men, his face is put for himself (Bxod. xxxiii. 14). The text is like the 
mystic pillar of the wilderness. It has two aspects. While God looks forth with love 
and favour towards his people, he shows himself as terrible to his enemies (Exod. xiv. 
24). His face, wherever seen, is always against those who wilfully and wickedly 
persist in doing evil. 

I. God's face in nature is against them that do evil. There is law in 
nature. To obey the law is to conquer, to disobey is to suffer. As to transgressors, 
there is neither exception nor immunity. We see the stern, unbending severity of law 
in the awfvd passage, Prov. i. 24 — 31. 

II. God's pace in the Holt Scriptures is against them that do evil. Take 
the ten commandments, and from the first to the last it is the same. The Law is holy 
and just and good. It demands obedience from all, and denounces condemnation and 
wrath against transgressors, without respect of person.?. The recorded judgments of 
God may be held as expressing the same thing. All through, from Genesis to Malachi, 
whether as respects nations or individuals, God's face is against the evil-doer. In no 
part of Scripture is this brought out more vividly and forcibly than in the Psalms. 

III. God's face, in the Person of his Son and cub Saviour, is against them 
THAT DO evil. Ohrlst, in his doctrine, his precepts, his example, and in his redemptive 
work, is wholly and for ever against sin. His object is to " take away sin," and ti> 
bring them that do evil to do good and to be the loving and obedient children of God, 
that they may walk in the ligbt of God's favour for ever. — W. P. 

Vers. 1—10. — Deliverance and gratitude. Occasion of the psalm uncertain. Cele- 
brates some great deliverance which awakens praise and inspires him to teach otheri 
trust and the secret of a prosperous life. 



264 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb. xxxiv. 1—22. 

I. A GREAT DELivEBANCB OBLBBEATED. (Vers. 4 — 6.) Solvation. 1. He was in 
great trouble and danger. (Vers. 4 — 6.) Thar the nature of the danger is not explained. 
Sin and sorrow our greatest trouble. 2. He earnestly sought deliverance. (Vers. 4 — 6.) 
Nu salvation except to earnest seekers. 3. Ood answered him and saved him. His 
face was bright with the light of God's face. God's angel was the instrument of his 
deliverance. Christ our Mediator and Deliverer. 

II. He is filled with gbatitudb. (Vers. 1 — 3.) 1. His thankfulness was to he 
enduring. 1. 'Not an evanescent thing, like the morning cloud and early dew, but 
lasting. 2. He calls upon all the afflicted (humble) to join in the praise. (Vers. 2, 3.) 
Because they may experience a like deliveiaiice. God's salvation is for the whole 
world. 

III. Hb invites men to pot thb goodness of God to the test of bxpbeibnck. 
(Vers. 8 — 10.) 1. They will find how blessed are they who trust in Ood. 2. All their 
true and real wants shall be satisfied. (Vers. 9, 10.) — S. 

Ver. 9. — The/ear of Ood. " fear the Lord, ye his saints : for there Is no want to 
them that fear him." The fear of Ood described the whole of practical religion. There 
are various kinds and degrees of fear caused by our relation to God, combined in various 
proportions with other sentiments. He is the great and powerful, and we are the 
weak; and we are naturally ignorant of his nature; and till we know whether he is a 
malignant or a benevolent being, we naturally dread him. The fear which dreads him 
is the first feeling which springs up. When we have passed out of and beyond the 
feeling of dread, we may still be overpowered by awe. We feel that God is greater 
than our highest, most perfect knowledge of his nature ; his vastness overcomes and 
prostrates us. Jacob ; Job ; David. But the strangest cause of fear is the sense of 
transgression and the fear of punishment. We dread the Judgment of Ood upon our 
lives and actions. He must know the realities that lie beneath tdl appearance — the good 
and the evil. . We may well fear when we think of his knowledge of us. The revelations 
of God's impersonal nature alarm us. They are all love and no feeling. The hurricane 
and the tempest are pitiless. The revelations of his personal nature in man and in 
Christ are full of compassion. God in Christ is the Physician ; but we cannot help 
fearing what he may have to do upon us for our healing, before we can be made whole. 
But we ought to believe and know that, like a good physician, he never inflicts any 
but necessary pain, and how much the Infliction costs him in his sympathy with us. 
Our theology often teaches that there are reasons for servile fear; that our relation to 
God is that of a courtier to an Eastern despot ; or that of a Jew debtor to a Jew 
creditor, who has, no generosity, but exacts the uttermost farthing ; or that of a criminal 
to a Judge who tries to compound with the ^aw by getting an innocent person to suffer 
for his crimes instead of himself; or who thinks God, in his providential discipline, a 
cruel Being, who calls upon him to suffer the loss of his children, as he called upon 
Abraham to sacrifice Isaac, in order to test his faith. But faith casts out the terrors of 
fear, not inspires them, and does not need such cruel experiments for our discipline. 
Then there is the fear inspired hj faith and love, but which has no torment. A man 
who has a great undeitaking before him, calling for the skill and energy of his highest 
functions, naturally trembles lest he should fail ; like a painter, who stands at bis task, 
but his heart trembling With the great pulses of his conception. He is fearful in 
proportion as he sees the perfection of the thing he is trying to embody. Turner 
watching the storm — that he might know how to paint it. So there is a lofty and 
noble fear of aspiration lest we should not fulfil the Divine purpose of love in our lives. 
The fear felt towards a good mother, who would sacrifice her life for her child. " How 
awful goodness is 1 " — S. 

Vers. 11 — 22. — The secret and blessings of a happy life. " In this second part the 
psalmist turns to believers, adilressrs them, and says that it is his design to teach them 
the art of leading a happy and quiet life, and of being secure against enemies." 

I. Thb secret of a happt and peaceful life. 1. The fear of Ood. (Vers. 11, 
15, 18.) Childlike fear — compatible with trust and love. 2. The government of the 
tongue. (Ver. 13.) What is said on this in the New Testament by Peter and Jaiues. 
S. Righteousness of life. (Ver. 14.) In its departing from evil — the negative aspect; 



P8. XXXV. 1—28.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



265 



and in doing good — the positive. 4. Strenuously seeking after- peace. (Ver. 14.) Seek 
peace, and pursue it." Take care not to cause disagreement, but to promote good will 
and harmony. 

IL The blessings that attend and follow such a life. 1. Prayer of the 
righteous is heard. (Vers. 15 — 18.) Contrast to the doom of evil-doers (ver. 16). 
2. Deliverance out of all dangers. (Vers. 17 — 19.) Troubles, the dangers are called, 
and sufferings. 3. The presence and communion of Ood with his people. This implied 
or expressed in nearly all the verses. 4. The protection of their life and person. (Vers. 
20, 22.) Contrast again to the fate oC the wicked (ver. 21). The words of the twentieth 
verse fulfilled at the crucifixion of our Lord. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXV. 

A FSAiiH ascribed to David by the title, and 
with many charaoteriBtics of his early style 
— abrupt, impassioned, full of lively and 
graphic images, and full of transitions. 
The picture which the writer draws of his 
own oiroumstances and position (vers. 11 — 
17, 19 — 21) accords well with what we 
know of David's life when he was a fugitive 
from Saul, and there is a special agreement 
between the first verse of the psalm and 
words historically ascribed to David at this 
period of his career (1 Sam. xxiv. 15). The 
psalm naturally divides itself into three 
portions, nearly of equal length (vers. 1 — 
10; 11—18; and 19— 28), in each of which 
may be traced the three elements of com- 
plaint, prayer, and promise of thanksgiving ; 
the promise of thanksgiving being in each 
case reserved to the close. Prayer predo- 
minates in the first and third portions, com- 
plaint (vers. 11 — 16) in the second. 

Ver. 1. — Flead my cause, Lord, with 
them that strive with me: fight against 
them that fight against me (comp. 1 Sam. 
xxiv. 15, "The Lord therefore be Judge, 
and judge between me and thee; and see, 
and plead my cause, and deliver me out of 
thine hand." The word translated " plead " 
is a judicial term ; but the context showa 
that it was in the battle-field, rather than in 
the law-courts, that David's cause was to be 
pleaded. The second hemistich is therefore 
added to explain and correct the first; it is 
fighting, not pleading, that is needed under 
the circumstaaces. 

Ver. 2.— Take hold of shield and buckler. 
"The shield (magen) was a smaller hand- 
weapon; the buckler (feinnoft) covered the 
whole body" (Kay). The "shield and 
buckler" are put forward first, because it is 
primarily defence and protection that David 
needs. His adversaries are the aggressors ; 



he is on the defensive ; Saul is hunting him 
upon the mountains. And stand ap for 
mine help (comp. Ps. vii. 6). Standing is 
the natural posture of one who interposes to 
help another. 

Ver. 3. — ^Draw out also the spear ; rather, 
bring out aJteo the spear, since spcitrs were 
not, so far as is known, kept in sheaths, like 
swords (Exod. xv. 9), but only laid up in an 
armoury. And stop the way against them 
that persecute me. So Jarchi, Bosenmiiller, 
Hitzig, Kay, Professor Alexander, Heng- 
steoberg, and our Bevisers; but a large 
number of critics regard n:p — the word 
translated "stop the way" — as really the 
name of a weapon, the Hebrew equivalent 
of the Greek aiyapis, which was probably 
the battle-axe. (So Vitringa, Michaelis, 
Bishop Horsley, Cheyne, Mr. Aglen, and 
the ' Spealcer's Commentary.') The passage 
will thea read, "Bring out also the spear 
and the battle-axe against them that perse- 
cute me," which is certainly a better parallel 
to " Take hold of shield and buckler," than 
"Bring out the spear, and stop the way." 
Say unto my soul, I am thy Salvation. 
Comfort my soul, i.e., with the assurance 
that thou art, and wilt ever be, my Salvation 
(comp. Pss. xxvii. 1 ; Ixii. 2, 6 ; cxviii. 14, 
21, etc.). Deliverance from tlie immediate 
danger is not all ttiat is meant; but rather 
support and saving help in all dangers and 
in all troubles. 

Yer. 4. — Let them be confounded and put 
to shame that seek after my soul. It appears 
from this that David's life is being sought, 
which only happened at two periods in his 
career : (1) when he was a fugitive from Saul 
( L Sam. xix. 15 — xxvi. 4) ; and (2) during 
the rebellion of Absalom (2 Sam. xv. 13 — 
xviii. 8). The psalm therefore belongs to one 
or other of those periods, moat probably to 
tlie former (see the introductory paragraph, 
and note the resemblance between tliis 
passage and 1 Sam. xx. 1 ; xxii. 23). Let 
them be turned back and brought to con- 
fusion that devise my hart. Imprecations 
closely resembling these occur frequently in 
the Davidical psalms (see ver. 26 ; Pss. xl 



266 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 



[ps. XXXV. 1 — 28. 



14 ; Ixx. 2 ; Ixxl. 13), and amount to a sort 
of commonplace, to be used whenever the 
machinations of his enemies iigamst him are 
the subject that occupies his thought. 

Yer. 5. — Let them be as dhaS before the 
wind (comp. Ps. i. 4 ; Isa. xvii. 13 ; xxix. 5 ; 
Hos. xiii. 3). Chaff is the type of whatever 
is light, vain, futile, and worthless; chaff 
driven before the wind represents the con- 
fused rout, of a beaten army flying without 
any resistance betbie an enemy. And let 
the angel of the Lord chase them ; rather, 
smite them. The angel of the Lord, who 
protects the righteous (Ps. xxxiv. 7), is 
oalleci on to complete the discomfiture of 
the wicked ones, who iire David's enemies. 

Ver. 6. — Let their way he dark and 
slippery ; literally, darkness and slipperiness ; 
i.e. let them fly along dark and slippery 
paths, where they cannot see their way, and 
will be sure to stumble and fall. And let 
the angel of the Lord persecnte them; 
rather, pursue after them. 

Ver. 7. — For without cause have they hid 
for me their net in a pit ; literally, the pit of 
their net. This is explained by some to 
mean " the destruction of their net ; " by 
others, "the pit that is covered by a net." 
But neither explanation is altogether satis- 
factory. Some therefore suppose an acci- 
dental transposition of a word. Which 
without cause they have digged for my 
soul. " Without cause " means " without 
provocation on my part." 

Ver. 8. — Let destrnotiou eome upon him 
at unawares ; t'.e. let the evil happen to him 
that he designed against others. As he 
sought to catch others in traps of which 
they knew nothing (ver. 7), so let an un- 
expected destruction come upon him. And 
let his net that he hath hid catoh himself 
(comp. Pss. ix. 15, 16; Ivii. 6; cxli. 10). 
It is the perfection of poetic justice when 
" the engineer " is " hoist by his own 
petard." Into that very destruction let 
him fall ; rather, tor destruction let him fall 
therein; i.e. let him not only fall into his 
own trap, but let his fall prove his destruc- 
tion. David's imprecations have always 
something about them from which the 
Christian shrinks; and this is particularly 
the case when he asks for his enemies' 
destruction. 

Ver. 9. — And my soul shall be joyful in 
the Lord, A sudden transition from impre- 
catory prayer to thanksgiving, or rather, to 
the promise of it — " My soul shall be joy- 
ful;" i.e. it shall be so when my prayers 
have been granted. It shall rejoice in his 
salvation. " Salvation " here is, no doubt, 
especially, deliverance from the immediate 
dtinger, but, perhaps, even here, not only 
tliat (see the comment on ver. 3). 

Ver. 10. — All my hones shall say. Lord, 



who is like unto theel The "bones" hire 
represent, not the frame only, as la Ps. 
xxxiv. 20, but the entire nature. David 
promises that his whole nature shall bear 
witness to God's mercy and goodness, 
proclaiming that there is "none like unto 
him " in these respects, none other that can 
deliver from danger as he can and does. As 
Hengstenberg observes, " He seeks to muke 
the Lord grant the desired help by promi.-i- 
ing that the help atiorded would yield a 
rich harvest of praise and thanksgiving." 
Which deliverest the poor from him that is 
too strong for him, yea, the poor and the 
needy from him that spoileth him? (comp. 
Ps. Ixxxvi. 1, wliere David again calls him- 
self " poor and needy ; " i.e. in want of help 
and peace and comfort; not absolutely 
witljout means, or be would not offer any 
temptation to the spoiler. 

Vers. 11—18. — The second part of the 
psalm begins with a long complaint. David 
sets forth the woes under which he is 
suffering. There are : 1. Calumny (ver. 11). 
2. Ingra,titude (vers. 12—14). 3. Male- 
volence (ver. 15). 4. Insult from the vile 
and base (ver. 16). He then passes to 
prayer : Will not God rescue him (ver. 17) 1 
In conclusion, he for the second time 
promises praise and thanks (ver. 18). 

Ver. 11. — False witnesses did rise up; 
they laid to my charge things that I knew 
not (comp. Ps. xxvii. 12); literally, mali- 
cious, or innrighteous witnesses (see Exod. 
xxiii. 1), It is not probable that witnesses 
in a court are intended. David's cilumni- 
ators accused him privately to Saul of 
" seeking his hurt " (1 Sam. xxiv. 9), and 
BO Bti:Ted Saul up against him (1 Sam. 
xxvi. 19). By what is here said, they 
appear to have accused him to his face, and 
to have endeavoured to extort from him a 
confession of guilt. 

Ver. 12. — They rewarded me evil for good 
(comp. ver. 13). Among those who slan- 
dered him were persons with whose troubles 
he had sympathized, and for whom he had 
prayed with fasting when they were sick. 
His worst persecutor, Saul, admitted the 
charge here made. " Thou art more right- 
eous than I," he said; "for thou hast 
rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded 
thee evil" (1 Sam. xxiv. 17). To the 
spoiling of my soul ; or, the desolating of my 
soul. The lesult of his enemies' machi- 
nations against him was to make him a 
fugitive and a wanderer, to separate him 
from the friend whom he tenderly loved, 
from his wife, his parents, and the greater 
part of his aciiuaintanue. 

Ver. 13. — But as for me, when they were 



P8. XXXV. 1 — 28.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



267 



sick, my clothing was sackcloth. It is sug- 
gested that Dayid had acted thus, especi- 
ally in the case of Saul, when he was first 
afflicted with his terrible malady (1 Sam. 
xvi. 14—23; xviii. 10); but he appears to 
speak of liis habitual practice, whenever 
any of his friends were sick. (On the put- 
ting on of sackcloth as a sign of grief, see 
Gen. xxxvii. 31; 2 Sam. iii. 31; xxi. 10; 
1 Kings xxi. 27 ; 2 Kings vi. 30 ; six. 1 ; 
Esth. iv. 1; Job xvi. 15; Pss. xiii. 11; 
Ixix. 11, etc.) I humbled my soul with 
fasting. Another customary indication of 
grief (see Pss. Ixix. 10 ; cix. 24 ; Judg. xx. 
26; 1 Sam. xxxi. 13 ; 2 Sam. i. 12; xxii. 16; 
1 Kings xxi. 27 : Neh. i. 4, etc.). And my 
prayer returned into mine own bosom (comp. 
Matt. X. IB). Prayers for otliera, if pre- 
vented by their unworthiness from benefit- 
ing them, are yet not altogether void and 
vain. Tiiey bring a blessing to the man 
that offers tliem. 

Yer. 14. — I behaved myself as though he 
had been my friend or brother. In every 
such case I sympathized with the sufferer 
to such an extent, that my conduct was like 
that of an intimate friend or a brother. I 
bowed down heavily, as one that mourneth 
for his nwther. Nay, I went further; I 
took on all tliose outward signs of grief 
which are usual when a mau has lost his 
mother. I "bowed down heavily," as 
tliough I could scarcely stand. The Ori- 
entals are extreme and exaggerated in their 
manifestations both of joy and grief (see 
Herod., viii. 99). 

Ver. 15.— But in mine adversity they re- 
joiced, and gathered themselves together; 
rather, in my fall, or in my halting ; " when 
I halted" (Kevised Version). " The word 
implies a sudden slip and overthrow," such 
as is represented in 1 Sam. xviii. 8—29. Yea, 
the abjects gathered themselves together 
against me. Compare the case of Job (Job 
XXX. 1 — 14). It is a matter of common ex- 
perience that when men fall from a high 
position into misfortune, the base vulgar 
crowd always turns against them with 
scnffg and jeers and every sort of con- 
tumely. And I knew it not ; rtither, and I 
knew them not ; men, i.e., of so low a con- 
dition, that I liad no acquaintance witli 
tliem (see the margin of the Eevjsed Ver- 
sion). They did tear me, and ceased not 
(comp. Job xvi. 9). 

Ver. 16.— With hypooiitical mookers in 
feasts ; literally, profane jesters of cakes ; 
i.e. ribald parasites at a great man's ta le, 
whose coarse buffoonery entitles them tn a 
(hare of the dainties ; they made me their 
butt, their jest, and their byword (of. Job 
ixx. 9). They gnashed upon me with their 
teeth; i.e. spoke fiercely and angrily 
Agiiinst nie, like dngs tliat anarl and show 



their teeth (comp. Job xvi. 9 ; Ps. zzxvii. 
12), 

Ver, 17. — Lord, how long wilt thon look 
on? "How long?" is the common cry of 
sufferers (Job six. 2; Pss. vi, 3; xiii, 1; 
Ixxlx. 5 ; Ixxxix. 46 ; Hab. i. 2 ; Kev. vi. 10), 
who do not recognize the wholesome disci- 
pline of suffering, or realize the fact implied 
in the plirase, " No cross, no crown." Man 
desires immediate deliverance ; God mostly 
delays his deliverance until Patience hag 
" had her perfect work " (Jas. i, 4), Eescue 
my soul from their destructions, my darling 
from the lions (comp. Ps, xxii. 20). 

Ver. 18, — I will give thee thanks in the 
great congregation: I wiU praise thee 
among much people. The promise is re- 
peated (see vers. 9, 10) ; but, as before, it is 
cunditio'ial on deliverance being granted, 
and intended to induce God to grant it, and 
to grant it speedily. 

Vers, 19 — 28. — The main element of this, 
the third section of the psalm, is prayer. 
Complaint finds a voice in vers, 20, 21, and 
thanksgiving in ver. 28; but with these ex- 
ceptions, the strophe is one long strain of 
prayer. The prayer is, first, negative : " Let 
not mine enemies rejoice " (ver. 19) ; "Keep 
not silence " (ver. 22) ; " Be not far from 
me " (ver. 22). But after this it becomes 
mainly positive: "Stir up thyself, and 
awake to judgment " (ver. 23) ; " Judge me, 
O Lord " (ver. 24) ; "Let them be ashamed 
and brought to confusion that rejoice at my 
hurt " (ver. 26) ; " Let them shout for joy, 
and be glad, tljat favour my righteous 
cause " (ver. 27) ; " Let the Lord be magni- 
fied, which hath pleasure in my prosperity " 
(ver. 27). 

Ver. 19. — Let not them that are mine 
enemies wrongfully rejoice over me (comp, 
Ps. xxxviii. 19, where David says that 
those who "hated him wrongfully" were 
" multiplied "). David feels that no one had 
any reason to hate him, since he had always 
sought the good of all with whom he came 
into contact (see ver. 12), Neither let them 
wink with the eye that hate me without a 
cause ; i.e, let them not have cause to wink 
to each other in self-congratulation on their 
hnving triumphed over me completely. 

Ver. 20,— For they speak not peace Once 
more tiie language of complaint. David's 
enemies, though they have driven him from 
the court, and made him a fugitive and a 
wanderer, were not yet satisfied. They did 
not speali him peace. They continued to 
scheme against him. But they devise de- 
ceitful matters against them that are quiet 



268 



THE BOOK OF ?SALMS. 



[ps. XXXV. 1- -28 



in the land. Davirt, if let alone, was willing 
enough to have remained "quiet in the 
land." He wag a fugitive and an outlaw ; 
bul, could he have obtained a safe refuge — 
the cave of AduUam, or any other — would 
glailly have remained peacefully within it. 
But his enemies would not allow him to 
remain quiet. Tliey stirred up the jealousy 
and hatred of Saul by lalse tales, and caused 
him to be " hunted upon the mountains " 
(1 Sam. xxvi. 20). 

Ver. 21, — Yea, they opened their month 
wide against me, anil said, Aha, aha ! onr 
eye hath seen it. They "opened their 
mouth wide" in scornful derision; and 
shouted triumphantly, "Ha, ha I our eye 
hath seen his downfall I " 

Ver. 22. — This then hast seen, Lord. 
Nothing of this has been hid from thee; 
thine eye, Lord, has seen it. Therefore 
I call upon thee. Keep not silenoe. Refrain 
not thyself. "Up, and let not man have 
the upper hand" (Ps. ix. 19). lord, be 
not far from me. Draw near, hasten, 
vindicate my name (oomp. Fss. zzii. 19; 
zzxviii. 21 ; Ixz. 12). 

Ver. 23. — Stir up thyself, and awake to 
my judgment (comp.Pss. lxzz.2; zliv. 23; 
Izxviii, 65). The psalmists oall on God to 
awake, not as though he were really asleep, 
but as a sort of stirring appeal to him to 
arise and manifest himself Even onto 
my cause, my God and my Lord. " Awake," 
t,«., "to judge my cause — to acquit me, 
•nd condemn my enemies " (comp. Pss. iz. 4 ; 
zxxv. I ; zliii. 1, etc.). 

Yer. 24. — Judge me, Lord my God, ao- 
«ording to thy righteousness. Let thy law 
of righteoiisuess be the rule by which I am 
judged, and my enemies also. Then the 
victory will remain with me ; thou wilt not 
let them rejoice over me. 

Ver. 25. — let them not say in their hearts, 
Ah I 80 would we have it (comp. ver. 21); 



literally, ah I our eoul, i.e. " our heart's 
desire is accomplished; we have got our 
wish." Let them not say, We have swal- 
lowed him up; i.e. destroyed hira, ruined 
him, brought him to an evil end (comp. 
2 Sam. zvii. 16). 

Yer. 26. — Let them be ashamed and 
brought to confusion together that rejoioe 
at mine hurt: let them be clothed with 
shame and dishonour that magnify them- 
selves against me (comp. ver. 4, of which 
this is an enlargement, with variations, tlie 
sentiment being exactly the same). Very 
similar maledictions will be found in Pss. 
zl. 14; Izz. 2; Izxi. 13; oix. 29. 

Ver. 27. — Let them shout for joy, and be 
glad, that favour my righteous cause. When 
David's enemies are "ashamed and put to 
confusion " (ver. 26), his friends will natu- 
rally " shout for joy, and be glad." This 
they will do, partly, out of sympathy; 
partly because their own interests are 
bound up with those of their leader. Had 
Saul captured David when he " hunted him 
upon the mountains," the fate of David's 
followers would have been death or exile. 
Yea, let them say continually. Let the Lord 
be magnified, which hath pleasure in the 
prosperity of his servant; literally, tn the 
peace of his servant. God desires that 
David's present troubles should cease, and 
that he should enjoy a time of rest and 
tranquillity. This was granted him, to 
some eztent, at Ziklag (1 Sam. zzvii. 4 — 7), 
but more fully when he came into bis king- 
dom (2 Sam. V. 1—16). 

Ver. 28. — And my tongue shall speak tt 
thy righteousness and of thy praise all the 
day long (comp. vers. 9, 10, and 18). David 
means to promise perpetual gratitude and 
thankfulness. He will not merely return 
thanks publicly, once for all, in the great 
congregation (ver. 18), but will continue to 
praise God always. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 3. — The a$surance of salvation, " Say unto my soul," etc. Can the heart 
frame, the lips utter, a more ambitious request? "Creator and Preserver of all being, 
Almighty, Eternal, Infinite God, speak to me, even me; tell me that thou art mine; 
that 1 am thine ! " Yet this prayer is as reasonable as ambitious. For human nature 
has in it a capacity which can be satisfied with nothing less. What God says must 
needs be true. Therefore this is a double petition: (1) that God will be my Salva- 
tion; (2) that he will assure me of this. 

I. God 18 THE soul's Salvation. Salvation is often spoken of as God's gift (Ps. 
xxxvii. 39 ; Isa. xlv. 7 ; xlvi. 13). But here (as Ps. xxvii. 1 ; Isa. zii. 2) God himself 
is our Salvation. The word has two meanings — the experience of being saved ; the 
power that saves. In the first sense, God bestows salvation — q.d. redemption from 
guilt and its reward ; spiritual healing; deliverance from the habit and power of sin; 
in a word, life. In the second sense, it is the love which pities, the grace which 
pardons, the righteousness which atones ; the spiritual power that quickens the dead 
«oul ; the light by which we see truth, the strength whereby we obey it ; the Divine 



M. XXXV. 1—28.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 269 

breath whereby our spirit lives. All this is in God. Salvation is ours as bodily life ia 
ours — God's work and gift. But " the Father hath life in himself." How worse than 
vain is the notion that we can save ourselves ! Salvation is not a reward to be earned 
or result to be toiled for ; it is life. You can starve or poison yourself, but you cannot 
bestow on food its power to nnurish, or on your body to receive nourishment. You 
can maim yourself, but not restore a limb. You can sin, but not fortjive, atone, redeem. 
These are God's alone. Salvation is personal: " thy salvation." It must be so, since 
sin is personal, character is personal, holiness and happiness are personal. There 
may be community in sin and guilt, or in noble effort and benevolent action ; but each 
one bears his own responsibility. If you are saved, God must say to your soul, " I am 
thy Salvation." 

II. We need God's own assueancb of otte salvation. "Say," etc. It is too 
great a thine; to take on man's work. Sin so deadens the conscience, that to many 
Ibrgiveness seems an easy thing. But let conscience wake, and it becomes difficult to 
believe that God can forgive. How can this prayrr be answered, this assurance given ? 
It needs no voice from heaven (as to Abraham, who had no Bible, no gospel ; Gen. 
XV. 1). The standing answer is in the gift of God's beloved Son, and in the promises 
of his Word (1 John v. 9 — 11 ; 1 Gor. i. 30). The special answer is by the gift of his 
Spirit, promised to every one who asks (Luke xi. 13 ; Bom. v. 5 ; viii. 16). The 
dependence of salvation on faith is not (as some fancy) a condition, rendering salvation 
less free. It is the very means by which it is freely given. " Look unto me, and be ye 
saved 1" Believe and live I Ask and liave! Therefore there is no presumption in that 
personal joyful assurance of salvation which rests not on our own faith, but simply on 
Ood's Word (John x. 28, 29 ; 2 Tim. i. 12). 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — A hard case — a very hard one — laid before Qod. This is one of those 
psalms in which the writers often meet with much scolding and with scant sympathy. It 
has been said that this psalm is not worthy of David. We are not prepared to say so : 
but we are prepared to contend that many of the criticisms passed on it are utterly 
unworthy of those who thus criticize.^ If we will but study the whole psalm in all its 
bearings, while we may not feel called on to justify every expression therein, we shall 
feel bound to regard fairly those circumstances of extreme hardship by which such 
expressions were called forth. We may have the case before us, if we " open up " the 
contents of the psalm in the following threelbld order. 

I. The case should be adeqitatelt studied. Beyond all question, it is a hard 
one, almost more than flesh and blood could bear. We will look at it : 1. As between 
David and his enemies. A bare enumeration of its main features (of which there are 
seven) will suffice. He was waylaid without cause (ver. 7). False witnesses spake 
maliciously against him (ver. 11). They actually rewarded evil for good (ver. 12). 
In their trouble David had behaved himself as their friend or brother (vers. 13, 14). 
In his trouble the enemies manifested a malicious joy (vers. 15, 16).' Their mahce 
was not against him only, but against others also (ver. 20). And not only so, but 
against the entire cause of righteousness of wliich David was the representative, their 
rage and hatred were directed (ver. 22). Now let us look at the case : 2. As between 
David and his God. How does he plead with Jehovah? He prays that God himself 
would interpose, and come into conflict with those who thus afflicted him (vers. 1, 2, 
3, 17, 22, 23) ; that God would manifest himself as David's Deliverer (ver 3) ; that the 
wicked might be thoroughly put to shame ; that their way might he dark and slippery, 
etc. (vers. 4, 5, 6, 8, 26) ; that God would reveal his delivering grace (ver. 10) ; that 

' See three thoughtful articles on " The Vindictive Psalms," in the Expositor, Ist series, 
vol. ii. p. 325, by Mr. Hammond ; and the Expositor, 2nd series, vol. vii. p. 181, by Mr. 
Bernard, and p. 357, by Mr. Aglen. Hengstenberg may be consulted hereon with special 
advantage. 

' Ver. 16 : " With hypocritical mockers in feasts ; literally, " with profligate cake- 
jesters," or parasites ; time-serving flatterers, who frequented the tables of the great, to gain 
a living by buffoonery (Dr. Green). 



270 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxv. 1-28. 

David and those who favoured his righteous cause might rejoice in God's salvation 
(ver. 9) ; that God would execute righteousness and judgment (ver. 24) ; that he 
would not permit the malicious joy of the enemy to coniinue (vers. 19, Z5); that the 
righteous might yet shout for joy at the triumph of their cause (ver. L7) ; and that 
with their joy David himself might blend his own (ver. 28). Now, when we thus set 
the whole psalm before us, and note how grievous is the case which was thus laid before 
God, and how varied are the forms of petition in which that is done, we cannot but 
feel amazed at the harsh estimate of David in which some of his critics have indulged. 
If David was too harsh in speakiug of the wicked, his critics are a fortiori far too 
harsh in their treatment of him. Let us therefore note — 

IL The oabb should be fairly estimated. Let us look at it: 1. Negatively. 
(1) The words of this psalm are not the words of God to man, but words of man to 
God : this is an all-important distinction to make in dealing with the Psalms.' (2) 
No man can, no man ever could, pray beyond the level of his own spiritual attainment. 
(3) Hence it is not necessary that we should attempt to justify every word in the 
pleading of an Old Testament saint, any more than we should attempt to do so in the 
prayers of God's people now. But it may be said, " David was a prophet." True, and 
when he professed to give out God's word to him, we accept such word implicitly. 
But that is not the case here. He is not praying as a prophet, but as a troubled 
saint. (4) This prayer, with the imprecations it contains, is by no means illustrative 
of the spirit of the Mosaic dispensation, but only of the degree to which a man who 
could pray like this, actually fell below the spirit of the dispensation under which he 
lived. Here we are compelled to differ sharply from Bishop Perowne and others who 
regard this psalm as indicative of the contrast between the morality of the Old 
Testament and New Testament dispensations. Though in the Scriptures, revelation 
is progressive, yet the morality enjoined in the Old Testament is precisely the same as 
that enjoined in the New. So our Lord teaches (Matt. xxii. 36—40; v. 17, 18). In 
the Sermon on the Mount our Lord tears off the wrappings with which " they of old 
time " had concealed the teachings of the Mosaic Law, and restores that Law to its 
pristine integrity and glory, on his own authority. But in the psalm before us we 
have not Old Testament morality as given by God, but Old Testament morality as far 
as attained by the writer. Many a modern representative of religion would sanction 
the cutting down of Zulus by the thousand in war. What should we say if any one 
declared that to be New Testament morality, when it was only that individual 
presenting his own view of it ? So with this and other imprecatory psalms ; they give 
us, not God's precept, but man's defective prayers. At the same time, while we do not 
justify these maledictions of David, we are bound in all fairness also to put the matter : 
2. Positively. (1) Here is a case of extreme provocation. (2) David was a king. 
(3) As such, he was not a merely private individual, but the representative of God 8 
cause. (4) Hence his petitions are not those of personal vindictiveness ; they are the 
passionate cries of one who yearns for God's vindication of the right. For we see at 
once the reason why, and the limit within which, he prays for vengeance on his 
enemies. (5) Whoever, owing to an inadequate study of the psalm, cherishes sympathy 
with David's enemies rather than with him, is grievously unjust. But we can 
not only free the case from being any stumbling-block to faith, we may even turn it 
to good account. For — 

IIL The case mat be hblpfdllt utilized. We gather from it : 1. How greai 
is the mercy that wronged saints can look up to God as the Avenger of their cause 
(Luke xviii. 1 — 8) I 2. There is a very great difference between a private feeling of 
vindictiveness, and the indignation felt at a great public wrong. It would be wicked 
of us to cherish the first ; it would be wicked of us not to cherish the second. 3. What- 
ever the case of wrong we have to lay before God, we may tell it to him just as we 
feel it. He is a loving Friend to whom we may unburden everything without any 
danger of being misunderstood. 4. If in our putting of the case before God, we say 
anything wrong or wrongly, God will forgive what is wrong in our prayers, and will 
answer them in his own way, often doing " exceeding abundantly above all we can ask 
or think." 6. Hence we may leave the method of vindicating the right and of 
shaming the wrong, entirely in the hands of God. Such expressions as those ia 

' Bee our first homily on the Psalms. 



P8. XXXV. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 271 

yers. 4, 6, 6, 8 would ill become us (cf. Eom. xii. 19, 20). 6. Nevertheless, it is 
perfectly true that severity to evil-doers is sometimes the greatest mercy to the 
Church of God (Acts v. 1 — 11). 7. God, even now, very often answers the agonizing 
prayers of saints by " terrible things in righteousness " (Ps. Ixv. 5 ; Eev. viii. 3 — 6). 
8. If we do not so far sympathize loith the spirit of this and other imprecatory psalms 
as to yearn to see righteousness triumphant and wickedness put to shame, we are fear- 
fully guilty before God, and are sinking immeasurably below the morality and public 
spirit of those very psalms which are so unfairly critici-ed and so thoughtlessly 
condemned. To plead for the victory of righteousness and for the crushing and 
shaming of iniquity is a necessity of a good man's nature. He cannot help it. Yea, 
one petition in the Lord's Prayer involves the whole, " Thy will be done on earth, 
as it is in heaven." And more than this, no one understands the redemption which 
is in Christ Jesus, who looks at it as providing only for the present forgiveness of 
individual souls : it is a grand and glorious plan for the inbringing of universal and 
everlasting righteousness; and when the Saviour's blood moistened earth's soil, it 
guaranteed that earth should be rescued from the destroyer, that the hosts of ill 
should be exposed and put to shame, and that Christ should wear the everlasting 
crown. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 28. — Thefleth and the Spirit. This psalm has been variously interpreted. 
Some say David speaks here representatively, not for himself, but for the community 
of Israel. Others say that he speaks prophetically, and with special reference to the 
days of Messiah., Others again hold that he speaks as a holy man, moved by the 
Holy Spirit to record the feelings that had passed through his own heart in time of 
trial. This last seems the more reasonable interpretation. 

I. First it agrees best with the uethod op insfibation. The object of inspiration 
is truth. It is not necessary that what is perfect should alone be recorded, but it is 
that the record itself should be perfect. Besides, there is undoubtedly an advance in 
the New Testament from the Old, both as respects the spirit of the prophets, and the 
greatness of the truths revealed. 

n. Further, this view agrees best with the akaloot of Holt Sobiptube. In Job 
and Ecclesiastes and elsewhere there are different speakers, and they do not all speak 
the same thing. There is diversity of opinion, and high debate. We have to walk 
circumspectly. We have to discriminate, lett we should take the devil's lie or the 
counsel of fallible men for the eternal truth of God (Job iL i ; xlii. 7). So of the 
Psalms. The record is true, but all that is recorded is not truth. There are various 
phases of thought and feeling, of character and life. Even the same speaker does not 
always keep the same level ; at one time he may cry, " I was as a beast before thee," 
and almost with the same breath, " Whom have I in heaven but thee ? " (Ps. Ixxiii. 
22, 25). 

III. Again, this view accords best with the facts ot David's life. He was not 
a perfect man; and who so ready to confess this as himself? Look at the historical 
parts of Scripture, and you find him saying and doing things far from righteousness. 
Why should he be judged differently when he speaks in poetry than when he speaks 
in prose ? Is it not reasonable to take what he says, in the one case as in the other, 
as the honest expression of his heart, and to judge it by the same standard ? No doubt 
the Psalms are to be regarded as spoken in moments of highest religious consecration ; 
but if David is to be held as always speaking in the Psalms as a perfect man, it will 
be hard to bring the facts into harmony with the other facts of his life, and, moreover, 
the effect would be to remove the psalms from the sphere of ordinary experience, and 
to empty them of much of their sweetness and virtue. Delitzsch has said that " this 
whole psalm is as it were the lyrical amplification of that which David says when face 
to face with Saul in 1 Sam. xxiv. 16." Looking at it in this light, it seems the story 
of a soul's conflict — the struggle of the spirit against the flesh — painful and severe, 
with risings and fallings, till at last peace is attained. It begins with a passionate 
cry to God for justice, and the language, full of fire and impetuosity, is such as would 
naturally rise to the lips of a man of war. His imagination works in the line of hii 
desires, and pictures an overthrow of his enemies, quick and terrible. Their destruc- 
tion would be his "salvation," and for this he would rejoice and give God thanks 



272 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [pb xxxt. 1— "28 

(vers. 9, 10), In the second part of the psalm he reverts to the cruel treatment he 
had received, but speaks of it with more calmness — ^more in sorrow than in anger. He 
remembers how he had tried to be patient, how he had restrained himself, and returned 
good for evil. But it had been in vain. Brooding upon this, his heart again rises in 
wrath (ver. 17). But as he comes nearer to God, and feels more intensely the sweet- 
ness of God's love, he recovers more quietness. Once more the surges of passion rise, 
and he is in danger of being overwhelmed; but again he turns to God, his only Eefuge, 
and casting himself upon his care, and committing things wholly to his hand, he 
enters into the rest of faith and hope and love. The portrait may be said to be true 
to life. We have not only the good, but the bad ; not only love to man, but the 
struggle to keep that love ; not only faith in God, but the difiBculty of gaining the 
height of that faith, and of holding it when it had been won. Thus we have a record 
which harmonizes with the experience of God's saints of all ages from Abraham to 
Paul, and that is rich in instruction and comfort. Who is there who tries to follow 
Christ, but knows how hard it is to be patient under injustice, to forgive our enemies, 
and to pray for them who despitefuUy use us and persecute us? It is some comfort 
for us, as with Christian when sorely tried in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, to 
hear the voice of a brother, and to be able to say, each one to his soul, " that some 
who feared God were in this valley as well as himself." — W. F. 

Ver. 22. — Go6Ps silence. " There is a time to keep silence, and a time to speak " 
(Eccles. iii. 7). So it is with man, and with reverence it may be said, so it is with 
God. There is a sense in which God la never silent. In manifold ways his voice is 
ever sounding in our ears. But there are times when God may be said to be silent, 
even with regard to his own people. There is speech on the one side, but no answer 
on the other. This silence may be prolonged till it becomes distressingly painful. 
There is the sense of loss; there is the feeling of desertion; there is the dread of 
worse things to come — of the going down to the pit of darkness and despair (Ps. xxiii. 
4). Luther said, in his strong way, "0 my God, punish me rather with pestilence, 
with all the terrible sicknesses on earth, with war, with anything, rather than thou be 
silent to me 1 " But though this silence is to be deprecated, yet it is ordained of God 
for good. It may come as — 

L Just ebtbibutiok. The wicked do not seek after God. It is no wonder, there- 
fore, if Gud should deal with them after their own ways (Prov. i. 24 — 28 ; John xiii. 
9). But even good men may become negligent — they may fall into sin and forget God. 
tiierefore it may be necessary to let them see and learn the evil of departing from tht 
living God (Pss. xciv. 10 ; cxxv. 5 ; Jer. ii. 19). 

n. Merciful WARNING. WemustnotjudgeofGodbyourselves. We must not think 
that he is arbitrary or cold. If he is silent, it is for just cause. Eemember how it 
was with Saul (1 Sam. xxviii. 6). Well would it have been for him, if he had regarded 
the doings of God, and turned to him in repentance. But he hardened his heart. God 
warns us also. His silence should bring our sins to our remembrance. " Your sins," 
saith the prophet, " have hid his face from you, that he will not hear " (Isa. lix. 2 ; cf. 
Hos. V. 15). 

III. Ghacious discipline. The end of the Lord is merciful. If he is silent, it may 
be: 1. To try our faith. Remember the Syro-Phoenician woman (Matt. xv. 21 — 28). 
2. To quicken our sense of dependence. God is Sovereign. He is under no obligation 
to us. If he hears, it is in mercy. We are too ready to think we have a claim upon 
him, and to resent his silence. We need to learn humility. " God resisteth the 
proud, and giveth grace to the humble" (1 Pet. v. 8). 3. lo enhance the value of the 
blessings we lack. The worth is known by the want. Memory of past joys makes us 
the more eager in seeking renewed tokens of love and good will. The light is sweet 
to the eyes, but it is sweeter if for a while withdrawn. Friendship is dear, but absence 
makes the heart grow fonder. The love of God is the joy of the heart ; but if clouds 
and darkness gather between us and God, the more earnestly do we cry for the restora- 
tion of his favour (Jer. xxix. 11 — 14). 4. To prepare us for higher manifestations of 
OocTt love. We need to be brought low in oriler to be raised up. We need to be 
emptied of pride and self-righteousnesa to be filled with the fulness of God. If we 
ask and receive not, it is because we ask amiss. This we have to learn. We are 



PB. XXXV. 1—28.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 273 



led, therefore, to self-examination, to penitence, to confession. God has something 
better than we thought of in store for us. It may be something to do or to suffer for 
him. There is a " needs be " we should be made ready. Let us therefore trust, and 
not be afraid (Isa. liv. 7, 8).— W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Battle and victory. The psalmist complains of unbelievers, ungodly 
enemies, prays for deliveiance, giving promise of thanksgiving if his prayir is 
granted. The psalm falls into three divisions, in each of which the three elements of 
complaint, prayer, and thanksgiving are contained. The divisions are vers. 1—10 ; 
vers. 11 — 18; vers. 19 — 28. Take first division and its suggestions (vers. 1—10). 

I. Every man has a spiritual battle to fight. We have to contend against : 
1. Enemies that threaten the destruction of the soul. (Ver. 4.) Our temptations, from 
within and from witnout, are our dangerous foes, who will conquer anil destroy us 
if we do not conquer and destroy them. We know what unresisted sin leads to. 2. 
They are crafty and insidious foes. (Vers. 7, 8.) They use smiles and sophistries to 
conceal their real nature and designs. Evil men lay plots to ensnare the young and 
unwary. Hence the need of watchfulness and circumspection. 3. They are cruel, 
unrelenting foes. (Ver. 4.) They devise our hurt and follow us continually. There 
can be no compromise with them. 

II. We must seek the help op God to give us the victobt in this battle. 1. 
We mustjiyht with Divine weapons. The sword ol the Spirit, the Word of God, and 
the helmet of salvation, etc. 2. Under the Divine inspiration. Filled with the trust, 
and love, and courage, and hope of those who catch their inspiration from Christ. 
Christ is the Captain of our salvation. The true soldier will follow the great General 
everywhere. 3. Ood helping us, we are stronger than all our foes, and are sure of 
victory at last. 

III. When the battle has been finally won we shall be filled with 
gratitude to God. (Vers. 9, 10.) For all the grace and help we have received in 
every stage of the conflict. And for the eternal value of the victory we have gained. 
This cannot be fully known here. — S. 

Vers. 11 — 18. — The wicked and the good. The general subject in this section of the 
psalm is a contrast between the wicked and the good, setting forth the baseness of the 
wicked nature, and the generous sympathies of the good. 

I. The baseness of the wicked. Their general characteristics are: 1. They often 
bring false malicious charges against good men. (Ver. 11.) " They demand satisfaction 
at Diy hands for injuries of which I have never even heard." 2. They return evil for 
good. (Ver. 12.) They had been former friends : this was the sting of their ingratitude 
and injustice. Former favours sour the minds of the ungrateful, and intensify their 
hatred. 3. They exult over the calamities of the good, and insult and injure them. 
(Ver. 15.) " The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel," and cruelty always embrutes 
the bad mind. 4. They incite the senseless rabble to persecute good men. (Ver. 16.) 
The multitude ever ready without reason to join in a hue and cry, and, without think- 
ing, aie ready to become the instruments of bad men. 

II. The nobility op the good. 1. Broken friendships fill them with a sense of 
bereavement. (Ver. 12.) The good hunger for love, as well as give it; and, when 
denied it, are afflicted with a sense of loneliness. 2. They are deeply sympathetic with 
the afflictions of othens. (Vers. 13, 14.) They fast and pray in token of the sincerity 
and depth of their sympathy. 3. In the calamities and sorrows of life the good turn 
to Qod for help and deliverance. (Ver. 17.) Especially the more they feel deserted 
by former friends. 4. They are constrained to give thanks to God for his mercies, 
(Ver. 18.) They are not ungrateful, like the wicked. Gratitude is a joy to the 
generous and religious mind. — S. 

Vers. 19 — 28. — Pleas for triumph. The substance of this third division is a con- 
tinuous prayer that God would give him to triumph over his enemies ; and the plans 
on which the prayer is grounded. 

I. He prays that the cause of unrighteousness may not triumph. 1. The 
enmity of his enemies was without just cause. (Ver. 19.) To be unjustly accused 

PSALMS. T 



274 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. xxxvi. 1 — 12, 



wounds a good man very deeply. 2. He was the champion of public order and peace ; 
and therefore they opposed him. (Ver. 20.) Em|jloyed deceitful words and schemei 
to disturb and overthrow the public peace. Bad men therefore. 3. God himself was 
the witnesi of their injtistice and wickedness. (Ver. 21.) And cannot but interpose 
of his own righteous will. 4. He appeals to Qod <m the ground of his personal righteous- 
ness. (Vers. 23, 24.) Not on the ground of his perfection ; but he appeals to his 
upright aim and just purpose and general rectitude. The righteous God must there- 
fore overthrow his enemies. God's righteousness, and his own could not hoth be 
defeated. Their just retribution was to be clothed with confusion and dishonour. 
The psalmist is so sure that his prayer will be answered and his enemies punished, 
that we have next — 

II. A SEATEFUL ANTICIPATION OF THE VIOTOET. 1. Se Calls Upon 0,11 who loVe 

righteousness to magnify the worh of God. (Ver. 27, " who have pleasure in my 
justification, or righteousness.") The victory of the psalmist over his wicked enemies, 
2. He himself will sing of the righteousness of God for ever. (Ver. 28, " all the day 
long.") We should praise God for ever as the Author of all our moral and spiritual 
victoriei. " Not unto us, but unto thy Name, Lord," etc. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSAIiM XXXVI. 



This short psalm is mainly didactic. It 
places in contrast the extreme wickedness of 
the wicked and the inexhaustible fulness 
of love, faithfulness, and righteousness 
which characterizes the God whom the 
wicked dare to offend. It ends with a brief 
but earnest intercessory prayer, that God 
will favour the righteous and protect them 
from the assaults of the ungodly, followed 
by an expression of confidence that the 
prayer will be granted. 

The psalm divides itself into three 
strophes, corresponding to the division of the 
subject-matter. Strophe L (vers. 1 — 4) 
gives the portrait of the wicked man. 
Strophe ii. (vers. 5 — 9) paints the Divine 
goodness. Strophe iii. (vers. 10 — 12) con- 
tains the prayer and the expression of 
confidunce. 

The title ascribes the psalm to David; 
and the critics generally acquiesce. Some 
of them point out special Davidical indica- 
tions ; but no one has ventured to assign it 
to any particular occasion in David's life. 
The epithet given to David in the title, 
"servant of Jehovah," would seem, however, 
to connect it with Ps. xviii. 

Ver. ]. — The transgression of the wicked 
laith within my heart. This is a difficult 
passage. In the first place, the text is un- 
certain, since some manuscripts have u^, 
"his heart," in the place of 'n'7, " my heart." 
And further, whichever reading we prefer. 



the meaning is far from clear. Dr. Eay 
translates, " Transgression's oracle to the 
wicked is, ' In the interior of my own 
heart ; ' " and understands the meaning to 
be that the sinfulness of the wicked man 
deludes him into the belief that his wicked- 
ness is known to no one but himself — it is 
all sufely locked up in the recesses of his 
own heart. Professor Alexander suggests 
as possible, "Thus saith depravity to the 
wicked man, ' In the midst of my heart, 
there is no fear of God before his (i.e. God'f J 
eyes.' " Others, preferring 13^ to '3^, render, 
** Transgression speaks to the wicked within 
his heart ; There is no fear of God," etc. ; 
regarding the two clauses as perfectly 
independent tlie one ot the other. This is, 
perhaps, the best explanation. There is no 
fear of God before his eyes. Either he 
belongs to the class of "fools, who say in 
their heart, There is no God " (Ps. xiv. 1), 
or lie agrees with those who cry, "Tush, 
God hath forgotten: he hideth away his 
face ; he will never see it " (Ps. x. 11). 

Ver. 2. — For he flattereth himself in his 
own eyes, until his iniquity be found to 
be hateful. Another very obscure verse, 
explained in various ways. The rendering 
of Professor Alexander is to be preferred, 
" For he fiattereth himself in his own eyes, 
at to God's finding his sin and hating it;" 
i.e. he flatters himself that he will conceal 
his sin from God, so that God will not 
discover it to hate it (see also the comment 
of Dr. Kay, and the Bevised Version) 

Ver. 3. — The words of his mouth are 
iniquity and deceit (comp. Pss. xii. 2; 
xxviii. 3). He hath left off to be wise, and 
to do good. There was a time when he 
occasionally acted wisely, and did what was 
right. But that time is gone by. Now he is 
consistently wicked. 



PS. XXXYI. 1 — 12.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



275 



Ver. 4. — He deviseth mischief upon his 
bed; rather, lie devueth iniquity — the same 
word as in the preceding verse. In tlie 
night, when he should bs locked in innocent 
slumber, he lies awake, devising wicked 
schemes against others (eomp. Prov. iv. 16 ; 
Micah ii. 1). He setteth himself in a way 
that is not good. More correct than the 
Prayer-book Version, " He hath set himself 
in no good way." The wicked man is not 
merely negatively bad; he determinately 
chooses a path of lite that is evil. Ha 
abhorreth not evil. He has no aversion to 
it, no horror of it, no shrinking from it. 
Whether a thing is right or wrong is to 
him a matter of complete indifference. So 
callous is he, so hardened. 

Ver. 5. — ^Ihy mercy, Lord, is in the 
heavens. Instead of the usual contrast 
between the wicked man and the godly one 
(Psi. i. 1—6; iv. 2, 3; v. 10, H, etc.), the 
psalmist here makes the startling contrast 
between the wicked man and Ood I The 
character of the wicked man is given in four 
verses (vers. 1 — 4), the portrait of God in 
five (verH. 5 — ^9), God's first and principal 
characteristic ii " mercy " — or rather, 
"loving-kindness" Oon). This quality is 
revealed, not on earth only, but also in 
heaven, towards the angels. Thy faithful- 
ness reachetb unto the clouds. TSexi to 
loving-kindness in God comes "faithfulness" 
— fidelity to every promise that he has ever 
made, unswerving attachment to those 
whom he has once loved, undeviating 
maintenance of the truth (oomp. Pss. Ivii. 
10 ; cvili. 4). 

Ver. 6. — Thy righteousness is like the 
great mountains ; literally, like the moun- 
taini of Ood ; and so Luther, BosenmuUer, 
Hengstenberg, Kay, Obey ne, and the Bevised 
Version. According to the Hebrew idiom, 
this means "the very greatest mountains" — 
tliose which seem to stand the strongest and 
the firmest. " Righteousness," or "justice," 
is placed immediately after " faithfulness," 
because of its close connection with it. Thy 
judgments are a great deep ; t.e. sucli as man 
cannot fathom — ^unsearchable — past finding 
out. Lord, thon preservest man and 
beast. The providential care of God for 
his creatures is another of his leading 
characteristics, and one especially deserving 
man's attention and gratitude. It is a form 
of his loving-kindness. 

Ver. 7.— How excellent is thy loving- 
kindness, Ood ! The psalmist, having 
made mention of the " lovingi-kinduess of 
God" as his most characteristic quality 
(ver. 5), and again brought it into notice as 
causing him to provide so carefully for all 
his creatures (ver. 6), cannot refrain from 
glorifying the quality whereto he has called 
attention. "How exr-ellent" — or, how pre- 



oioui (Kay, Alexander, Oheyne, Bevised 
Version) — " is thy loving-kindness I " How 
does it exceed all that we could have 
anticipated I How far does it go beyond all 
that we deserve I Therefore the chUdren of 
men put their trust (or, shall put their 
trust, or shall take refuge) under the 
shadow of thy wings (comp. Pss. xvii. 8; 
Ivii. 1 ; Ixiii. 7, etc.). Enoourdged by the 
consideration of thy goodness, the beney 
Adam, the oliildren of weak, frail, sinliil 
man, shall take heart, and lay aside their 
natural timidity, and turn to thee, and put 
their trust in thee, gathering themselves 
under the shadow of thy protecting wings, 
and looking to thee, and thee only, for safety 
and defence (see Buth ii. 12). 

Ver. 8. — They shall be abundantly satisfied 
with the fatness of thy house. God will 
satisfy all who trust in him with " blessings 
out of his holy seat," and will satisfy them 
abundantly. The blessings intended are 
spiritual blessings ; and the " house " is, 
primarily, "the place where God set his 
Name," which at this time was the tabernacle. 
Faithful Israelites were to expect spiritual 
blessings through faithful attendance on 
the tabernacle worship, eo far as it was 
accessible to them. The " house " typified 
heaven, whence, of course, the blessings 
really came. And thou shalt make them 
drink of the river of thy pleasures ; literally, 
the river of thy Ederu. Thou shalt give 
them access to an exhaustless fountain of 
delight, a stream like that which watered 
Eden (comp. Isa. Ii. 3 ; Iv. 1 ; John iv. 14 ; 
vii. 37, 38). 

Ver. 9. — For with thee is the fountain of 
life. The ultimate source of all life is God. 
Israel had been taught by Moses (Sent. 
XXX. 20) that God was their Life ; but this 
was not all ; he is equally the Origin of life 
to everything that lives — to angels, men, 
beasts, birds, fishes, zoophytes, plants (see 
Gen. i. 11, 20, 24, 27, etc.). And, as he is 
the sole Source of natural life, so is he also 
the I ne and only Origin of spiritual vitality 
(Pas. XXX. 5 ; ixvi. 9 ; John i. 4 ; vi. 57 ; 
vii. 37—39, etc.). And in thy light shall 
we see light (comp. John i. 4, 5, 9; 1 John 
i. 5 — 7). God is essentially Life and Light. 
He » has life in himself " (John v. 26). He 
" is Light, and in him is no darkness at all " 
(1 John i. 5). The Son, who is " the Light 
of the world" (John viii. 12), is but "the 
Effulgence of his Father's glory " (Heb. i. 3, 
Euvised Version), " Light of light," the 
ray which streams from the Sun of the 
universe. Yet from him comes the light 
which enlighteneth all creatures (John i. 9). 
" In his light we see light." 

Ver. 10. — continue thy loving-kindnesi 
unto them that know thee. Here begins the 
third strophe. Having fiuiahed his " instrup- 



276 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XXXVI. 1 — 12 



tion," the psalmist passes on to prayer; 
and is content to ask that God will be in 
the future such as he has been in the past — 
that he will "lengthen out," prolong, or 
" continue his loving-kindness " to his 
faithful servants, dealing with them as he 
has hitherto dealt with them (vers. 5, 7), 
mercifully, graciously, and lovingly. His 
faithful servants are " those that know him," 
because, as Hengstenberg observes, "the 
true and essential knowledge of God is to 
be found only in a sanctified mind." And 
thy righteousness to the upright in heart. 
Continue, i.e., to deal justly with those 
whose heart is right with thee — who, in 
spite of occasional lapses, are really in heart 
sincere. 

Yer. 11. — Let not the foot of pride come 
against me. The mention of " the foot of 
pride" is noted as a mark of Davidical 
authorship. " Every psalm of David which 
speaks of danger points to the pride of his 



enemies as the source" (Canon Cook), 
And let not the hand of the wicked remove 
me J or, drive me away (Revised Version), i.e. 
force me into exile, as Absalom's party 
succeeded for a time in doing (2 Sam. zv. 
13—30). 

Ver. 12. — There are the workers of 
iniquity fallen; or, yonder (Kay). It is 
as if the psalmist suddenly saw a vision. 
" There " — on a spot that presents itself to 
his eyes — are the wicked actually " fallen ; " 
they lie prostrate in the dust. They are 
cast down, and shall not be able to rise ; 
or, to rise up again (comp. Ps. xviii. 38). 
Whereas the righteous may fall into mis- 
fortune repeatedly, and recover themselves 
(Prov. xxiv. 16), the workers of iniquity, 
when their time comes to fall, usually 
perish. At any rate, this would be the 
result of the overthrow which the psalmist 
sees in a sort ef vision. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ver. 4. — !nie portrait <^ the godless man. " He abhorreth not evil." This dark trait 
is the crowning stroke in the portrait here drawn of the godless man. If a man does 
not hate evil, it is certain he loves not good. Those twin precepts are like stems from 
one root (Eom. xii. 9, " Abhor . . . cleave "). What a man loves and follows shows 
what he tuiU he ; but what he hates shows what he is. 

I. HaTBBD of sin is a more BEAEOHINa MORAL TEST THAN ADMIBATION OF GOOD- 
NESS. True, any real love for goodness, desire after righteousness and holiness, shows 
a man not yet hopelessly bad. But there is a weak approval of good, with no earnest 
effort to follow it, which only amounts to self-condemnation. To recognize the right, 
true, good, kind, honourable path, and yet not choose it, is even a distinct step down- 
ward. Power to say " No " is the decisive test of strength of moral character. Good, 
if followed at all, must be pursued actively — uphill. But to go wrong you need but 
yield, and drift with the stream. " The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence " (Matt. 
xi. 12). 

II. Hence hatred op sin is an essential and olorious fbatdee op Qod's 
OHAEAOTBB. (Hab. i. 13 ; Jer. xliv. 4 ; Prov. vi. 16.) If men had power to stop the 
mischief and suffering caused by sin, they would think lightly of sin itself. It is 
because God does not think lightly of sin that he does not interfere to prevent the 
misery. If the stream is to flow clean, the fountain must be cleansed. God will not 
make an evil tree bear good fruit. Suffering is the divinely ordained penalty, warning 
men off from sin, tracking men out in their sins, calling men to repent of sin, 
witnessing to God's hatred of sin (Eom. vi. 23). But this is only one side. Misery, 
suffering, death, are no arhitrary infliction; no artificially contrived punishment. 
They are sin's natural result. Want of love to God and to man, ripening into " enmity 
against God" (Rom. viii. 7); and that self-indulgence and self-worship which prac- 
tically are enmity to men, cannot but bear the bitter fruit of misery and death (Bom. 
vi. 21 ; Gal. v. 19 — 21). A world of perfect joy and lasting happiness must be a world 
from which sin is eternally shut out (Bev. xxi. 27 ; xxii. 16). 

III. This note of warning is one specially needed bt the times we livk m. 
Modern society is strong (stronger than at any past epoch) in benevolence, kindliness ; 
pity for the suffering, the fallen, even the guilty. It is weak on the sterner side- 
indignation against wrong, contempt of falsehood, stern zeal for justice, hatred of evil. 
We may see this in social life, in commercial life, in political life, in Church life, 
in theology. We like to " make things pleasant." We persuade ourselves that sin is 
no such very great evil ; that God will not be very hard on ii. We forget that th« 



PS. XXXVI. 1—12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 277 

most tremendous denunciations of sin and of sinners are from the loving lips of ou^ 
Saviour himself. " Ye that love the Lord, hate evil ! " (Ps. xcvii. 10). 

Ver. 9. — " The fountain of life." This short but sublime psalm opens in a minor 
key. With a few powerful strokes the psalmist paints the blindness, untruthfulness, 
blasphemous presumption of an ungodly life — a life void of godly fear, and of that 
hatred of evil without which there is no true love of goodness. Then as with a sudden 
recoil from this hateful spectacle, the psalmist turns to God, pouring forth a noble 
strain of praise. He contemplates God's mercy, truth, justice, bountiful providence, 
and loving-kindness to his children (ver. 9). May be looked at as the crowning point 
(jf this hymn of worship, at which praise turns to prayer. 

I. God is the sole ohiginal Possessob op life— tjndekivbd, self-sustained, 
ETEENAL. "The Father hath life in himself" (John v. 26). "God draws existence 
from his own store. We possess but a borrowed existence ; being is not native to us. 
As in our turn, one by one, we shall pass out of this life, and the world will go on its 
way without ns ; so, if God willed, we might pass out of being, and the universe would 
not miss us " (Saurin). But God " inhabiteth eternity " (Isa. Ivii. 15). This truth, 
the foundation of religion, is sublimely set forth in the Old Testament, especially in 
contrast with the vanity of idols ; and is shadowed forth in the persfmal name by which 
God entered into covenant with his people (Exod. iii. 14; vi. 3; comp. Isa. xliii. 10 — 
13 ; xliv. 6; so in the New Testament, Joliu xvii. 3; Rev. iv. 9, 10). 

n. God is the Authob and Sustaikbe op life. The variety, beauty, activity, 
fruitfulness, joy, of the life of all living cieatures are so many streams, whose inex- 
haustible fountain is in him (Acts xvii. 25, 28). From the gigantic trees of California 
and Australia, four hundred or five hundred feet in height, to the all but invisible 
moss on Arctic snows ; from the eagle, soaring above the mountain peaks, the elephant 
in his massive strength, the whale plunging deep in ocean, to those creatures 
revealed by our strongest lenses, tens of thousands of which find ample space in a few 
drops of water ; — all draw life and being every moment from him. The least is as 
carefully designed and finished as the highest. Let us not forget how these two 
worlds of life — plants and animals — are balanced and made mutually dependent: the 
plant feeding on the air which the animal breathes out, and which to itself is poison, 
and giving back that which the plant needs not, but which to the animal is the breath 
of life. Even death and decay are made to minister to life. The creatures appear and 
vanish, like waves on the great river of life ; but the river flows on, for its fountain 
is in God (Ps. civ. 27 — 31). Shall we imagine that this is true only of our small 
world, and that all the suns and systems with which space teems are splendid deserts ? 
Or is not Isa. xlv. 18 true of many and many another world as of our own ? 

III. Spiritual life — man's highest life — like bodily life, has its fountain 
IN God. He alone bestows and sustains it. We share with the lower creatures the 
life of sensation and conscious activity. But we have also (whether we heed it or not) 
a higher life, or capacity of life — the life o( personal character, which may be cultivated 
and perfected in personal communion with Qod. Bach one has in him germs of good 
and of happiness ; germs, too, of evil and misery, for whose full development this life 
does not afford room. Each human spirit, a world in itself, has in it material for 
heaven or hell. This is so, whether we like to think so or no. More than this. Scrip- 
ture reveals (what we could never have discovered, reasonable as it is) that the Spirit 
of God, personally bestowed and dwelling in us, creates and sustains this higher life 
(John iii. 6). The most vigorous life — bright intellect, intense emotion, strenuous 
will, fruitful activity^-if destitute of living communion with God, and devoid of his 
Spirit, is pronounced in Scripture but a living death (Eph. ii. 1, 4, 5 ; 1 John v. 12). 

Lessons. 1. Worship. If we could rise to the height of these words, fathom their 
depth, read their full meaning, our souls would be bowed, yet uplifted in adoiation — 
filled with the glorious sense of the majesty, the mystery, the infinite greatness and 
goodness of God (1 Tim. i. 17 ; vi. 15, 16). 2. Submission. He with whom is the 
fountain of life must determine how and how long the stream shall flow. Our lives 
belong to him. When he withdraws life he is not taking away what we have any 
right or claim to — only what is his (Heb. ix. 27). But the Lord Jesus holds the key 
(Bev. i. 18). 3. Faith in Jesus. Christ is the Possessor and Dispenser of spiritual 



278 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxvi. 1—12. 

life (John v. 26). All the streams of both physical and spiritual life flow through him 
(Col. i. 15, 16 ; John i. 3). He came to give life (John x. 10). But a man might die 
of thirst at the brink of a full-flowing fountain, if he would not drink. So, with infinite 
pathos, our Saviour says, " Ye will not come " (John v. 40). But all who will are 
freely bidden (John vii. 37—39 ; Bev. xxii. 17). 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — 4. — Ood's revelation of man to himself; or, the transgressor's heart turned 
inside out. It has been thimght by some that this psalm was written about the time 
when Saul save his daughter Miohal to David with a treacherous desiu:n (see Walford, 
in toe.); by others, that it is a general description of some of the wicked men — such as 
Saul, Absalom, Ahithophel, etc. — with whom David was brought into contact (see 
Fausaet hereon). But there is no clue in the psalm itself to any such specific his- 
torical reference. We see a special significance in the title of the psalm, which tells 
us that it was written by David as a servant of Jehovah, and handed by him to the 
choirmaster for use in the songs of the sanctuary. We may regard it as a desorip- 
lion of the heart of the ungodly, written in the piercing light of Divine revelation (see 
ver. 9), affording us a striking illustration of Heb. iv. 12, showing us that " the Word 
of Q-od is" indeed "living and strong, sharper than any two-bladed sword, piercing 
even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow," 
being " a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart." We find, too, that the 
Apostle Paul regards the words, " There is no fear of God before his eyes," as a part 
of the Divine indictment against a sinful race, whether of Jew or of Gentile origin 
(cf. Bom. iii. 18). Hence the inspection of the human heart, the results of which are 
heie stated, is one that has been carried on under the searching light of Heaven. And 
a terribly painful discovery it is, to find how much iniquity God sees hidden in the 
nooks and corners of the heart. For us to be always carrying on this introspection 
would be more than we could bear. Yet the wicked may well be asked to study their 
own hearts in the light of this description, that they may see how much they need 
deliverance from their dark and sinful selves; while the believer may well look into 
this description again and again, that he may see from how much he has been delivered 
by the grace of God. 

I. Let us studt this sbabohing invbstiqation of the secrets of a human 
HEART.* (Ver. 1.) 1. The heart of an ungodly man has an oracle of its own. The 
Hebrew word translated " saith " is a noun, and means " oracle." Some wonld regard 
the phrase as elliptical, and as meaning, "The oracle [of God, concerning'] the trans- 
gression of the wicked in his heart, is," etc. (so Gheyne and Olshausen). But it seems 
to us rather a satirical contrast. The righteous have their oracle, which is Divine. 
The wicked have their oracle, even transgression. The dislike of being governed by 
another is the governing principle of their lives. " Our tongues are our own : who if 
lord over us?" (Pss. xii. 14; ii. 3). Hence their "oracle" is dictated, not by loyalty, 
but by rebellion against God. 2. There are terrible negations in the godless man's life. 
(Ver. 1, " There is no fear of God before his eyes.") There is no desire of the Divine 
approval, nor dread of the Divine displeasure. It was reserved for the nineteenth 
century, however, to develop the most impious forms of this denial of God. There are 
not wanting novels, such as George Eliot's and others, which present model characters 
in social life on the basis of non-theism, and which depict it as a virtue to be without 
any fear of God whatsoever. This psalm deals with an evil which is by no means a 
thing of the past. It is developed to-day in frightful form, and puts on a guise of 
virtue to hide its ghastliness. There is a second negation (ver. 4) : " He hath left off 
to be wise and to do good." The absence of the fear of God will soon be followed by 
the loss of respect for man, and the deterioration of general intelligence and of social 
virtue. There is no sustaining impulse for the highest excellence when God ceases to 
be enthroned in the heart. For a third negation here specified shows clearly enough 

' According to the LXX., Syriac, and Arabic Versions, and Jerome, 'a'? shoald be ia^ 
O. " hi8 heart," not " my heart." 



PS. XXXVI. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 279 

the drift of the godless man (ver. 5) : " He ahhorreth not evil." Tlie issue of a 
materialistic denial of God, and of a materialistic view of man, must be the denial nf 
evil as evil. Evil cannot exist if atoms of matter be all. For molecules never breal^ 
the ranks, and can never get out of harness. And he who first abhors not evil, out of 
senseless bravado, will come to deny evil altogether, and will let his passions hurry 
him wiiither they will, on the inward plea that he is " acting according to nature." 
3. There are equally terrible positive evils in the godless man's life. First, evils io 
thought (yer. 3). The psalmist means either that, in spite of his godlessness, he ha? a 
very good opinion of himself, or else that he flatters himself his sins will never come 
out to light, and be found out in all their naked ugliness. Nor is this all. But he 
positively deviseth mischief upon his bed (ver. 5). Even in the night he is pursuing 
schemes of self-gratification, altogether regardless of righteousness or of the good of 
others. A second form of positive ill is found in his words (ver. 4). Truthlessness 
will soon follow godlessness. And when in his eye God ceases to be, it will not be 
long ere right ceases to be right, and truth to be truth. And a third form of ill will 
develop itself. " He setteth himself in a way that is not good." He plants his feet, 
he takes a determined stand, in the direction of gratifying self rather than in the direc- 
tion of pleasing God. And will aim at nothing but " utility," in the narrow sense of 
hedonism. Right as right will have disappeared from the gaze of his eye, and will 
cease to govern either deed, word, or thought. How terrible a picture is this of 
unchecked human depravity 1 

II. What practical use bhoxtld be madb in odb dat op such a tbebible 
EXPOSURE OF THE SECRETS OF DEPRAVED HEARTS ? 1. It is a Very Solemn thought that 
we are thus heing inspected, at every moment, by an all-searching gaze. It is only 
where Divine revelation has been vouchsafed that sin is dealt with so very seriously, 
and that the heart is thus depicted so minutely. 2. How fearful the descent of sin, 
and how encroaching are its inroads on character I Tet, after all, we need not fall into 
the error of supposing that the Word of QoA regards all as eqimlly guilty or as equally 
corrupt. Tet, as the Apostle Paul shows in the second and third chapters of his 
Epistle to the Romans, where he is handling the indictment which stands in God's 
Law against us, we are " all under sin." If the Jew has sinned against a written Law, 
the Gentile has sinned against an unwritten law. Hence both are "guilty before 
God;" although the measure of each one's guilt, and the depth of each one's corrup- 
tion, can be judged accurately by God alone. 3. Let us be devoutly thankful that we 
may know the worst of ourselves by comparing what we are with the pure and holy 
Law of God. To know the disease is an important step in seeking for a cure. 4. Mven 
if we have not gone such lengths in guilt and maddened sin as are here described, let ue 
thankfully acknowledge that we owe it to the restraining providence of God. For, 
alas! the germs of all ill are in each of us. 6. We need a deliverance from ourselves. 
We need forgiveness for guilt, and cleansing from corruption. 6. Since all are under 
tin, how righteous is the requirement of the gospel I " God commandeth all men every- 
where to repent." No man is as good as he ought to be, nor yet as good as he knows 
he ought to be. And for this he ought to be sorry and to mourn his guilt persistently 
before God. When he is thus ready to put sin away by repenting of it, God is ready 
to put it away by forgiving it. 7. It is the glory of the gospel that it takes into account 
all our needs, from every possible point of view. In Christ we have pardon for the 
penitent's sin, and cleansing from the foulest corruption. Yea, through the Spirit of 
God we may be regenerated, and sanctified, and snatched from the power of darkness 
to the kingdom of God's dear Son. 8. It is only in that very Word which looks at sin 
most seriously, that man is regarded most hopefully. Man and his sins are not 
inseparable. They may be parted. And when this blessed effect is brought about, 
" being made free from sin, and become servants unto God," they will " have their fruit 
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life." — 0. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — Ood^s revelation of himself to man. The reason for so sudden a 
transition in the theme of this psalm does not clearly appear. It is, indeed, possible 
that portions of two may be pieced together ; but we have no proof of that. The 
remark of Calvin is very striking, " Alter having spoken of the great depravity of 
men, the prophet, afraid lest he should be infected by it, or be carried away by the 



280 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxvi. 1—12 

example of the wicked, as by a flood, quits the subject, and recovers himself by reflect- 
ing on a different theme." ^ Whether this be precisely the correct account of the 
matter or no, certain it is that too prolonged a gaze into the desperate wickedness of 
man would unnerve us and would generate a spirit of misanthropic distrust. For our 
own balance of mind, and peace and rest, we must turn our gaze away from the haunts of 
sin to the abode of perfect righteousness and halcyon calm. And, thank God, we can 
do it. And if we turn the glass of the Word upward instead of downward, we shall find 
more to inspire with rapture than we have seen to create dismay. But neither the one 
description nor the other can be accounted for by the ordinary laws of the human 
mind. The psychology of the natural man will not serve us here. Only a " man 
whose eyes are open " could have written either the first or the second part of this 
psalm. And we here see the working, not of psychology, but of pneumatology — of the 
pneumatology of the spiritual man when receiving and transmitting a revelation from 
God and of him. What the Apostle Peter says of prophecy generally may be applied 
to this psalm : it " came not of old time by the will of man." David spake as he was 
" moved by the Holy Ghost." Having, tlien, spied into the abyss of depravity by the 
glass of the Word, let us peer into the boundless heights of glory by looking through 
the same glass when turned upward. Let us study — 

I. The perfections of God in their sublime and peerless glory. (Ver. 5, 
el seq.") We have put before us the sphere in which the Divine Being dwells — "in the 
heavens ; " " unto the clouds." The heavens, in the highest sense, are regarded as the 
dwelling-place of God; and, to the same intent, the word translated "clouds."* Since 
God is everywhere present, we must not confine his presence (in our thinking thereof) 
to one spot rather than another (Ps. oxxxix. 7 — 12). Yet we are permitted to think 
of "heaven" as being a region where he specially manifests his glory — "Our Father, 
which art in heaven ; " " The Son of man " " came down from heaven " (cf. Ezek. 
i. 26 — 28 ; Isa. vi. 1—4 ; John xvii. 5). High, high above this troublous scene of 
unrest and sin tliere is a throne of glory, there is a seat of power, there is a realm of 
unruffled, everlasting calm (Ps. xcvii. 1). But here we have revealed to us him who 
is on the throne, and the glorious attributes which mark his infinite Being. 1. " Mercy," 
" goodness ; " benignitas, misericordia. God has a heart. " He that formed the ear, 
doth he not hear ? He that formed the eye, doth he not see ? He that formed the 
heart, doeth he not feel ? " Yea, verily. God is a Being of infinite tenderness, compas- 
sion, and love. 2. " Truth ; " i.e. "faithfulness ; " fides, Veritas. "Hath he said, and 
shall he not do it ? " " Hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good ?" 

" Firm as a rock his truth remain! 
To guard his promises." 

Not one thing hath failed or shall fail of all that the Lord hath spoken, 3. " Righteous- 
ness." (Ver. 6.) " Thy righteousness is like the great mountains."' Justitia. It 
is because the righteousness of God is so firm and unmovable that we can repose in 
him the most entire and absolute confidence. Even love, divorced from righteous- 
ness, would fail to win our hearts. The work of Christ commands our homage, love, 
and rest, because therein love and righteousness are seen in sublimest concord. Note: 
How intense the relief to turn our eyes away from this scene of sin and corruption 
to him " whose dominion extendeth over all" in righteousness, mercy, and truth ! 

II. The perfections of God in their bearing upon us. 1. Perfect administration. 
(Ver. 6.) "Toy judgments are a great deep;"* a profound abyss (cf. Ps. Ixxvii. 19). 
They often present a depth of mystery which we have no plummet to sound. But they 
Ate judgments for all that; i.e. right-settings — they are never at fault. And never is 
there any flaw in the Divine administration on this globe (Ps. xcvii. 2). 2. Loving- 

' See Calvin's ' Commentary,' in loo. 

' The word occurs in the following passages: Deut. xxxiii. 26; 2 Sam. xxii. 12; 
Job XXXV. 5; xxxvi 28; xxxvii 18, 21; xxxiiii. 37; Pss. xviil. 11; Ivii. 10; Ixviii. 34; 
Ixxvii. 17; Ixxviii. 23; Ixxxix. 6, 37; cviii. 4; Prov. iii. 20; viii. 28; Isa. xl. 15; xlv. 8j 
Jer. li. 9. 

• Literally, " mountains of God ; " of the following expressions (Pss. civ. 16 ; Ixv. 9). 

* Not, as Hengstenberg, "a great flood." The word signifies "abyss" (see Job xxviiia 
14; Ps. xlii. 8; Amos vii. 4; Gen. vii. 111. 



rs. XXXVI. 1—12.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 28] 

kindness. The same word as is rendered " mercy " (Authorized Version) in ver. 5. 
But the translators saw the meaning of " mercy " per se becomini» " loving-liindness " 
towards us. Not only has the sun light, but we feel the warmth of his rays. Even 
so the tender mercy of God discloses itself to us in innumerable acta of kindness and 
love. 3. Protection. (Ver. 7.) "The shadow of thy wings" (of. Exod. xix. 4; Deut. 
xxzii. 9 — 12; Ruth ii. 12 ; Pss. xvii. 8; xoi. 4; Ivii. 4; Ixiii. 7; Ixi. 4). Perhaps the 
most wonderful of God's attributes is that patience with men, whereby he restrains 
the power that could crush, and puts it forth so gently as to guard. Had we not been 
sheltered by an invisible guarHianship, we had been oruslied ere now a thousand times 
over. Note, also, that the figure of " wings," etc., indicates a marvellous tenderness 
of love. 4. Supiply. (Ver. 8.) "The fatness of thine house" — the rich provisions 
of Divine love wtiioh are so largely enjoyed in the fellowship of worship in the courts 
of the Lord. " The river of thy pleasures ; " literally, " of thine Eden." Is there here 
an allusion to the river which flowed peacefully through the garden of Eden when sin 
had not as yet tainted its bowers? Or is this phrase a declaration that of the pure joy 
which is in the heart of God he gives those to partake who are in communion with 
him ? If so, here is a wonderful anticipation of the truth, " My peace I give unto you." 
5. lAfe. (Ver. 9.) "The fountain of life." Here is a sublime expression of the 
doctrine which in modern phraseology is called " the origin of force " — a sublime expres- 
sion thereof, however, on its moral and spiritual side. Such a phrase as this may 
well have been borne in mind by the Apostle John,* when he says of the Son of God, 
" In him was life." 6. Light. (Ver. 9.) " In thy light shall we see light." In how 
many senses this is true, and how richly it is true in every sense, it would require 
many homilies to show. We can but hint. Without God we can see no light any- 
where. We have no basis for thought, no account to give of existence. Without the 
light from God to illumine our souls, we cannot see the glory of his love in creation. 
Without the enlightening and regenerating power of his Spirit, we cannot see the 
kingdom of God. But with God above, around, within, in what a blaze of light and 
glory may we live! * Note : What amazing bliss is ours, even now, when the fulness 
of God is made over to us In Christ through his Word and Spirit ! Perfect judgment, 
loving-kindness, guardianship, living food, life, light! What more can we hare? 

III. The Divine pebfections as laid hold of by believing men. When our God 
reveals himself thus to us as our God, it is but fitting and right that our hearts should 
respond to such revelation. A response we find here. It is fivefold. 1. Here is an 
txhilarating sense of being in the possession of a precious treasure. (Ver. 7.) " How 
excellent," etc. ! rather, "How precious is thy loving-kindness, God! " Indeed, it 
's. Precious beyond thousands of gold and silver ; yea, " better than life " (Ps. Ixiii. 3 ; 
xliii. 4). God is our " exceeding Joy." Often and often may we muse with ever- 
increasing delight on the exhaustless stores of love which are ours in the heart of the 
infinite and eternal God (cf. Deut. xxxiii. 26, 27). 2. Here is a sense of safety and repose 
in fleeing for refuge to Qod. (Ver. 7.) " Put their trust ; " literally, " flee for refuge " 
(cf. Ps. xci. 2). How intense the repose when we make God our Eefuge ! From the 
plots of men, from the strife of tongues, from perils of every kind, we can hide in God 
— blessed and safe in his almighty keeping. 3. Here is a sense of satisfaction in the 
abundance of a Divine supply. God's love is as meat and drink to us (cf. John vi.). 
When all the fulness of God is made over to us in Christ, we are indeed well supplied. 
We often want more of Christ ; we never want more than Christ. 4. The trust and 
love of the heart express themselves in prayer. (1) For others (ver. 10). We may bear 
all the saints on our heart as intercessors before God. (2) For ourselves (ver. 11). 
That God would so prove himself to us to be all that he has promised to be, that we 
may never be moved from the right and safe path by any of the plots and snares of 
designing men. 5. Already, in the anticipation of faith, we sing praise for delivering 

' Well says Bishop Alexander, "Of how much of St. John's theology is this verse the 
root 1 " (' The Witness of the Psalms to Christ and Oliristianity,' p. 259). 

' The psychology of the natural man will not account for such a gloriouB psalm as this 
ever having been written by any one, anywhere, in any age of the world. It is high time 
for those who would subject exegesis to naturalistic psychological law to review the ground 
on which they profess to take their stand. 



282 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxvi. 1— 12. 



grace. (Ver. 12.) "There are the workers of iniquity fallen." "There!" — emphatic. 
There they are I I look on far ahead, and know that I shall triumph in redeeming 
love, and that I shall yet see those that plotted my ruin brought to nought, as Israel 
saw their foes dead on the seashore (Bxod. xiv. 30, 31 ; Pss. xlvi. 6 ; xxxvii. 34 — 38 ; 
liii. 8 ; Ixiv. 7 — 10). (For the application of all this in its highest and grandest form, 
see Bom. viii. 34 — 39.) Let us trust God, brothers, while danger is nigh, and we shall 
shout in triumph when life's storms are over. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — We have here a terrible picture of the wicked man. I. His heabt is 
THE SEAT OF EVIL. It is there as an " oracle." It is enthroned. It speaks with 
authority. It gives forth its decrees for obedience. The true is opposed by the false. 
Bighteousness gives place to unrighteousness. All counsels of reason and compunc- 
tions of conscience are hushed by the cry, " No God 1 " (2 Thess. ii. 3, 4). 

II. His life is marked by abandonment to etil. The power that rules the 
heart rules the life. There is progress in depravity, as in goodness. Gradually the 
sway of sin extends, till at last it works without check, without remorse, without 
remedy. You know a servant by the livery he wears, so when you see a man who sins 
wilfully and habitually, whose words and actions and manner of life are manifestly 
regulated without any fear of God, you cannot but regard such a man as a servant of 
sin (Bom. vL 16 ; John viii. 34). 

III. His ohabaoteb is formed undeb the foweb of etil. Acts form habits, 
and habits character. The process is slow, but certain. What determines character 
is the power that worketh in us, be it good or be it evil (Gal. v. 17, 18). There is evil 
in all, but when the heart has been won back to God, the evil, though present, has 
lost its power. There is conflict, but the victory is sure for good, and not for evil 
On the other hand, where evil still rules supreme, the result is of necessity-^greater 
and greater degradation and corruption. 

IV. His futubk is dare with the prognostics of evil. To those who are 
living without God, the prospect in this life is gloomy and painful, but there is still 
hope. The voice of mercy is ever sounding in their ears, " Why vrfll ye die ? " As 
time passes, things grow darker. Guilt increases, the heart is hardened, and reforma- 
tion becomes more and more improbable (Jer. xiii. 23). Again and again signs and 
warnings are given — precursors of the end, foreshadowings of the doom that awaits the 
impenitent. But they are unheeded. There is a terrible retention of character, and 
the future has no star of hope to light the gloom. " The wicked is driven away in his 
wickedness." — ^W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Aspice. Look aroimd, how distressing is the .scene 1 Look hack, it is 
the same tale of human care and crime. Look hefore, little to encourage, or to lead us 
to believe that things will be better than they are. But look up, and we can take 
heart, and speak one to another of better times. God reigns. Christ is at the right 
hand of the Father, to carry out his gracious purposes. Though there be much that is 
dark and depressing, yet we are able still to pray to God as " our Father," to say, 
" Thy kingdom come," and to assure our hearts of the final victory of love, for " Thine 
is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory." 

I. From the falsehood of men we make oub complaint to the faithful- 
ness OF God. Though men lie and beguile, God is true. His Word is truth. "He is 
faithful who hath promised." We may trust him utterly. Like him, let us also be 
faithful. 

II. From the injustice of men we mat appeal to the justice of God, 
Conscience within and the Law without bear witness that God is righteous. Justice 
is justice everywhere. Whatever be our lot here, we shall get right yonder. However 
basely men may behave to us, God will treat us fairly. The Judge of all the earth 
will do right. In this faith we can possess our souls in patience (1 Cor. iv. 3, 4 ; 
Jas. iv. 11, 12). Come what will, let us ever do that which is just and good to all 
men. 

III. From the selfishness op men we can take refuge in the love and 
MERCY OP God. In trade and commerce and all the various businesses of the world, 
selfishness prevails. The rule is, " Every man for himself ; " and the royal law, " Thou 



XMVI.1— 12.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 28* 



shalt love thy neighbour as thyself," ia set at nought. Even in the Churches the 
leaven of selfishness is sadly operative. But " God is love." He is the great Giver. 
His delight is to show mercy, to do good and to commuDicate. He has come nearer 
than ever in Christ Jesus, and under the strong and loving covert of his wings we find 
refuge from all the oppressions and ills of life (ver. 7). Let us make it our habit more 
and more to abide with God. Christ is in the bosom of the Father, and it is as we 
" live together with Christ" that we abide in the love of God,' and are comforted in all 
our troubles, defended in all our dangers, and strengthened for every good word and 
work. 

" Only, O Lord, in thy dear love, 
Fit US for perfect rest above ; 
And help us, this and every day. 
To live more nearly as we pray." 

W.P, 

Vers. 6, 7. — Bighteousness ; Judgment ; loving-kindness. There are three great sayings 
here which deser ve our deepest study. First, God's " righteousness," that perfectio n of lui 
character which secures perfect justice in all his doings. It is like " the mountains," 
so high that it is always above us, so fixed and stable that it cannot be moved. Then 
God's "judgments" — his ways, his dealings with men — are called a "great deep," as 
being in many respects beyond our sounding or measuring, unfathomable and full of 
mystery (Ps. Ixxvii. 19). Last, there is God's providential care. It is said, " How 
excellent is thy loving-kindness, O God 1 " (vers. 6, 7). But while these sayings are 
very striking and beautiful, looked at by themselves, they become vastly more signifi- 
cant and consolatory when we regard them in their relationship. Suppose we take 
the second, and place it in the light of the first and then of the third. In the " great 
deep " there is much that is awful and perplexing. But if there be mystery, this should 
not surprise us. We are but children. How can the finite comprehend the Infinite 1 
But this mystery has its uses: it teaches us humility; it inspires us with reverence; 
it prepares the way for faith and hope and love. But much depends on our stand- 
point. See how different things become when we look at " the great deep " from the 
sure ground of the everlasting hills. It is significant that the psalmist speaks of the 
"mountains" before the "great deep," of the "righteousness" of God before his 
"judgments." Here is a lesson for us. Let us first make sure as to God's righteous- 
ness. Then when our hearts are established in this truth, we can look abroad without 
fear of the great deep of God's judgments. Even if, like Paul, tossed up and down 
" in Adria," the assurance of God's righteousness will give us peace, and sustain our 
hopes ; and when we reach the shore again, we can look back, as from Melita, with 
thankful love and praise to God's ways and wonders in the deep. Then, further, when 
we take up the third great saying here, the light increases, and the sense of God's 
gracious presence and care becomes stronger and stronger. How often is it so in God's 
Word and works I Side by side with soma grand manifestation of his greatness and 
majesty, we have some tender touch that speaks of his fatherly love and care. 
Whensoever, then, we are oppressed and appalled by the sight of the "great deep," let 
us call to mind, on the one hand, God's " righteousness ; " and, on the other, God's love 
— that we may be comforted. Before us is the " great deep," with many things that 
are terrible and distressing — the shipwreck of dear hopes, the burying out of sight of 
beloved ones, the mystery of trial and of death — but, standing on the sure ground of 
God's righteousness, we may possess our souls in patience ; and, contemplating the 
manifold and increasing proofs of God's love and goodness in our daily life, we may 
take heart, and say, " He cannot will me aught but good ; I trust him utterly." Let 
us learn to take the right order in consid ring God's works. We should begin with 
what IS plain and certain. We should study the dark things in the light of what is 
clear, the mysteries by what is revealed. Further, mark the importance of making 
much of common mercies, that we may be the better prepared for uncommon 
emergencies. God is educating us. When we know him as caring for us in little 
things, we can trust him to care for us m greater things (Matt. vL 30—34). If we 
have learned to run with the footmen without being weary, we can better contend 
with horses. If we do our duty and ser u God in the land of peace, then we shall be 



284 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8 xxxvii. 1 — 40, 



the fitter to face the swelling of Jordan (Jer. xii. 5). Above all, let us remember that 
only in God can we find a sure Eefuge from all trouble (ver. 7). 

"Though griefs unnumbered throng thee round. 
Still in thy God confide ; 
Whose finger marks the seas their bound, 
. And curbs the headlong tide." 

W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Ths curse of wickedness and the hlessedness of fellowship with Ood. 
The psalmist complains of the moral corruption of his generation, and points the 
character of the time rather than any particular occurrence — unless " the foot of pride " 
in the eleventh verse may possibly refer to some invader that he dreaded. We have here 
a vivid description of the cursed state of ingrained, deliberate wickedness, and of the 
supreme hlessedness of fellowship with Ood. 

I. The ourse of ingrained, deliberate wickedness. (Vers. 1 — 4.) Represented 
under two main aspects. 1. The utter degeneracy of his thoughts. (Vers. 1, 2.) 
Translate, " The oracle, or voice, of transgression is in the heart of the wicked ; " ».e. 
evil is the sovereign voice that speaks to or commands him. It is the only imperative 
voice that he hears — not the voice of conscience or duty. As a consequence, he doei 
not see or hear God, and, therefore, does not fear to transgress. More than this, he 
becomes complacent (" flatters himself") in devising evil things as a sign of superior 
cleverness, and glories in hating rather than in loving. He is a fearful example of the 
total inversion of the moral order in all his thoughts. As a consequence, we have : 2. 
The utter degeneracy of his conduct. (Vers. 3, 4.) His words are the image of his 
thoughts — mischief and deceit. He has left off, turned from, every wise and good way 
of living, as a thing gone out of his esteem, forming no part of his purpose in life. 
He meditates only mischief on his bed, where other men remember the evil of the 
ilay, and repent ; but he sinks to sleep or awakes from it in forming evil designs, setting 
himself into the direction of no good way, nor abhorring any evil. 

II. The buprbmb blessedness op fellowship with God. (Vers. 5 — 10.) 1. 
Go^s goodness makes him infinitely worthy of our trust. (Vers. 6 — 7.) His mercy, 
tiithfulness, righteousness, judgments, preserving providence, are all infinite and 
J erfect, and those who trust in him live in the holiest, safest shelter — under the shadow 
of his wings overspreading the " mercy-seat." 2. God will abundantly satisfy all their 
g -eatest needs. (Ver. 8.) They shall partake of the Divine satisfaction and joy — eat 
o : the fatness of his house, and drink of the river of his pleasures. Because he is the 
B Duntain of all life and the Substance of all light, and they who dwell with him shall 
di aw his life into themselvas, and see all things in the light of his presence. 3. They 
bname confident of the downfall of those who are unrighteously opposed to them. 

g'ers. 11, 12.) " There 1 " — pointing as if to the scene of the ruin of his foes and the 
iS of God. Those who enjoy fellowship with God and Christ are assured that they 
too will at length conquer their spiritual foes, and enter fully into the kingdom that 
•VI aits them. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM xxxvn. 



This is another of the alphabetical psalms 
(see above. Pes. ix., xxv., and xxxiv.), and, 
though more free from irregularities than 
the previous ones, is not altogether without 
them. While, generally, each letter heads 
a stanza consisting of two verses, there are 
tliree occasions on wliich the stanza assigned 
to a letter is formed of only one verse (see 
Ters. 7, 20, and 34). Further, there are 



two occasions when the stanza begins with 
a wrong letter, h taking the place of j?, and 
1 of n. These anomalies it has been pro- 
posed to get rid of by altering the text; but, 
to judge by the previous alphabetical 
psalms, absolute exactness was not at first 
aimed at in this form of composition. 

The psalm is wholly didactic. It begins 
with exhortation, which is carried on 
through five stanzas to the end of ver. 9. 
Exhortation then gives place to calm and 



PB. xsxvn. 1 — 40.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



285 



unimpassioned instruction, of a character 
resembling that which makes up the bulk 
of the Book of Proverbs. This tone con- 
tinues to the end of ver. 33, when there is a 
return to exhortation, but exhortation (vers. 
St, 37) mingled with instruction (vers. 35, 
36, 38—40). The whole poem is grave, 
quiet, equable, devoid of excitement or lyrio 
fervour. It is unlike David's other com- 
positions, but may be bis, as asserted in the 
title, and may be the only composition which 
we possess of his belonging to his old age 
(ver. 25). 

The object of the poem is to reassure men 
wliose minds are disturbed by the fact of 
tlie frequent prosperity of the wicked, to 
convince them that in every case retribution 
will overtake the ungodly man at the last, 
And to impress upon them that the condition 
of the righteous, even when they suffer, is 
far preferable to that of the wicked, what- 
ever prospeiity they may enjoy. 

Ver. 1. — ^Fret not thyself because of evil- 
doers. According to Aristotle, we have u 
special emotion implanted in our nature — 
c€/ie(ris — which causes us to " fret " when we 
witness undeserved prosperity ('Ehet.,' ii. 9, 
§ 1). Certainly the feeling is very common 
and very strong; it is also characteristic of 
*he best natures (see Ps. Ixxiii. 3 — 14 ; Job 
xxi. 7—15; Jer. lii. 1, 2; Mai. iii. 15). 
The feeling does not need to be eradicated, 
but only to be held in check. Faith in 
God's retributive justice will enable us 
■calmly to await " the end" (Ps. Ixxiii. 17), 
in fidl assurance that ultimately God's 
vengeance will overtake the wicked man, 
>and he will receive condign punishment. 
Heither be thou envious against the workers 
of iniquity. Eavy is not a natural pansion. 
To envy the evil-doers on account of their 
.prosperity is at once a folly and a danger. 
Their position is really not enviable; and, 
if we allow ourselves to envy them, we shall 
be tempted to follow their example (see 
'Prov. .\xiv. 1). 

Ver. 2. — For they shall soon be cnt down 
like the grass. So Zophar, in the Book 
of Job (XX. .")), "The triumphing of the 
wicked is ehorl, and the joy of the hypocrite 
•but for a moment." And, no doubt, if we 
compare time witli eternity, the longest 
triumph that the wicked ever enjoy is but 
for a brief space, is soon gone, endures "but 
for a moment." It has a continuance, how- 
«ver, which to men in this life seems long, 
often intolerably long; and hence the dis- 
inrbance which men's minds suffer on 
account of it (Job xii. 7, 18; Ps. Ixxiii. 3— 



16). And wither as the green herb (comp. 
Pss. xc. 5, 6; ciii. 15; Isa. xl. 6, 7; Jas. i. 
10, II ; 1 Pet. i. 24). 

Yer. 3. — Trust in the Lord, and do good. 
Notwithstanding any difficulty which the 
prosperity of the wicked causes thee, trust 
thou still in the Lord ; be sure that his 
providence watches over thee, and en- 
deavour fctill to serve him by " doing good." 
So shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily 
thou shalt be fed; rather, dwell in the laiid, 
and feed on faithfulness (Kay) ; i.e. remain 
where thou art, and be satisfied with the 
thought of God's faithfulness. Feed on 
this. 

Yer. 4.— Delight thyself also in the Lord. 
Draw from communion with God all that 
inward intensity of joy whith it is capable 
of giving. And he shall give thee the desires 
of thine heart. God will then grant thee 
all thy desires, and make thee perfectly 
happy. 

Yer. 5. — Commit thy way unto the Lord 
(comp. Prov. xvi. 3; Ps. xxii. 8). The 
meaning is, " Cast thyself and thy life un- 
reservedly upon God — yield thyself wholly 
to him — look to him for support and 
guidance." Trust also in him ; and he shall 
bring it to pass, "He will accomplish all 
that thy faith has laid upon him " (Kay). 

Yer. 6.^Aud he shall bring forth thy 
righteousness as the light, and thy judg- 
ment as the noonday. If the prosperity of 
the wicked frets thee, because it seems to 
obscure thy righteousness, since while he 
appears to bask in the sunshine of God'i 
favour, thy life is possibly overshadowed 
by clouds and darkness, be sure that, in the 
end, this seeming injustice will be remedied. 
God will not frown on thee always ; one day 
he will turn on thee the light of his 
countenance, and make thy righteousness 
to shine forth like the sun in its noonday 
splendour. 

Yer. 7. — ^Best in the Lord; literally, b* 
nlent; i.e. do not murmur; make no com- 
plaint ; be silently acquiescent and resigned. 
And wait patiently for him. Be content 
to await his time, which is sure to be the 
light time. Meanwhile possess your soul in 
patience. Pret not thyself because of him 
who prospereth in his way (comp. ver. 1, 
of which this brings out the sense). It is 
when the ungodly prosper that the righteous 
are apt to repine. Because of the man who 
bringeth wicked devices to pass. It is the 
success of the ungodly in their vricked plots 
and schemes which especially vexes the 
righteous (see Job ix. 24 ; xii. 6 ; xxi. 7 — 9 , 
xxiv. 2—12 ; Ps. Ixxii. 5—12, etc.). 

Yer. 8, — Cease from anger, and forsake 
wrath; i.e. such anger and snch wrath as 
the prosperity of the wicked calls forth. 
Fret not thyself in any wise to do evU; 



28d 



THR BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. xxsvii. 1 — 40. 



rather, fret not thyself, only to do evil. No 
result could be looked for from the sort of 
"fretting" spoken of, but an evil one. If 
men will dwell unduly on the fact of the 
prosperity of the wicked, and brood upon it 
in their hearts, they will be apt, in the first 
instance, to envy the wicked, which is at 
once " to do evil ; " and from this they will 
bo naturally tempted to go on to an imita- 
tion of thpir wicked practices, which is to 
assimilate themselves altogether to the 
enemies of fled, and to be guilty of practical 
apostasy (comp. Ps. Ixxiii. 2, "But as for 
me, my feet were almost gone; my steps 
had well-nigh slipped. For I was envious at 
the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the 
wicked "). 

Ver. 9. — ^For evil-doers shall be cut off. It 
is foolish to " fret " and rage and storm 
against the ungodly whom we see prosper- 
ing, since they will certainly be "out off" 
sooner or later — sooner rather than later, 
according to the belief of the writer (see 
vers. 2, 10). But those that wait upon the 
Lord (see ver. 7), they shall inherit the 
earth. It is doubly foolish, since when the 
wicked are "out off," as they will be 
assuredly some day, the godly will find 
themselves the inheritors of the earth. This 
prophecy is partially fulfilled from time to 
time, and will find its complete fulfilment 
in the "new heavens and new earth, where- 
in dwelleth righteousness" (2 Pet. iii. 13). 

Ver. iO. — For yet a little while, and the 
wicked shall not be (compare th^ comment 
on ver. 2). Tea, thou shalt diligently con- 
sider his place, and it shall not be; or, he 
shall not be. He shall have been swept 
away; his "place shall know him no more" 
(Pb. oiii. 16). 

Yer. 11.— Bnt the meek shall inherit the 
earth. This prophecy is endorsed by our 
Lord (Matt. v. 5). It has only had occa- 
■ional fulfilment hitherto, notably in Moses, 
the meekest man of his day (Numb. xii. 3) ; 
to some extent in St. Louis and other great 
saints, whose influence has been world-wide, 
as St. Francis d'Assisi, St. Vrancis Xavier, 
St. Carlo Boromeo, and others. And shall 
delight themselves in the abundance of 
peace. Being men of peace, the meek, 
when they "inherit the earth," will estab- 
lish universal peace (Isa. ii. 4; xi. 6 — 9; 
Ixv. 25; Ezek. xxxiv. 25) and "delight in 
the abundance of it" (comp. Ps. l.\xii. 7). 

Ver. 12. — The wicked plotteth against the 
just (comp. Pss. xxxi. 13; xxxv. 4, 7, etc.). 
Wicked men commonly lay their plots 
against the righteous, as being less likfly 
to suspect them, and })erhaps as less likely 
to resist their machinations. And gnasheth 
upon him with his teeth (comp. Ps. xxxv. 16). 

Yer. 13. — The Lord shall laugh at him 
(eomp. Ps. ii. 4 ; lix. 8 ; and see the com- 



ment on the former passage). Tor he seeth 
that his day is coming ; i.e. God sees that 
the day of the wicked man's visitiition is 
approaching (see above, vers. 2, 9, 10 ; and 
comp. 1 Sam. xxvi. 10). 

Yer. 14. — The wicked have drawn out the 
sword, and bent their bow, to oast down the 
poor and needy. David is perhaps thinking 
especially of his own persecutors, Saul uud 
Absalom, who pursued after him with armed 
men, and sought his life (1 Sam. xxiii. 8, 14, 
26; xxiv. 2; xxvi. 2; 2 Sam. xvii. 24—26; 
xviii. 6—8). But he may also have in his 
mind the raids that powerful chiefs made 
upon their weak and peaceful neighbours 
(Job xxiv. 5 — 12). And to slay such as be 
of a right conversation ; or, such as are up- 
right in way ; Le. such as lead a righteous 
life. 

Yer. 15. — Their sword shall enter into 
their own heart. Such as " take the sword " 
often "perish by the sword" (Matt. xxvi. 
52). Absalom's rebellion cost him his life. 
Marauders would sometimes meet with a 
stout resistance, and be slain by those whom 
they had intended to plunder. And their 
hows shall be broken; t'.& they shall meet 
with failure. 

Yer. 16. — A little that a righteoas man 
hath is better than the riches of many wicked 
(comp. Prov. xv. 16 ; xvi. 8). 

Yer. 17. — For the arms of the wicked 
shall he broken (comp. Ps. x. 15). The 
wicked shall be disabled from doing more 
mischief. If not slain outright, they shall 
return from the combats that they have 
provoked with shattered weapons (ver. 15) 
and damaged persons. But the Lord np- 
holdeth the lighteons. Their adversaries 
in the encounters. 

Ver. 18. — The Lord knoweth the days of 
the upright ; literally, of the perfect — 
those who yield him a complete obedience. 
Ood takes loving note of their days, knows 
their number, and the events which each 
day will bring. He will cause all things 
to " work together for their good." And 
their inheritance shall be for ever (comp. 
vers. 27, 29, and 37; which all, like this 
verse, point, albeit vau;uely, to a future life). 
The mere continuance of a man's pOi-terity 
in a prosperous condition cannot exiiaust 
the meaning- of such phrases as, "Their 
inheritance shall be for ever ; " " Dwell for 
evermore;" "The righteous shall inherit 
the land, and dwell therein for ever." If 
David himself meant no more than this, yet 
the Holy Spirit which inspired him may 
have meant more. At any rate, to the 
Christian the words will always bring up 
the thought of that "inheritance incor- 
ruptible, and undeflled, and that fadeth not 
away, which is reserved for us in heaven " 
(1 Pet. i. 4). 



PS. xxxvn. 1 — 40.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



287 



Ver. 19. — They shall not be ashamed in 
the evil times. If they fall into adveisity, 
it will not cause them to feel shame. They 
will know that they are not being punished 
for evil-doing, but that God is trying them 
and purifying them (Job xxxvi. 8 — 11). 
And in the days of famine they shall be satis- 
fled (comp. Pa. xxxiii. 19). 

Ver. 20.— But the wicked shall perish 
(oiimp. vers. 2, 9, 10, 15, 36) ; literally, for 
the wieked shall perish. The happiness of 
the righteous cannot be complete until the 
wicked are removed out of their way ; since, 
so long as they continue in the world, they 
will be ever vexing the righteous and 
troubling them (Ps. Ivi. 1). And the enemies 
of the lord shall be as the fat of lambs. 
So, many of the old commentators, as Aquila, 
Kimcbi, and others ; and among moderns, 
Rosenmiiller, and Professor Alexander. But 
the bulk of recent critics translate, as the 
'xceUenny of the pastures (Hupfeld, Kay, 
Hengstenberg, Canon Cook, Oheyne, Kevlsed 
Version) ; ».e. the rich herbage which is 
buint up by the huat of summer (comp. 
ver. 2), Both translations seem to be tenable ; 
but the latter is perhaps preferable, since 
the consumption of the fat of lambs upon 
the altar is connected with the idea, not of 
rejection, but of acceptance. Into smoke 
shall they consume away (comp. Ps. cii. 3). 

Ver. 21. — ^Ihe wicked borroweth, and pay- 
eth not again. The wicked man borrows 
with a light heart, though he may have no 
prospect of ever being able to repay. Living 
under God's curse (ver. 22), he is for the 
most part not able to repay ; when he hap- 
pens to be able, he is often not willing. 
But the righteous showeth mercy, and giveth 
(comp. Ps. cxii. 5, 9). Tlie righteous has 
not often need to borrow (see Deut. xv. 6 ; 
xxviii, 12, 41). Bather, he lends and gives 
freely. 

Ver. 22. — ror such as be blessed of Mm 
(t.e. God) shall inherit the earth (see above, 
ver. 11). And they that be cursed of him 
shall be cut off (see above, ver. 9). 

Ver. 23. — The steps of a good man are 
ordered by the Lord ; rather, established ; i.e. 
upheld, and made firm. It is not the general 
superintendence of men's steps and goings 
by God (Prov. xvi. 9 ; xx. 24) which is here 
spoken of; but the special strengthening 
Hud supporting of the steps of the pious. 
The word naj must be understood, not of 
the ordinary man, but of the good man. 
(" na:, viri, scilicet justi, et Jnva benedicti," 
Boseuihiilier). And he delighteth in his 
way. He " knows " it (Ps. i. 6), and looks 
upon it with favour, and even "has plea- 
sure " in it (Ps. XXXV. 27). 

Ver. 24.— Though' he fall, he shall not be 
utterly oast down. "The difference," as 
Hengstenberg observes, " is that between 



misfortune or loss, and absolute ruin." The 
good man njay be afHicted; he may even 
fall into some fault (Gal. vi. 1) or grievous 
sin (2 Sam. xi. 4) ; but so long as " the rnot 
of the matter is in him " (Job xix. 28), God 
will not suffer him to be prostrated. For 
the Lord upholdeth him with his hand; 
literally, the Lord supports his hand. If he 
falls, God (as Lutlier says) "catches liim 
by the hand, and raises him up again." So 
David had himself experienced (2 Sam. 
xii. 13). 

Ver. 25.— I have been young, and now am 
old. It is most natural to understand this 
literally, and to gather from it that the 
psalmist, whether David or another, com- 
posed this psalm in advanced life. It has 
certainly all the gravity, calmness, serious- 
ness, and tone of autliority which befit a 
teacher of many years and much experience. 
Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, 
nor his seed begging bread. The social 
condition of the Israelites was very unlike 
that of modem European communities. 
Though there were rich and poor among 
them, there could scarcely be any that were 
very poor. Where there was a general 
obligation upon all well-disposed persons to 
lend to such as were in need, and no interest 
could be asked upon loans, and in the year 
of jubilee all debts were remitted, and 
mortgaged lands returned to their original 
owners or their families, actual begging 
was scarcely possible, and at any rate could 
only be brought about by extreme and reck- 
less misconduct. Many philanthropists be- 
lieve that even at the present time in our 
own country mendicancy is nearly always the 
oonsequence of persistence in evil courses. 
Still more must this have been the case ia 
Palestine in the time of the monarchy (see 
Prov. XX. 4). 

Ver. 26. — He is ever merciful, and lendeth 
(comp. ver. 21). This psalm contains a good 
deal of repetition, perhaps intended to em- 
phasize certain portions of its teaching (see 
vers. 1, 7, 8 ; 3, 27 ; 11, 22, 29; 7, 34, etc.). 
And his seed is blessed (comp. Pss. xxv. 18 ; 
oii. 28 ; cxii. 2). 

Ver. 27. — Depart from evil, and do good. 
Tlie same injunction is given, iu exactly the 
same words, in Ps. xxxiv. 14. And dweU 
for evermore. This is to be understood as a 
promise, "If thou wilt depart from evil, 
and do good, then tliou shalt dwell in the 
land for ever " (comp. ver. 3). 

Ver. 28. — For the lord loveth judgment 
(comp. Ps. XL 7). "Judgment" — Bsli'O — 
is here "justice," "righteousness;" as in 
Pss. xxxiii. 5 ; xcix. 4 ; ciii. 6, etc. And 
forsaketh not his saints (see ver. 25; and 
comp. Isa. xli. 17 ; xlii. 16, etc.). They are 
preserved for ever. Something has pro- 
bably fallen out at the commencement uf 



288 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. XXX VII, 1 — 4(X 



this line, which ought to begin with the 
letter ain. But the seed of the wicked 
shall he cut off. The wicked shall perish, 
not only in their own persons, but in their 
posterity, who shall be "cut off from the 
land of the living" (Isa. liii. 8), anil have 
" their name blotted out " (Pa. cix. 13). 

Ver. 29. — The righteous shall inherit the 
land, and dwell therein for ever (oomp. 
vers. 3, 9, 11, 18, 22, 28, 34 ; and Prov. ii. 
21). Bishop Butler sagaciously remarks 
that this is the natural tendency of things, 
if sufficient time be given, and acciJental 
hindrances removed ('Analogy,' pt. i. ch. 
iv.). 

Yer. 30. — The month of the righteous 
speaketh wisdom. (On the essential union 
of wisdom with goodness, see the Proverbs, 
pastim.') And his tongue talketh of judg- 
ment ; i.e. utters only what is morally right, 
and in accordance with truth and goodness. 
"Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh." A good man out of the 
good treasure of his heart can only bring 
forth good things (Matt. xii. 34, 35). 

Ver. 31. — The Law of his Ood is in his 
heart (comp. Deut. vi. 6 ; Pss. xl. 8 ; exix. 
11 ; Isa. li. 7). None of his steps shall slide. 
The two facts are associated as cause and 
effect. The having the Law of God in his 
heart prevents his sliding or going astray. 

Yer. 32. — The wicked watoheth the right- 
eous, and seeketh to slay him. Wicked 
men hate righteous men, as being a reproach 
to them, and also as being a hindrance and 
a danger. The righteous thwart their plans, 
oppose their proceedings, often frustrate 
their counsels. Sometimes their opposition 
brings the wicked man into peril, as when 
it takes the shape of prosecution before a 
court, or of help given to one who has 
fallen among thieves. Hence the hatred 
felt by the wicked towards the righteous is 
not surprising. It leads the wicked to 
entertain murderous thoughts — to be ever 
"watching" tor an opportunity when he 
may take the righteous man at a disadvan- 
tage, and, if no other means of removing 
him from his path present themselves, kill 
him. Modern civilization, with its precau- 
tions and "resources," prevents actual 
violence for the most part; but the mur- 
derous instinct remains, and even now, in 
his heart, many a wicked man is a murderer. 

Ver. 33. — The Lord will not leave him in 
his hand. God, as a general rule, does not 
allow the wicked man to work his will upon 
the righteous. He interposes one check or 
another, and saves the righteous man from 
destruction. Nor condemn him when he is 
judged ; i.e. nor will he allow him to be con- 
demned when the wicked man brings an 
accusation against him, and seeks to have 
him sentenced to death by an ignorant or 



unjust judge. These promises are not 
universal nor absolute, since many good 
men have been assassinated by their enemies, 
as Abel by Cain; and many have been 
wrongfully condemned to death and exe- 
cuted, as Naboth at the instigation ol 
Jezebel. 

Ver. 34. — Wait on the Lord (comp. vers. 
2, 5, 7 ; and Pss. xxvii. 14 ; Ixii. 5 ; oxxx. 
5; Prov. xx. 22). The injunction is re- 
peated so often because of man's extreme 
impatience and unwillingness to " tarry the 
Lord's leisure " (Prayer-book Version of Ps, 
xxvii 14) trustfully and confidently. And 
keep his way. The way in which he would 
have them walk — the way of righteousness 
(comp. ver. 3). And he shall exalt thee to 
inherit the land (see ver. 29, and the com- 
ment ad loo.). When the ungodly are cut 
off, thou Shalt see it (comp. Pss. liiS, fi; 
xoi. 8). Doubtless with some satisfaction. 
As the " ungodly " spoken of are employed 
in watching for an occasion to " slay " the 
righteous (ver. 32), these last can scarcely 
witness their removal from th6 world by 
God's providence without a feeling of relief 

Yer. 35. — I have seen the wicked in great 
power, and floarishing like a green bay 
tree ; rather, ai in the margin, Uhe a green 
tree in Jiii own (or, hie native) ioil. Growing, 
i,s., rankly and luxuriantly, like a leafy 
shrub, that has never suffered transplanta- 
tion (comp. Ps. i. 3 ; Ezek. xxxi. S). 

Yer. 3i>. — Tet he passed away, and lo, lie 
was not (cf. Job xx. 5 ; Ps. Ixxiii. 19, 20). 
Yea, I sought him, but he could not be 
found. The sudden disappearance of an 
imposing personality astonishes and con- 
fuses us. We cannot believe that one who 
has played so prominent a part in our drama 
of life is gone altogether. We looli about 
for him ; we expect him to reappear at any 
moment. We cannot realize the fact that 
he is vanished for ever. We ask ourselves, 
» Where is he ? " (Job xx. 7). 

Yer. 37. — ^Mark the perfect man, and be- 
hold the upright : for the end of that man 
is peace. This translation is much disputed. 
Most ancients and many modems render 
the first line, " Keep innocency, and observe 
uprightness," while some critics maintain 
that achariih in the second line must mean 
" posterity," and not " end." Others, again, 
join tlialom to iih, and render, " There shall 
be posterity (or, a future) to the man of 
peace." However, the rendering of the 
Authorized Version is retained by our 
Eerisers, and accepted in part by Heugsten- 
berg and Dr. Kay, while it has the complete 
approval of Canon Cook. 

Ver. 38. — But the transgressors shall he 
destroyed together (oomp. vers. 2, 9, 10, 15, 
20, and 34). The end of the wicked shall ha 
cut off. If acharith be taken to mean "poi- 



i-g. ixxvn. 1 — 40.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



terity " in the preceding Terse, it must be 
given the same signification here. 

Ver. 39.— But the salvatiou of the right- 
eous is of the Lord (comp. Pss. iii. 8 ; Ixviii. 
20, etc.). He is their Strength in the time 
of trouble (see Pss. xvili. 1 ; xlvi. 1, etc.). 
The last two verses sum up the teaching of 
the psalm, and indicate its especial object, 
which was to encourage and sustain the 
righteous under their trials, by the assurance 
that they were under the special protection 
of God, who, wlienever trouble threatened, 
would stand forth as their Strength and 
Defence, and would ultimately be their " Sal- 
vation." The full meaning of this last ex- 



pression was left obscure, though enough 
was said to raise the hope that this world 
was not the end of everything, but rather 
the beginning. 

Ver. 40. — And the lord shall help them, 
and deliver them ; he shall deliver them 
from the wioked, and save them, because 
they trnst in him. The ground of God's 
favour towarils the righteous, and the ground 
moreover of their righteousness itself (ver. 
3), is their trnst in him. Trusting in him, 
they have taken his Law for their rule oi 
life, and made it their constant endeavour to 
serve and please him. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 4. — Delight in Ood. " Delight thyself," etc. The order of these wordi makes 
all the difference between a religion of selfishness and a religion of love. Not, " The 
Lord will give you what your heart is set on ; therefore delight in him ; " but, " Delight 
thyself in the Lord ; let him be thy Joy — Fountain of happiness and Object of desire ; 
then thy most earnest petitions, deepest wants, highest aspirations, shall all be satisfied 
in him. Delight in God includes satisfaction and joy — 

L In God himself. That is, so far as he has made himself known to us — who and 
what he is, in whom we have our being. 1. His glory as the eternal and infinite 
Creator; his povrer, wisdom, goodness, perpetual presence and unfailing care of his 
universe. 2. Yet more in his character — his love, righteousness, unchangeable truth 
(John i. 18; xiv. 9). 

IL In our personal relation to him — that he is oub God and Father. 
(1 John iii. 1 ; Eph. ii. 1 — 10.) There is nothing selfish, presumptuous, or exclusive 
in this joy. The more we have it, the humbler we shall be ; more desirom that others 
should share it ; more qualified to influence them to seek and obtain it. 

III. In converse with him. This is the most marked and, glorious characteristic 
of the psalms generally — real, living communion with God (comp. Phil. iv. 4 — 7). 

rV. In obbdibnoe to him. " To live in the fear of God is not without its pleasure. 
It composes the soul, expels the vanity which is not without vexation, represses 
exorbitant motions, checks unruly passions, keeps all within in a pleasant, peaceful 
calm " (John Howe). 

Conclusion. There is a deep secret of a bappy life — must we not say a sadly 
neglected secret, even among real Christians ? Unselfish delight in God is doubtless a 
high attainment. But is it out of reach ? Surely not, when to the glorious knowledge 
of all that God is in himself is added the blessed certainty that he is our Father in Christ 
Jesus. This should be sunshine in darkest days. Yet let no Christian be discouraged 
because consciously very deficient in this respect. " That some are less sensibly and 
passionately moved with the great things of God (and even with the discovery of his 
love) than some others, doth not argue them to have less of the Spirit, but more of that 
temper which better comports with deeper judgment and a calm consideration of things. 
. . . Though flax set on flre will flame more than iron, yet withal it will smoke more, 
and will not glow so much, nor keep heat so long " (Howe). 

Ver. 7. — The rest of the soul. " Best in the Lord." If any age ever needed a gospel 
of rest, it is this in which we live. We often call it " this busy age." But it is mor« 
than busy — ^it is restless. Men pride themselves on " living fast." They seek excite- 
ment, not refreshment, in their very pleasures. Amusement becomes not recreation, 
reinvigoration, restful play, fitting you to return with fresh strength and vigour to 
work, but often an exhausting demand and strain. You are weary after your holiday, 
not rested. It was a wise as well as a gracious voice which said to the disciples, 
" Come ye apart, and rest " (Mark vi. 31). 

PSALMS. V 



290 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [Ps. xxxvn. 1—40. 

L Wb need ebst. 1. Physical rest, in due amonnt, is a yery dee]) need of life. At 
our peril we despise it. There are forms of animal life which are sleepless, but they 
are of very low types. The child, for many years, needs to spend half his life in sleep. 
The strong man needs from a quarter to a third of his time for sleep ; and he must not 
gire his waking hours to unnecessary toil, or body and mind will fail under the strain. 
We are not to think the time spent in sleep sheer waste. The schoolboy knows his 
task better when ho wakes than over-night. You are wiser for "sleeping over " a 
question. As a new building requires time to settle, so, it seems, do our thoughts. 
" He giveth his beloved sleep" (Ps. xxvii. 2). 2. No less do we need mental rest— 
repose of soul, heart, intellect. Best from doubt in certainty of truth. From care, in 
trust. From life's turmoil, in the quieting presence of things unseen and eternal. 
From the world, in solitary converse with our Father and our Saviour. From rest- 
lessness, in peace ; not insensibility, not inertness or carelessness, but inward calm. 

II. GioD IS THE boul'b Rebt. Clod has made all creation full of drlight and profit 
for man, but not provided full satisfaction, perfect peace, anywhere but in hiniself. 
Faith is not a sudden snatch, but an abiding hold. Like the ivy, the soul climbs by 
clinging close ; and as the ivy cannot cling while tossed to and fro by the wind, so the 
soul must cease to be agitated by stormy restless desires, if it is to take close, strong, 
peaceful hold on God. Best in God includes : 1. Beconciliation, It would be absurd 
to speak of resting in Ood while our heart is at enmity with him, estranged from him, 
or careless, ignorant, doubtful, about our personal relation to him. One or other of 
these must be the case unless we are what Scripture calls reconciled to Ood. The 
" glad tidings " is the " word of reconciliation " in a twofold sense : (1) The message 
and witness of the fact that God has provided atonement (2 Cor. v. 19 ; Bom. v. 10). 
(2) The message of personal invitation — not to Jews, heathen, atheists, notorious 
offenders, as such, but to meu as men, to each one ai a sinner (2 Cor. v. 20). Nature 
has no gospel. It is Christ who interprets for us the teaching, else unintelligible, of 
the lilies and the birds (Matt. vi. 26, etc.). It is his voice — the voice of the Father speak- 
ing through the Son — that says, " I will give you rest " (Matt. li. 28). 2. The rest of 
absolute submission to Qod's will, is what he sometimes calls us to. A hard lesson, but 
holy, profitable, with an after-fruit of peace. Not the highest form of faith, but indis- 
pensable to its completeness. For God does not cease to be our Creator, our Sovereign, 
when we become " children of God by faith in Christ Jesus." 8. The rest of unlimited 
trust. Not mere lying still in God's hand or at the feet of Jesus; not (as the 
" Quietists " taught) annihilation of our own will or of personal self ; the calm energy 
of the soul, wittingly placing all in God's band. Not the stillness of the stagnant 
pool, but the calm of the deep lake through which a steady current flows. Christ was 
not passive in Gethsemane ; the whole force of his will and purpose was gathered up 
in "Not my will," etc. 

"Ver. 23. — Vindication of God's supreme and gracious providence. " The steps," etc 
(see Bevised Version). The theme of this noble psalm is the vindication of Gkid's 
•uprenae and gracious providence, and the confirmation of faith tried by the vicissitudes 
of life, the prosperity of evil-doers, and trials of the righteous. 

I. In the widest sense human life — "the steps of [each] man," the path in which 
he treads — is under God's guidance ; upheld by his power, directed by his counsel 
(Prov. XX. 24). As a journey is made up of single steps, and one fal»e step may be 
fatal ; so lite, of momentary experiences and acts of choice, of which the greatest may 
hinge on the least. Life or death may bang on a pair of damp sheets or wet shoes, or 
a whiff of poisoned air. The fate of an empire may turn on the flight of a bullet. A 
spider's web spun across a dark opening has saved a fugitive from his persecutors. A 
successful career or a happy home may be owing to a chance meeting. If, therefore, 
God rules human affairs, he must foresee and control their most minute and secret 
causes. 

II. God bestows special quidance on his ohildben. "The steps of a good 
man," etc. (Authorized Version). " Established," is the proper meaning of the Hebrew 
word ; not only directed, but made firm, planted evenly and safely. This word '' good," 
inserted by our old translatorB,seemsa bold interpolation; but, in fact, it does but express 
the spirit of the whole passage. It is of the " meek," the " righteous," the " upright," 



PS. XXXVII. 1—40.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 291 

the man who delights in the Lord, rests in him, waits on him, the psalm speaks (vers. 
3, 4, 7, 11, 16, 18). Such phrases as " special providence " are sometimes ignorantly 
used, sometimes as ignorantly found fault with. Wrongly used, if it be supposed 
til at God's control is occasional, not perpetual and universal; wrongly objected to, if 
it is forgotten that at any moment God's guidance may have some special end in view, 
some immediate result. There are three reasons why God's children-^namely, those 
who are living the life of faith — obtain this special guidance and may count on it. 
(1) They ask for it. (2) They follow and yield to it. (3) It is possible in their 
case, as it is not in the case of an ungodly life. They have the teaching of God's Word, 
which the ungodly person neglects ; and the teaching of God's Spirit, which he does 
not believe in or desire (Rom. viii. 14). Further, God has a different end in view for 
them (Rom. ii. 7, 8). 

Peaotioal oonolusion. 1. If we desire God to guard and guide and prosper our whole 
lUti-joumey, we must ask him to guide every step. We are warranted in asking and 
expecting his leading in the least matters as truly as in the greatest. We should not 
willingly move a step without him. We must be prepared at every step to let him 
choose, rerbembering Ps. cvi. 16. 2. What shall we say to those who have never yet 
taken the one first step into the right and safe path (John v. 40 ; Prov. xvi. 26) ? 
" There is but a step between " you " and death." But also, one God-guided step will 
bring you to the feet of the Saviour, who is pledged to turn none away (John vi. 37). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 40. — 2%e good man's directory. This is a very remarkable psalm. Its 
theme is one throughout its entire length. Yet it is not so much drawn out con- 
secutively as repeated proverbially. This may be partly accounted for by its alpha- 
betical structure.' There is no advance between the verses at the commencement and 
those at its close, but rather a remarkable variety of beautiful turns of expression to 
a thought that is the same throughout. The whole psalm may be summed up thus : 
" Just now, you see the wicked prospering and the ungodly depressed. Do not fret 
over this. Trust, do right, rest in the Lord, wait and see. And by-and-by you will 
find that the righteous are brought out to the light, while the wicked are relegated to 
iorgetfulness and shame. Even now to have God in the heart with a crust in the 
hand, is better than to have the riches of many wicked. God will, in his own time and 
way, appear for his faithful ones, and prove the truth of his ancient word, ' Them that 
honour me, 1 will honour.' " So far as the text of the psalm is concerned, there is little 
to call for laboured criticism, though the Hebrew student would do well to examine 
minutely the second halves of the third and thirty-seventh verses. For the most part 
the psalm is delightfully plain and clear ; and nowhere could any better rule or directory 
for life be found than is herein contained. In our homiletic treatment of it we will 
notice — 

I. The seyebal duties herb enjoined on the oood man. These duties are 
put into a form suggested by the circumstances which surrounded the writer. When 
David wrote this psalm he was an old man. Looking back on the scenes of past 
observation and experience, he had witnessed many strange inequalities on the surface 
of society. Looking in one direction, he had often beheld an ungodly man enjoying all 
that heart could wish, so far as this world was concerned ; and in another direction tie 
had as often seen a good man, one who walked closely with God, in the midst of trial, 
afBiction, and distress. This state of things had perplexed him, and he knew that it 
still perplexed the righteous. To meet their perplexities and to assuage them, this 
psalm was penned ; and it is this purpose which forms the background of thought 
throughout the entire length of the psalm. 1. The first injunction is "fret not " (ver, I). 
Do not worry or perplex yourself about these mysteries of God's providence. Even it 
the lot of the wicked seems more easy, more pleasant, more prosperous than yours, 
yet " they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb ; " 
besides, " a little that a righteous man hath is better than the riches of many wicked." 
God's people are infinitely better off, with him as their heavenly Friend, than any of 

' No student should leave unnoticed Eirkpatrlok's very thoughtful notes an this psalm. 



29« THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxvn. 1— 4a 

the ungodly are, with all their noise and parade. 2. Hence a second duty is presented 
to us: "Truit" and "Best in the Lord." Tvro expressions for substantially the sama 
attitude of spirit. But this restful trusting is put in contrast from fretting. Yovir 
work i> not to worry, but to trust your God. Now, in what sense is this intended ? Let 
us picture the good man under the difficulty to which we have referred. He sees the 
ungodly in high places, while he is obscure, depressed, afflicted ; and he wonders what 
it means. Now, in what sense is such a one to trust in the Lord ? He is to trust 
in God, believing that such a state of things is known and permitted by him in 
infinite wisdom ; that this state of things is perfectly consistent with God's love 
for his people; that Otod has some wise and holy end in permitting it — to prove 
kim and to improve him ; and that he will see that end, either in this world or in 
the next. 3. Then there follows a third duty : " Wait patiently." If we are content 
to wait and let God's methods in providence open up before us, we shall see the 
ungodly cut down (vers. 2, 9, 10, 15, 17, 20, 25, 36, 38); that God will give as the 
desires of our heart, and graciously clear our way (vers. 4, 6); that though we 
may have been misunderstood and misrepresented for a time, yet God will clear us and 
our reputation in the long run (ver. 6); that God will grant the true possession 
and peaceful enjoyment of life to the meek and loyal (ver. 11) ; that the little of 
the righteous brings far more joy than the much of the wicked (ver. 16) ; that h« 
will be upheld where others &11 (ver. 17) ; that supplies shall be sent to the saint 
even in days of famine (ver. 19); that step by step will be taken imder the 
ordering of a Divine Guide (ver. 23) ; that even in falling he shall not perish, fot 
to him shall be shown a Divine upholding grace (ver. 24); that the righteou* 
man will leave a blessed inheritance to his children, — peace was his in life, and peace 
shall follow his children when he is gone to his rest (ver. 37) ; that his life is but 
an outworking of God's great salvation (vers. 39, 40). It is not in youth that all this 
can be seen, but if we believe God when we are young, we shall have proved him ere 
we are old. Only let us " wait patiently." There is a vast unfolding plan, which, if 
we are wise to observe, will be ever revealing to us " the loving-kindness of the Lord." 
4. And thus we are led onto a fourth duty — that of obedience. (Ver. 3.) " Trust in the 
Lord, and do good," i.e. " do right." In ver. 34 the same duty is expressed in another 
phrase, " Wait on the Lord, and keep his way." Trusting and trying, resting and 
working, are to go together. We are to find out what Qtoi would have ut do in the 
sphere in which he has placed us ; then to trust in the Lord, be strong, and do it. 
And we may " do right " (ver. 3), or, in other words, we may " keep his way " (ver. 34) 
in one or other of two methods. By actively doing the Divine will ; and thii is 
probably what most of us are called on to do — to pursue with energy the duties in activ* 
life that are set before us. Now, we may fulfil these : (1) In attending at each moment 
to the duty of the moment ; simply doing the right thing, at the right time, in the 
right way, and with the distinct aim and purpose of pleasing God. May be our calling 
is not that which we should prefer, and yet we see no way open to any other. 
When God does open a way in another direction, by all means let us follow it. But, 
meanwhile, be it ours simply to do the work which lies before us, with % readiness and 
cheerfulness that befit those whose sole aim is to please God. (2) In the cultivation 
of holiness we may " do right," ever setting the Lord before us, and aiming to follow 
him who " left us an example, that we should follow his steps." (3) In personal efforts 
to help, to relieve, to comfort, or to serve anotlier, we may do right. In this respect, 
as well as others, " it is accepted, according to what a man hath, and not according to 
what he hath not." But we may " do right " also by patiently bearing the Divine 
will ; and sometimes this is all the believer can do — simply to bear what God has laid 
upon him. Nor is there a nobler sight on earth than to see one who, racked with 
pain or wrapped in obscurity, can say, " My lot is appointed me by my Father's wUl; 
all that will ia love, and therefore I can cheerfully bear it. If my Father were to give 
the rod unto my own hands, I would give it back to him, saying, 'Father, thou 
knowest best ; do with me as seemeth goud in thy sight.' " Why, such a one, though 
he never goes outside the doors of his own house from one year's end to another, m a 
missionary to the Church and to the world 1 Preach fervently as we may by words, 
we cannot preach like these sufi'ering saints ! But we must notice — 
II. The connection there is between these several dutibb. We have specified 



PS. XXXVII. 1-40.] THE r.OOK OF PSALMS. 293 

them under four heads. 1. Fret not. 2. Trust. 3. Wait patiently. 4. Do right. 
These four may be reduced to two : trusting and trying ; or, in other words, to resting 
knd working. Both are inclmied in the verse already quoted. " Trust in the Lord, 
•nd do right." While these duties in combination make up " the whole duty of man," 
they are so connected together that neither can be discharged without the other. If 
we do not trust in Ood, we cannot do the right, and if we do not desire to do right, w» 
have no right to trust in Qod. What, then, is the relation between them ? At least 
a fourfold one. 1. Trust in God ensures the peace of mind which Jits a man for 
work. E.g. take a tradesman in business, whose affairs are going down, and who will 
soon find himself on the wrong side of the balance-sheet. It is impossible for him 
to go about his business with the energy it requires, especially in these times. But 
put the man's affairs straight; tell him that everything is set right, and that by-and- 
by he will find himself in a better position than at present, — and you put new life into 
the man. When he knows that all is right, he can set about his work with all the 
zest that is needed. So it is here. There once were two burdens pressing on the 
heart. The one, of his spiritual interests, the other, of his tempoial care. What hai 
become of these ? The first, the burden of guilt, he has laid at the foot of the cross. The 
second, the load of earthly care, he brings day by day, and casts it upon his God. 
Thus he has nothing left to care for, nothing left to be anxious about. Hence, the 
peace of Grod passing all understanding keeps his heart and mind in Christ Jesus; 
and, consequently, with unburdened heart, he can go about the work his Father has 
given him to do. 2. Trusting in Ood ensures the reception of ttrengthfor the discharge 
of work. "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength ; " " As thy days, 
so shall thy strength be." So runs the promise, and so runs experience too. Strength 
according to the days; strength sure as the days; strength to the end of the days. 
Such will be the uniform result of " waiting on God all the day." 3. Trusting in God 
supplies a man with motives to perform his work. If I am permitted to trust in God, 
then honowr requires that I shall do right ; for I trust in God for strength to perform 
his will ; hence when I ask for strength there is a tacit pledge that the strength received 
from God shall be spent in obedience to God. And not only so, but gratitude also 
requires that I should do right. If I receive of God's strength, how can I but grate- 
fully spend it for him ? And the honour of religion requires that I should do right. 
For if I tell the world I am trusting in God, and yet fail to do right, what will the 
worldling say ? What can he say, but this ? — " Either your God is not the God you say 
he is, or else you have not the trust in him which you profess to have." If we want 
the world to believe in Qod, if we want them to give us credit for sincerity, we must 
show that, while we trust in God, we also do right. 4. Trusting in God gives a man 
a guarwntee of the successful issue of his work. Is it mine to trust in God ? Can I, 
under all circumstances, repose in him ? Then I know that, to the very last, all shall 
be well. He hath said, " I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee." Trusting in him, 
we will dare to work, to suffer, or to die. 6. Ih^sting in. Ood will ensure a blessing to 
those on whom our work may afterwards fall, (Ver. 37, Hebrew and Revised Version 
margin, compared with ver. 38, Hebrew.) The good man leaveth an inheritance to his 
children's children. " The generation of the upright shall be blessed." The Old Testa- 
ment does not project our thought into our own future life after death as the New 
Testament does, but it lays very much stress on the effect of a man's life on the genera- 
tions which will follow him on earth : this is in accordance with Deut. vii. 9. And 
there can be no manner of doubt that the posterity of a man of trained righteousness, 
integrity, and piety, even though he be a poor man, will have the best of all legacies — 
pious poverty, Oo^s blessing, and a father's prayers. We do not say that young people 
are now taught too much to look to their future life, but we do venture to afBrm that 
fer too little stress is laid upon, and mention is far too seldom made of, the thought 
of the effect of parental character upon posterity. The law of heredity is stronger than 
that of environment ; or, to put the same truth in somewhat antique form, " Grace does 
not run in the blood, but it purifies it." 6. Trusting in Ood tnsures a man of a home 
in Ood when the earthly work is over. Even when flesh and heart fail, God is th 
Strength of our heart, and our Portion for ever I — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 40. — Two pictures. The psalmist says, at ver. 26, " I have been joung, uid 



294 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxvii. 1—40. 

now am old." We may regard him therefore as speaking in this psalm with the fulness 
of knowledge and the confidence of ripened wisdom. His old experience has attained 
to prophetic strain. Let us consider two pictures. 

L Thk eyilb of bnvt. It is common. It takes its rise snd works upon the 
lower part of our nature, blinding our minds, perverting our hearts, and stirring up 
all our evil passions. It " frets " us with a sense of our inferiority ; it " frets " us with 
a feeling of the injustice with which we are treated ; it " frets " us with a proud 
cunsoiousness of what we would have done, if only things had been otherwise, and we 
had fair opportunities. In these aod other ways it breaks our peace and embitters our 
lives. And yet how useless is envy as a resource amidst the ills of life I Instead of 
remedying, it only aggravates our troubles. Nothing but evil can come of evil. Envy 
leads not only to waste, but to worry, and not only to worry, but to wearing away of our 
powers, as by the slow and insidious progress of disease. Besides, envy is manifestly 
unreasonable in view of the realities of character. The prosperity of the wicked is vain 
and delusive. Look to the tendencies of things, look to the effect upon character, look 
to the end, and then see how, even in the deepest sense, it is infinitely better to have 
little with a clear conscience, than a full purse of unrighteous gains ; to take the lowest 
place among men, with the love of Qod, than lands and heritages and the highest 
honours of the world, by the sacrifice of truth and righteousness. Moreover, envy is 
iri reality a grievous offence against Ood. We are slow to admit this. We regard 
' fretfulness " as more an unhappy temper than a sin. But in this we err. " Envy " 
implies dissatisfaction with Ood's government, distrust of his justice, and doubt of his 
truth. When we give way to " envy," we place ourselves first, and as good as say, 
" If God were just, if he really loved us and cared for us, he would settle things other- 
wise, and not suffer our enemies to triumph over us." Thus in our selfishness we blind 
ourselves tu the truth, and act not only unworthily towards God, but inconsistently 
with our own best faith and hopes. "The tree is known by its fruits." To judge 
rightly of envy, let us mark its effects. See how it wrought in Gain. See how from 
that time onward, wherever it has had sway, it has wrought terrible evils — as in Saul, 
and Ahab, and Haman, and the wicked Jews, and even in the Christian Gliurch. If 
these things are so, how great a sin do we who profess to be the followers of the meek 
and lowly Jesus commit by yielding to this mean and degrading vice that has wrought 
such havoc in the world and in the Church 1 

II. The blessedness of trust in God. Trust is the true antidote to envy. We 
see this in the dispositions it produces — towards God, piety (vers. 3 — 6) ; towards man, 
benevolence (ver. 8). Next in the benedictions it secures. It brings settledness. Instead 
of distressing cares and pastsions, we have tranquillity. Instead of pain, we have peace. 
We are at home with God. There is also iiistenance. We are " fed " with heavenly 
fuod. We gain strength for all work. " Daily bread" fits us for daily duty. There 
is also sati^action. Our higher nature is set above our lower nature. Beason rules 
instead of passion. Love binds us to our brethren instead of our being separated by 
envy. Trust in God brings to us all that is really good for us, and we bask as in the 
sunshine of God's favour instead of being alienated from him by wicked works. Mark 
the Divine order with regard to these blessings. There must be a right spirit before 
there can be right conduct. Mark also how, as we live a true and unselfish life, doing 
good and hoping for nothing again but what God the Lord sees fit to give, we secure 
not only our own self-respect, but grow in favour with God and man. The surest way 
to get rid of discontent with the present, and fear of the future, is to do right and leave 
all to God. 

" Careless seems the Great Avenger ; history's pages but record 
One death-grapple iu the darkness, 'twixt old systems and the Word, 
Truth for ever on the scaffold — wrong for ever on the throne. 
Yet that scaffold sways the future, and behind the dim unknown, 
Stondeth God within the shadow, keeping watoh above his own." 

(Lowell.) 

W.F. 

Vers. 4 — 6. — Here we have a sweet picture of a noble life. I. Quiet heabt. The 
eye, the ear, the imagination, continually bring before us objects that appeal to oui 



P8. xxxvii. 1— 40.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 295 

detirei. We are in danger of being distracted and harassed, and of even yielding to 
envy and discontent. The cure 18 from God. When we come to know him as he is, 
to believe in him as he has revealed himself in Christ Jesus, we are able to rest in him 
with confidence, leaving everything to his righteous and loving rule. 

II. ElOHTLY OBDEBED lilTE. There may be life without any rule, or there may be 
life wrongly directed, or there may be life regulated in a right way, in accordance with 
God's will and not our own. This last is the true " way." It is when we " commit 
ovir way to God " in humble prayer, and holy submission to his will, that light will 
•rise to us, and strength be ministered to us, and real prosperity secured to us. This 
is not only the best way for ourselves, but also for others. It is in doing God's will 
that we reach the highest honour and usefulness, and accomplish our true destiny. 

III, Blissful futube. There is a screen as of night between us and to-morrow. 
We know not what a day may bring forth. There may come loss of health, of property, 
of friends. There may come diverse trials and troubles. Or it may be otherwise. Let 
us be thankful that God has been pleased to conceal from us what it would have been 
ill for us to know. But God knows all, and we are as sure, as that God lives, that it shall 
be well with the righteous. — W. P. 

Vers. 27 — 40. — Evil-doers. Evil-doers are not truly objects of envy. The more 
closely we contemplate this, the more clearly do we see their baseness. But it is needful 
that we should be urged to this salutary duty. Again and again in this psalm is the 
exhortation addressed to us to consider and judge rightly, to cease from evil and learn 
to do well. And there are good and weighty reasons given why we should have 
no part with evil-doers. 

L Theib ohabacteb ib odious. 

XL Theib rBosPEBiTT IS delusite. Image upon image is used to set forth the 
vanity and worthlessness of all prosperity not founded in righteousness. Beason, 
observation, and history are appealed to as teaching that sometimes quickly, at other 
times slowly, sometimes openly, at other times silently and secretly, but always 
sertainly, the end cometh (ver. 38). 

nL Theib dbyioeb abe doomed to defeat. We see, on the part of the wicked, 
malice suggesting, cunning contriving, and energy working out their evil devices, and, 
on the other hand, God watching and thwarting and overruling for good all their 
plans. So it was with Joseph's brethren (Acts vii. 9, 10). So it was with Daniel's 
cruel foes (Dan. vi. 24). So it was with the Jews, whose wicked hands had crucified 
the Son of Qod (Acts ii. 23, 24). The day of retribution surely cometh. Not onlj 
defeat, but " shame and everlasting contempt," await the wicked. — W. F. 

Vers. 27 — 34. — Ooodness. We hare here — 

L That goodness is the tbub aim of life. The first thing is to have the heart 
made good, and then all that flow from it, in word and deed, will be good also. 

** But snob as are good men can give good things.'' 

(Milton.) 

II. That goodness is the bbal olobt of life. (Vers. 30, 31.) We cannot 
but admire " wisdom " and "judgment ; " but what gives these their sweetest savour 
and their highest worth is the spirit of goodness that dwells in them. The glory of 
God is his goodness, and it is in the measure that we are like God in goodness that we 
are like him in glory. This glory is free to us in Christ Jesus. 

UI. That ooodnebb ib the most pebmanent posbebbion of life. Many things 
stand high for a time that will be brought low ; many things are counted worthy 
amongst men that will yet be proved worthless. There may be wicked men who hold 
a prominent place in the world, and are for a while the envy of many, whose greatness 
is after all a delusion and a lie. In the end they will be cut down like a tree, whose 
glory is for ever abased. But it shall be otherwise with the righteous. Goodness 
cannot die. It is safe amidst all changes. It stands firm in the tumult and rage of the 
greatest storm. It emerges purer and brighter than ever from the fires of persecution 
and the fury of evil men (vers. 39, 40). Goodness lives as an influence in the world 
alter death, triumphs as the power of God in death, and will dwell in the light of God 
beyond death for ever and ever. — W. F. 



298 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxvii. 1—40. 

Vers. 1—6. — Doubts raised hy the Divine providence, and how to meet them. The 
difficulty which perplexes the mind of the psalmist here is — How does God judge the 
wicked, if he allows them to prosper; and how reward the righteous, if they suffer 
adversity ? The answers given are not a consecutive argument. The whole psalm is 
more like a string of pearls held together only by the string. The thoughts have no 
joints or links to unite them. The leading thought, repeated in various ways, is not to 
envy the present prosperity of the wicked, but rather to wait in patient resignation for 
the just judgments of God. 

L BdBNIHQ envy 18 WBONO IN ITSELF, AND LEADS TO EVIL CONSEQUENCES. (Ver. 1.) 

To grudge the wicked their prosperity is very much as if we coveted it. And envy is 
nigh to cursing — an unrighteous spirit. 

II. We mdbt allow time to solve this as weUi as luinr otheb DnmonLxiu. 
(Ver. 2.) Fate of Saul, Absalom, and Ahithopliel. " What thou knowest noi now," etc. 

III. Let not TODB DirFIOTJLTIES supplant the only TEULY 8ATI8PYINO BXEE0I8B8 

or THS HXABT AND LIFE. (Yers. 3, 4.) Trust in the unseen Lord ; delight yourself 
in him ; find the joy of his service ; and your best desires shall be satisfied. Do not let 
your jealousy of the wicked cause you to cease from doing good, and unsettle your ways 
of life ; inhabit the land, and live a truthful and faithful life. 

IV. Let THE BIOHTEOCrS man be ASSUBED of the SYMPATHY AND 00-OFEBATION 

OF THE eiqhteous God. (Vers. 5, 6.) God brought David out of all dangers with 
which Saul threatened him, and made his name to shine over the whole kingdom. 
Present adversity is often the way to future glory. Think of the darkness that fell 
upon Christ in his sufferings and death ; and yet he was the Sun of Righteousness. — S. 

Vers. 7 — 11. — Confidence tn Qod. The text of the whole psalm is in the first two 
verses. We are not to be discouraged in the service of God by the prosperity of 
the wicked ; for it is more apparent than real, and is a short-lived prosperity. At the 
seventh verse the psalm takes a fresh start from the same key-note, 

L SiLKNT tbust in God, waitino foe him, is the only tbue solution or KHS 
difficulty. (Ver. 7.) Do not vainly argue the question ; be silent to God, and hs 
will speak by-and-hy and explain the difficulties of his providence. 

II. Envious angbb that the wicked abe betteb off than toc is siNVUii. 
(Ver. 8.) It is an arraignment of God's providence, which is presumptuous, and a 
discontent which is ungrateful, and an undervaluing of that inward prosperity which is 
the greatest good of life. 

in. It is the biohteous who beally inheeit that which is best IK VBB 
LIFB. (Vers. 9, 10.) The prosperity of evil-doers will soon come to an end ; for it is 
unrighteous, and cannot last in the world of a righteous Qod. But the righteous hara 
an inward life that turns outward things into gold ; they feast royally at the table of 
God, as is said in the twenty-third psalm. 

IV. The PBECEDiNa thought is bbpeatbd with the promise of an abundanci 
OF PEACE. (Ver. 11.) Our Lord repeats the former part of this verse in the Sermou 
on the Mount. " The meek — those who do not vainly strive and fret over the impos> 
sihle or the inevitable — shall inherit the earth." And shall have peace of heart and 
mind, which the wicked have not. — 8. 

Vers. 12 — 20. — The righteous and the wicked. The argument is continued and 
repeated in various forms, that the righteous is to hold fast his confidence in God, and 
not to be discouraged by the prosperity of the wicked. For — 

I. CoNBiDBB the EXPERIENCE OF THE WICKED. (Vers. 12 — 15, 20.) 1. Tht impo- 
tence of the plots which they in their anger devise. (Vers. 12, 13.) The Lord shall 
laugh. " No weapon formed against him shall prosper." 2. The punishment of ti» 
wicked i near and certain. (Vers. 13, 20.) " He seeth that his day is coming." 3. 2%« 
weapons which they employ against the righteous shall recoil upon themselves. (Vers. 
14, 16.) God overrules the contest between them. 

II. The BLESSEDNESS OF THE EiGHTEOUS. (Vers. 16 — 19.) 1. A little with righteout- 
ness is worth more than much with wickedness. (Ver. 16.) 2. The strength of tht 
righteous is maintained and upheld hy Qod. (Ver. 17.) While the " arms " equiva- 
lent to the "strength" — of the wicked soon break down. 3. They fulfil their divindf 



PS. XXXVIII. 1 — 22.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



291 



appointed days, and their goods descend to their posterity. (Ver. 18.) They are secur , 
•nd all things work together for good. The Christian knows of an eternal inheritanr . 
4. Ood win provide for all their wants. (Ver. 19.) This we know more abundan i ly 
ill Christ. — S. 

Vers. 23, 24. — Ood orders the good life. " The steps of a good man," etc. 

I. God orders the life of a good man. 1. By means of outward law. " His 
delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night." 
" But what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh," etc. Christ 
is the outward law for the Christian. 2. By means of an inward influence. His 
Spirit exerting, directing, and ruling the thoughts, the desires, and the will, teaching 
him how to choose and how to walk. He " orders " consistently with our freedom. 

IL God takes pleasure in the way of good men. 1. Because all his work is 
good. A good man's life is his production. All God's work is good, none evil. 2. 
Because he delights in the rectitude and welfare of his children. As an earthly father 
delights in the true prosperity of his children. 

in God gives evert help fob the becoveet of those who pall. He upholds 
him, helps him to rise, by taking hold of his hand. 1. He promises abundant forgive- 
ness to the repeatant. " Let the wicked forsake his way," etc. The parable of the 
prodigal son. 2. He searches and trie* and shows the evil way in men, and leads them 
to repentance. By the revealing work of his Spirit. " Like as a &theT pitieth his 
chUdren," etc.— 8. 

Ver. 37. — The perfect life. " Mark the perfect, and behold the upright : for the man 
of peace hath a future [or, ' posterity ']." In contrast to the wicked spoken of in the 
next verse (38). This whole psalm is a record of human experience. 

I. The study of human bxpbrienob in the light op human chabaoteb is 
most instbuctive. 1. Every man's life is in the main an embodiment either of the Law 
of Ood or of the law of sdf. Intellectual life, a life of knowledge or of ignorance, of 
wisdom or foolishness. But the moral life is the grandest, as exhibiting obedience or 
disobedience to the eternal laws of God. 2, 2%e moral life shows the consequence* of 
living the one life or the other. The shame and misery of the one, and the peace and 
blessedness of the other. Difference is life or death. 

n. What the study of the biqhteous hait's lite beveals. 1. It bring* him 
internal peace. And in the main outward peace; but if not, the peace of trust and rest 
in God. Peace in life and peace in death. 2. He transmits righteousness to his posterity. 
(1) By the influence of his example and teaching. His words and his character are 
reproduced in his children ; he lives again in them, perhaps a higher life than he lived, 
according to the law of progress. May be exception*. (2) By hereditary trans- 
mission. Moral as well as physical qualities descend to our children, and to children's 
children. How grand a motive for a pure, noble, Christian life 1 Goodness runs in the 
family blood. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXVIII. 



This is the third of the penitential psalms, 
and is appropriately recited by the Ohuroh 
on Ash Wednesday. Of all the penitential 
psalms it is the one which shows the deepest 
marks of utter prostration of heart and 
spirit under a oombination of the severest 
trials, both mental and bodily. The mind 
of the writer is racked by a sense of God's 
displeasure (vers. 1, 2, etc.), by grief at the 
desertion of friends (ver. 11), by fear of the 



machinations and threats of enemies (vers. 
12, 19, 20). His 'body is smitten with 
disease, the flesh without sonndness, the 
bones full of aches, the loins agonized with 
a sense of burning, the heart palpitating, 
the strength and sight failing (vera. 3 — 10). 
And through all there is the feeling that 
the whole is the result of his own sin (vers. 
8 — 5, 18). Still the writer is not reduced 
to despair. He clings to God (vers. 1, 9, 15, 
21, 22). He accepts his sufferings as a just 
oliastisement. He confesses his iniq^uity. 



298 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. xxxviu. 1 — ^22. 



and ia sorry for his sin. He prays to God 
(vers. 1, 21); he pours out his complaints 
to him (ver. 9); he hopes in him (ver. 
15); finally, he calls upon him as "hlg 
Salvation" (ver. 22). 

The psalm is ascribed to David by tlie 
title, but is not generally allowed to be 
his. It is assigned commonly to an un- 
known sufferer. Still, some modern critics, 
notably Canon Cook, in the 'Speaker's 
Commentary,' accept the statemeut of the 
title, and find the psalm very suitable to the 
eircumstancei of David " at the period just 
preceding the revolt of Absalom." Canon 
Cook holds that "at that time there are 
indications that David was prostrate by 
disease, which gave full scope to the machi- 
nations of his son and his abettors." If 
this were so, the Davidical authorship would 
certainly be probable; but the absence of 
any mention of such an illness from the 
Second Book of SKmuel is a difficulty which 
cannot easily be got over. 

The psalm falls into three divisions : 
From ver. 1 to ver. 8 ; from ver. 9 to ver. 
14 ; and from ver, 15 to the end. Each part 
begins with an appeal to Grod, whereon 
follows a description of the writer's sufferings. 
Part iii. both begins and ends with an appeal 
to God. 

Yer. 1. — Lord, rebuke me not in thy 
wrath (comp. Pa. vi. 1, where the first of 
the penitential psalms begins similarly). 
The prayer is for the cessation of God's 
wrath, rather than of the " rebuke " which 
has resulted from it. Neither chasten me 
in thy hot displeasure (see the comment on 
Ps. vi. 1). 

Yer. 2. — For thine arrows stick fast in 
me. (On the "arrows" of the Almighty, 
see above, Ps. vii. 13; and comp. Job vL 
i; Pss. xviii. 14; xlv. 5; Ixiv. 7; Ixxvii. 
17, etc.) It has been maintained that by 
"God's arrows" only sickness is meant 
(Hitzig) ; but the contrary appears from 
Deut. xxxii. 23 — 25. Hengstenberg is 
right, " Tlie arrows of the Almighty denote 
all the chastisements of sin depending on 
God." And thy hand presseth me sore. 
The verb used is the same in both clauses ; 
but it is difficult to express both ideas by 
one term in English. Dr. Kay makes the 
attempt by translating, " For thine arrows 
have sunk deep in me; yea, thine hand 
sank heavily on me." 

Yer. 3. — There is no soundness in my 
flesh because of thine anger. The psalmist 



begins with a description of his bodily 
troubles ; and, first of all, declares that 
there is "no soundness in his flesh," i.e. 
no healthiness, no feeling of vigour, no vital 
strength. Neither is there any rest in my 
bones, he says, because of my sin. His 
bones ache continually, and give him no 
rest (comp. Pss. vi. 2; xxii. 14; xxxi. 10; 
xlii. 10 : and Job xxx. 17, 30). 

Yer. 4. — For mine iniquities are gone 
over mine head ; t.e. tliey overwhelm me 
like waves of the sea. Together with my 
bodily pain ii mingled mental anguiih — a 
sense of regret and remorse on account of 
my ill-doing, and a conviction that by my 
sins I have brought upon me my sufferings. 
As an heavy burden they are too heavy for 
me. They press me down, crush me to the 
earth, are more than I can bear. 

Yer. 5. — Uy wounds stink and are 
corrupt. The writer reverts to his bodily 
pains. He has "wounds," which "stink" 
and " are corrupt ; " or " fester and become 
noisome," which may be boils, or bed-sores, 
and which make hiui a loathsome object to 
others (comp. Job ix. 19 ; xxx. 18). Because 
of my foolishness. Because I was so foolish 
as to forsake the way of righteousness, and 
allow sin to get the dominion over me. 

Yer. 6. — ^I am troubled; literally, bent; 
which some take physically, and explain aa 
" twisted by violent spasms," others, psychi- 
cally, as "warped in mind," "driven crazy." 
I am bowed down greatly; <.e. bowed to 
earth, crooked, as men are in extreme old 
age, or by such maladies as lumbago and 
rheumatism. I go mourning all the day 
long. My gait is that of a mourner — I 
stoop and move slowly. 

Yer. 7. — For my loins are filled with a 
loathsome disease; my loins are /uU of 
burning (Kay, Revised Version). A burning 
pain in the lumbar region is apparently 
intended. And there is no soundness in my 
flesh. Bepeated from ver. 3. 

Ver. 8. — I am feeble and sore broken ; I 
have roared by reason of the disqnietness of 
my heart. In concluding hii accounts of 
his physical condition, the writer passes 
from details to more vague and general 
statements. He is " feeble," i.e. generally 
weak and wanting in vigour — he is " sore 
broken," or "sore bruised" (Bevised Ver- 
sion), i.e. full of aches and pains, as though 
he had been bruised all over — and the 
" disquietness of his heart" causes him 
to vent his anguish in " roarings," or 
groaniugs. 

Vers. 9—14. — In this second strophe the 
physical are subordinated to the moral 
sufferings ; the former being touched on in 
one verse only (ver. 10), tlie latter occupy, 
ing the rest of the section. Of these th« 



PS. xxxviii. 1 — 22.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



2fi9 



most tangible are the pain caused by the 
desertion of his '"lovers," "fiienda," and 
"kinsmen" (ver. 11), and the alarm arising 
from tlje action taken, simultaneously, by 
big ill wishers and adversaries (ver. 12). 
These afflictiuDB have reduced him to a 
condition of silence — almost of apathy, such 
as is described in vers. 13, 11. 

Ver. 9. — Lord, aU my desire is before 
thee; and my groaning is not hid from 
thee. This has been called "the first 
indication of hope in this psalm ; " but 
there is a gleam of hope in the prayer 
of ver. 1. Hope, however, does here ahow 
itself more plainly than before. The 
psalmist has laid "all his desire" before 
God, and feels that God is weighing and 
considering it. Ue has also opened to him 
"all his groanings" — uttend freely all liis 
complaint. This he could ijave been led 
to do only from a conviction that God 
was not inevooably offended with him, but 
might, by repentance, confession, and earnest 
striving after amendment (ver. 20), be recon- 
ciled, and induced to become his Defence 
(ver. 15) and his Salvation (ver. 22). 

Ver. 10. — My heart pauteth. This verae, 
which reverts to the bodily sufferings, seems 
a little out of place. But Hebrew poetry 
is nut logical, and cares little for exact 
arrangement. Three more bodily troubles 
are noticed, of which this is the first — the 
heart "pants," i.e. throbs, or palpitates 
violently. Uy strength faileth me. The 
strength suddenly fails. Ai for the light 
of mine eyes, it also is gone from me. 
The sight swims, and is swallowed up in 
darkness (oomp. Job xvii. 7). 

Ver. 11. — My lovers and my friends stand 
aloof from my sore; or, from my itroke 
(comp. Fs. xxxiz. 10, where the same word 
is used). The psalmist feels himself to be 
''Stricken, smitten of God" (Isa. liii. 4)> 
He looks for comfort and syin|iathy to his 
friends, but tbey, with a seltisbuess that 
is only too common, hold aloof, draw away 
from him, and desert him (comp. Job ziz. 
18, 14). And my kinsmen stand afar off; 
or, my jieighbours. The stricken deer is 
forsaken by the rest of the herd (comp. 
Malt. xxvl. 56, 58). 

Ver. 12. — They also that seek after my 
life lay snares for me. To the desertion of 
friends is added the persecution of enemies, 
who take advantage of the debility and 
prostration caused by sickness to plot 
against the writer's life, to "lay snares for 
him," and devise evil against him. Those 
who assign the psalm to David suppose 
the devices deocribed in 2 Sam. xv. 1 — 6 to 
he referred to. And they that seek my 



hurt speak mischievons things, and imagine 
deceits all the day long; literally, tpeak 
maligidty; i.e. calumniate me— bring false 
accusations against me (comp. 2 Sam. xvi. 
7,8). 

Ver. 13. — Sut I, as a deaf man, heard 
not. I took no notice, t.e. I mude as if I 
was deaf. And I was as a dumb man that 
openeth not his mouth. So far this 
psalmist, whetlier David or anotlier, was a 
type of Christ (see Isa. liii. .7; Matt. xxvi. 
63 ; xxvii. 14 ; 1 Pet. ii. 23). 

Ver. 14.— Thus I was as a man that 
heareth not, and in whose mouth are no 
reproofs; i.e. 1 was like a man who is 
unable to answer, to reprove, or rebuke 
an adversary. So great was my aelf-re- 
■traint. 

Ver. 15.— For in thee, Lord, do I hope. 
Thus 1 acted, because my hope was iii thee. 
I looked for thy interposition. I knew that 
thou wouldst " maintain my right, and my 
cause " (Ps. ix. 4) in thine own good time 
and in thine own good way. I said to myself 
in my heart, Thou wilt hear — or rather, thou 
wilt answer (Revised Version) — Lord my 
Ood ; and I was content tu leave my defence 
to thee. 

Ver. 16. — For I said, Hear me, lest other- 
wise they should rejoice over me; rather, 
for I said, I will be silent, lest otherwise they 
should rejoice over me. I feared lest by 
answering rashly or intempeiately I might 
give my enemies occasion against me. I 
knew by experience that, when my foot 
slippeth, they magnify themselves against 
me. They are always on the watch to 
catch at any slip on my part, and make 
it a ground for magnifying themselves and 
denying me. Hence my silence. 

Ver. 17. — For I am ready to halt. I am 
weak and helpless, liable at any moment 
to stumble and fall. And my sorrow ii 
oontinually before me ; i.e. my sin, which 
I sorrow over, which lies at the root of all 
my distress (comp. Fs. Ii. 3). 

Ver. 18. — For I will declare mine iniquity ; 
I will be sorry for my sin. The four " fors," 
beginning four consecutive verses, are some- 
what puzzling. Canon Cook suggests that 
they introdcice four reasons for the psalmist's 
silence (vers. 13, 14) and abstinence from 
self-justification : (1) because God hears 
him, and will make answer for him (ver. 
15); (2) because, if he spoke, he might 
give further oocasiou to his enemies (ver. 
16); (3) because he feels in danger, and 
is conscious of sin (ver. 17); and (4) because 
he has no course open to him but confession 
and contrition. If we are jnstifled in 
attributing the psalm to David, and in 
assigning its composition to the period 
immediately preceding Absalom's rebellion, 
we must look upon it aa opening to ui 



300 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. xxxviii. 1 — 22, 



a view of Datiil's condition of mind at that 
time which is j( great intereat. 

Yer. 19. — Bat mine enemies are lively, 
and they are strong. The psalmist goes 
back to the thought of his enemies, to 
whom he has made no answer, and whom 
he has not ventured to rebuke (vers 13, 14). 
He remembers that they are full of life 
and strength ; he calls to mind the fact 
that they are many in number ; he puts 
on record the cause of their enmity, which 
is not his si&, but his earnest endeavour 
to forsake his sin and follow after righteous- 
ness (ver. 20); and then, in conclusion, he 
makes a direct appeal to God for aid against 
them — first negatively (ver. 21), and then 
positively in the final outburst, " Make 
haste to help me, O Lord my Salvation" 
{ver, £2). And they that hate me wrong- 
folly are multiplied. This suits well the 
time of Absalom's conspiracy, when day 
by day more and more of the people forsook 



David and joined the party of his sor 
(2 Sam. XV. 12, 13> 

Ver. 20. — They also that render evil for 
good are mine adversaries (comp. Ps. xxxv. 
12). Because I follow the thing that good 
is ; literally, because I follow good. 

Ver. 21. — Forsake me not, Lord (comp. 
Pss. xxvii. 9 ; Ixxi. 9, 18 ; cxix. 8). God 
never really forsakes his saints (Ps. xxxvii. 
28). He withdraws sometimes for wise 
purposes the sense of his presence and 
favour, so that they feel m if they were 
forsaken; but this is only temporary. my 
God, be not far from me (comp. Psb. xxii. 
19; XXXV. 22; Ixxi. 12). 

Ver. 22. — Hake haste to help me, Lord 
my Salvation (see Pss. xxii. 19; xxxi 2; 
xl. 13 ; Ixx. 1 ; Ixxi. 12, etc.). This so 
frequent cry always shows imminent peril ; 
or at any rate, a belief in it. The writer here 
was in danger doubly — from disease and from 
his enemies. Thus he might well cry oat 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 4. — Conviction of tin an element of trite Christian life. " As a heavy burden.* 
Jonah, when carried down in his living tomb to " the roots of the mountains," with 
the sea-weeds about his head, was not plunged in a deeper sea of trouble than David in 
the experience this paalm records (comp. Ps. xxxii. 3 — 5). He felt that his troubles 
were the just and wise chastisement of his sins; and they lead him to confession 
(ver. 18). He humbly bows under God's hand ; but only prays that he may feel that 
chastisement is not in wrath, but in mercy (ver. 1 ; cf. Heb. xii. 6, etc.). These words 
supply a starting-point for some remarks on conviction of tin as an element in true 
Christian life. 

I. Conviction of bin — q.d. sorrowful sense of blameworthiness before God — 
BFBINOS FROM A TRIPLE BOOT : (1) an awakened and enlightened conscience ; (2) definite 
memory of particular sins ; (3) clear and affecting views of holiness. 1. The natural 
effect of persistent sin is to deaden conscience (Eph. v. 19). Conscience may be 
awake, but completely perverted by ignorance or false belief; e.g. the heathen mother 
fiiuiiing her infant into the Ganges (Acts xxvi. 9). When the Holy Spirit opens the 
eyes of the mind, and applies the truth to the heart, sin is seen and felt to be "exceed- 
ing sinful " (Rom. vii. 7 — 13). Hence to a tender, rightly informed conscience, things 
appear sinful in which an ungodly heart discerns no harm. 2. We sin in many other 
ways than in deliberate acts of conscious transgression. We " leave undone what w» 
ought to do;" fail in intention, in mixed unworthy motives, even when our action is 
good; selflshneBS, cowardice, sloth, unfaithfulness; falling (how far!) short of the 
Divine standard — love to God with all the heart, mind, soul, strength, and to our 
neiglibour as ourself. We may know all this, confess it, seek pardon ; but it does not 

oppress.and burden conscience like some definite act of sin — perhaps long past which 

stands out with frightful clearness in the memory (Ps. li. 3). 3. The measure of the 
sinfulness of sin is its opposition to holiness. The Bible standard of holiness is God's 
character revealed to us, above all, in Christ (1 Pet. i. 15, 16). Therefore our view of 
our own sinfulness will depend on our clear and affecting apprehension of God's 
holiness. The robe that looks white in dim light will betray all its spots and stains in 
midday sunshine, 

II. ExPEBfSNOE QBEATLT VABIEB, KVBN IN RBAI, CHRISTIANS, BEOABDING OONTICTIOH 

or BIN. With some, overwhelming; with others, consciously deficient. This may 
arise from either of the sources spoken of, or a combination — tenderness or dulness of 
rnnscience, rennembrance of particular sins, closeness of converse with God, and deep 



P8. xxxvin. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 801 

and lofty views of holiness. Some Christians may be patterns, but none are models, 
for others. 

III. Dim, feeble sense op sin and of its evil seems chabaotebistio op the 
Christianity op to-dat. There is a great advance in prevailing views and teaching 
regarding Divine love ; but no corresponding advance regarding Divine righteousness 
and holiness. This tends to enfeeble Christian life and work. Nothing is more 
dangerous than the use of exaggerated language to express our inner life. Let no 
Christian for whom they would be exaggerated and unreal adopt the words of the text. 
But let us seek a quickened conscience, a faithful self-knowledge, above all, nearness 
to God, that we may see all sin, and our own, in the light both of his holiness and of 
his love. 

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTH0E8. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — Sin stinging like an adder. This has been called one of the peni- 
tential psalms. It may be called so without any severe strain of language; and yet 
its penitential tone is very far removed from that of either the thirty-second or the 
fifty-first psalm. There is little doubt that there is a sincere acknowledgment of the 
sin ; but here the main stress of the grief seems to be attributable rather to the suffer- 
ing consequerit upon the sin, than to the guilt of the sin itself. And we cannot resist 
the conviction that an undue reticence (which, alas I often results in an in frequent and 
inadequate warning against sins of the flesh) has somewhat warped and fettered the 
remarks of many expositors. For the physical suffering which is here detailed with 
distressing precision, points to sin as the cause thereof — to that sin which is one of the 
seriously poisoning influences in our social fabric, and against which no pleadings can 
be too tender, and no warnings can be too loud. Let us first study the case, and then 
utilize it. 

I. The case stated. Even before entering into detail, it is obvious that the case 
Is one of intense suffering. The details, however, will show us but too clearly what 
the suffering was, and how it was accounted for. 1. There had been the commission of 
tin. Vers. 3 — 5 give us three terms — " sin," " foolishness," " iniquity." The sin was 
one which brought about a great deal of: 2. Bodily disorder, Note the following 
expressions: (l)"My flesh" (ver. 3). (2) "My bones" (ver. 3). (3) "Mv loins" 
(ver. 7). (4) " No soundness " (ver. 3). (5) " No health " (ver. 3). (6) " Wounds " 
f ver. 5). (7) " Ulcers " (ver. 5, Hebrew). (8) " Offensive " (ver. 6). (9) " Burning " 
(ver. 7). (10) This alternating with deathly coldness (ver. 8). (11) " Palpitation " 
(ver. 10). (12) The fi:ame bent and bowed with the suffering (ver. 6). (13) 
" Failing strength " (ver. 10). (14) " Dimness of sight " (ver. 10).' Surely this puts 
before us, in no obscure fashion, the terrible physical woe which the writer was enduring. 
8. Oreat mental anguish. (1) God's arrows struck very deeply into his soul (ver. 2). 
(2) God's hand pressed heavily upon him (ver. 2). (3) He went abroad as a mourner 
(ver. 6). (4) He roared — groaned aloud — all the day long. It may not be always 
possible to affirm that such and such suffering is the effect of this or that specific sin. 
But sometimes we can. And it is no wonder if sins of the flesh bring fleshly suffering. 
It is an ordained law of God that it should be so. Hence the sufferings are rightly 
regarded as " the arrows of God." 4. Jn his trouble, lovers and friends stand aloof from 
him. Even neighbours and kinsmen drew themselves afar off (ver. 11). Earthly 
friends are like swallows, who come near in fine weather, and fly away ere the weather 
turns foul. 5. He was laden with reproach, and even beset with snares. (Ver. 12.) 
6. 3e did not and could not reply. To the charges laid at his door he had no 
justifications to offer, and therefore said nothing (cf. ver. 14, Hebreiv). This was so far 
wise. 7. Though silent to man, he pou/rs out his heart to Ood. He calls God his God'; 
even though guilt lies heavily on the soul. (1) He declares the whole case before the 
mercy-seat (ver. 9). (2) He confesses the sin (ver. 18). (3) He deprecates the 
Divine displeasure (ver. 1). (4) He appeals for help (ver. 22). Note: Thereis a great 
difference between men who " are overtaken in a fault," and those whose life is one 

■ Ferowne's notes on the several terms are helpful ; as also are Kirkpatriok'g. Fausset's 
remarks on this psalm, in his ' Horn Psalmicsa ' (pp. 56, 57, 144), shed helpful light upon it. 



302 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xxxviii. 1—22. 

perpetual sin of alienation from God. David lived in an age when lustfulness was 
scarcely recognized as wrong at all, save where the holy Law of God had gleamed oc 
it with the searching light of Heaven. If David fell into this sin, it was because he 
was injured by the low conventional standard of his day. If he regarded it as sin, and 
mourned over it, it was because he was under the educating influence of tha' ^^'mrl 
which was as "a lamp to his feet, and a light unto his path." 8. While David 
moans his sin as threatening him, with destruction and ruin, he looks for salvation, in 
Qod and Ood alone. (Ver. 22.) "0 Lord my Salvation." 

II. The case utilized. Here is evidently a psalm which is one of a number that 
contain a rehearsal of the writer's private experience. They profess to be that, and 
therefore, unless some good reason to the contrary is shown, we rightly assume that 
they are that. The expositor who desires to deal faithfully with all the psalms, and 
with the whole of each psalm, will often find Jiimself between two opposite schools. 
On one side, there are those who would enclose every psabn within the limits of a 
naturalistic psychology; while there are others who seem to regard every psalm as 
referring directly or indirectly to Christ.' But while the second and forty-fifth psalms 
can by no means be accounted for by a rationalistic psychology, so this thirty-eighth 
psalm can by no means be applied to the Messiah directly or indirectly. Let us not 
select facts to fit a theory ; but study all the facts, and frame the theory accordingly. 
In this personal moan and groan we have : 1. Suffering following on sin. Of what 
kind the sin was there can be little question. And if we wonder that David could fall 
into such sin, we may well ask — What can be expected of a man who had six wives 
(2 Sam. iii. 2 — 5) ? The Law of God might, indeed, he the rule of his life, but he was 
injured and corrupted by falling into the conventionalisms of his day; and hence in his 
private life he came far short of his own professed ideal. Is not the like incongruity 
between the ideal and the actual often seen even now? 2. If it was owing to "con- 
formity to the world " that David thus sinned, it was because he had before him Ood't 
revelation of the evil of sin that he was so bowed down under a sense of the guilt thereof. 
The revealed Law of God stood high above the level to which he had attained ; hence 
a shame and self-loathing on account of sin, which would nowhere else have been 
known. 3. Smarting under the sense of guilt, David yet tells Ood all. He knew God 
to be one " pardoiiing iniquity, transgression, and sin ; " and hence the burdens of sin 
and guilt, as well as of care, were laid before the mercy- seat (Ps. xxxii. 5). 4. At 
times, however, words fail ; then the desire and the groaning are perfectly understood. 
(Ver. 9.) Who does not understand something of this that knows anything of the 
"energies of prayer"? There are " groanings wldch cannot be uttered." As there 
are " songs without words," so are there " prayers without words." For the griet 
consequent upon sin may be, and often is, aggravated by the desertion of those friends 
who will smile on us when we are prosperous, and will turn their backs on us when 
adversity comes. Bat, even so, it is an infinite mercy to be shut up to God, and to let 
the heart lie " naked and opened " before One who will never misunderstand, and who 
will never forsake us. 6. I<'or our Ood is "Jehovah our Salvuticn." That is his 
revealed name, and to it he will ever be true. See how gloriously " tti» sure mercies 
of David" are set forth in Ps. Ixxxix. 26—33. God is "a just God, and a Saviour" 
(Isa. xlv. 21). Hence we should never let our consciousness of guilt drive us from 
him ; rather should it always make us "flee unto " him " to hide us." 6. Eence only 
those who have the light of God's revelation can possibly have any gospel for men 
smarting under the guilt of sin. We do not know any one passage in Scripture in 
which the combination is more remarkable of a man whose sin has brought deepest 
shame and agony upon him, and who yet is laying hold of God under that beautiful, 
that matchless name, "my Salvation" (ver. 22). Very often, indeed, the word 
" salvation " in the Old Testament means mainly, if not exclusively, temporal deliver- 
ance. Here, at any rate, it cannot be so limited; for the salvation required to meet 
the case of woe thus laid before God must be one which includes cancelling guilt, 

' On one side are such as Wellhausen and Oheyne; on the other, such as Home and 
Alexander, If, however, such a psalm as this makes the extreme Messianic theory 
obviously untenable, on the other hand, there are facts enough adduced, twenty times over 
iu Bishop Alexander's Bampton Lectures, to show that the naturalistic psycholoirioal 
theory oanaot stand for a moment. Why cannot we let each psalm speak for itself 1 



w. xxxvm. 1— 22.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. *« 

purifying from corruption, and healing disease. And that revelation of God m our 
Salvation which was made in germ to the Hebrews, is disclosed more fully to us under 
Christ. He is "made wisdom from God unto us, even righteousness, sanctification, 
and redemption ; that (according as it is written) he that glorieth, let him glory in the 
Lord " (1 Cor. i. 30, 31). In the very volume where sin is dealt with must seriously, it 
is also treated most hopefully; and the very revelation which cries with trumpet- 
power, " All have sinned," also cries, " Look unto me, and be ye saved." — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 22. — Thoughts in affliction. The preacher saith, "In the day of adversity 
aonsider " (Bocles. vii. 14). We should " call to remembrance " — 

I. The hand or God in affliction. Our afiBictions may be various, and have 
various causes. But we should look higher than mere human instrumentality, or the 
action of natural laws. We should acknowledge the hand of God (ver. 2). What a 
change this makes I It soothes our resentments. It calms our fears. God sees all. 
He knows how we suffer. He who has stricken us can heal our wounds. He who has 
"pressed us sore " is able to pour joy into our hearts. 

II. The oonneotion of sin with affliction. If there is suffering, there must have 
been sin. We may not be able to trace the connection ; and we may greatly err and 
wound others cruelly if we gay that certain sufferings are the result of certain sins. 
But, while we are not to judge others, we should judge ourselves. Our sufferings ought 
to bring our sins to remembrance. And the more strictly we scan our lives, and the 
more severely we search our hearts, the more will our sins increase, till their pressure 
and weight become intolerable, and we cry out, " They are too heavy for me " (ver. 4). 

ILL The inadequacy of all human aid nr affliction. Affliction is a great 
levealer. It not only shows us much as to ourselves, but also as to others. It proves 
who are true and who are false ; who are worthy and who are unworthy ; who may be 
trusted to stand by us, and who will wax cold and forsake us, " having loved this 
present world." Job bitterly complained of his friends : " Miserable comforters are ye 
aXL" The psalmist was still more sorely tried : " My lovers and friends stand aloof 
from my sore " (ver. 11). Even when true and willing, our friends can do but little 
for us in our greatest straits. Counsel is good. Sympathy is better. Generous aid 
ia better still. But the best of all, the only help that goes to the root of the matter, 
ia when some true friend, like Jonathan, " strengthens our hands in God." 

IV. The Divine besoueoeb ot the godly in affliction. There is prayer. The 
disciples in trouble came to Jesus and told him all. So we may pour out all our heart 
to God (ver. 9). There is confession. It is a marvellous relief to bring our sins to 
God (ver. 18). The burden that is too heavy for us will fall off when we cast ourselvea 
as humble penitents at the foot of the cross. There is renewed consecration. What- 
ever comes, we must bold fast to our hope. Every danger and strait, every great fear 
that pales the face and makes the heart grow faint, should lead us to the renewal of 
our vows, and the reinvigoration of our purpose to " follow only what is good " (vei;. 
20). Above all, there is refuge in Ood. From the beginning, and all through, the 
psalmist is with God, confessing, pleading, appealing ; and in the end he gathers up all 
the desire of his heart in the earnest cry, " Forsake me not, Lord 1 my G«d, be 
not far from me 1 " " Make haste to help me, Lord my Salvation I " (vers. 21, 22). 
Thus he found comfort ; and so may we also. Jerome said, " If any sickness happen 
to the body, we are to seek for the medicine of the soul ; " and the true and only 
Physician of the soul is Christ. — W. F. 

Vers. 1—22. — A fearfvl pictwre of the sufferings whuA a great tin can eauu. 
Supposed to be one of David's penitential psalms. 

1. Complicated mental and bodily suffbrino. (Vers. 1 — 8.) 1. Dread of Ood't 
further anger. Guilt makes a man full of fear and apprehension (ver. 1). 2. His Hn 
VHis realized as an intolerable burden. (Ver. 4.) A load that he was unable to carry; 
or a great wave passing over his head and threatening to overwhelm him. 3. Sis 
tin wot an mfeMing and disquieting sorrow. (Vers. 6, 8.) Continual, uninter- 
mittent, that made life one lasting agony. 4. Mental suffering brought on great bodUg 
tuffering and prostration. Body and mind react upon each other when any great 
trouble comes upon us ; and we are reduced to the deepest pitch of misery. 



304 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[P8. XXXIX. 1 — 13, 



II. Hb IB PUNISHED BY MEN AB WELL AS BY GoD. (Vers. 9 — 14.) 1. His fritndt 
are alienated, and refuse Mm any comfort. (Vers. 10, 11.) When we feel forsaken of 
God and man, then our cup of agony is full. This was our Lord's experience at the 
Crucifixion. 2. Bis enemies also seek to give him his death-blow. (Vers. 12, 19, 20.) 
They endeavour to take advantage of his fall to ruin him and take his life. How bad 
men " rejoice in the iniquity " of the righteous 1 3. Conscious of sin, he is obliged to be 
silent. (Vers. 13, 14.) Consciousness of guilt makes him unable to refute the false 
eharges of his enemies. Of what avail is it to speak when we are deeply self-con- 
demned ? This is an aggravation of our punishment, when we cannot defend ourselves 
before our foes. 

III, He eenounoes all self-help to hope in God. (Vers. 15 — 22.) 1. // Ood 
did not hear him, his enemies would rejoice over him. For he himself was so weak 
that he had no strength to contend with them (vers. 16, 17). 2. He will earnestly 
repent and confess his sin. (Ver. 18.) This is our only way of restoration to the 
favour of God or man. Eepentance is the earnest turning away from the sin with 
sincere loathing of mind. 3. An imploring cry for speedy rescue. (Vers. 21, 22.) 
When we feel as on the brink of death, we do not think of "God's time;" we are 
impatient for deliverance, and we cry for present help in our time of trouble. 

Lgsbon. Think into what straits and suffering a man's sins have power to bring 
him, and what his opportunity of salvation is in Christ. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XXXIX. 



Thb psalmist, vexed and disgusted with 
life, feeling a desire to murmur and com- 
plain, but aware thai his words are watched, 
and his wicked enemies ready to make use 
of them against him, has resolved on main- 
taining an entire silence — at any rate, while 
the ungodly are in his sight (vers. 1, 2), but 
is unable to keep to his resolve. Despite 
himself, he bursts out into speech — a speech 
of bitter complaint (vers. 4 — 6). "How 
long has he got to endure this life so un- 
satisfactory, so full of vanity?" The out- 
burst relieves him, and he continues in » 
gentler strain, recognizing God's hand in 
■ihe griefs and woes of life, entreating his 
help, and finally asking to be spared » 
little, that he may recover strength, before 
he goes hence and is no more (vers. 7 — 13). 

The title assigns the psalm to David, and 
represents him as having committed the 
composition for musical arrangement to the 
precentor, or choir-master, of the time, who 
is then named as Jeduthun, one of the chief 
musicians in David's service (1 Ohron. xvl. 
41, 42 ; XXV. 3—6). There is no reason to 
dispute this attribution. The poetic beauty 
of the composition is great, and the oircum- 
stauoes are such as suit David's early life. 

The pause-sign, "Selah," divides the 
psalm into three portions: (1) from vcr. 1 



to ver. 5 ; (2) from ver. 6 to ver. II ; and 
(3) from ver. 12 to the end. 

Ver. 1 — I said, I wiU take hied to my 
ways, that I sin not with my tongue. There 
are no grounds for connecting this silence 
with the abstinence from self-vindication 
mentioned in the preceding psalm (vers. 13, 
14). Indeed, it seems to have had a wholly 
different origin (see the introductory para- 
graph). I will keep my mouth with a 
bridle; i.e. "curb my impatience, restrain 
and keep in my speech." While the wicked 
is before me. The Prayer-buok Version is 
better, if less literal, " While the ungodly 
is in my sight." 

Ver. 2. — I was dnmb with silence, I held 
my peace, even from good. Some explain^ 
" I held my peace, but it did me no good — I 
I was none the better for it" (Hupfeld, 
Hengstenberg, Canon Cook) ; others adopt 
the Prayer-book "Version, "1 kept silence 
even from good words" (Kay, Alexander, 
Revised Version). And my sorrow was 
stirred. The pain at my heart was not 
quieted thereby, nor even lessened ; rather, 
it was roused up, quickened, and aggrsi- 
vatd. This is the natural result of repress- 
ing any strong feeling. 

Ver. 3. — My heart was hot within me; 
or, grew hot (Kay). And while I wa* 
musing the fire burned ; or, kindled (Eevised 
Version). Then spake I with my tongue; 
i.e. aloud, articulately. I could not — at any 
rate, I did not — refrain myself. I burst out 
in speech, and made my moan to God. 

Ver. 4. — lord, make me to know min« 
end, and the number of my days. This i* 



ea. XXXIX. 1 — 13.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



305 



not exactly the request of Job, who desired 
to be at once out off (Job vi. 9 ; vii. 15 ; 
xiv. 13), but it is a request conceived in the 
aame spirit. The psalmist is weary of life, 
expects nothing from it, feels that it is 
"altogether vanity." He asks, therefore, 
not exactly for death, but that it may be 
told him how long he will have to endure 
the wretched life that he is leading. He 
anticipates no relief except in death, and 
feels, at any rate for the time, that he 
would welcome death as a deliverer. That 
I may know how frail I am. So meet 
moderns; but Hengstenberg denies that 
Vin can ever mean " frail," and falls back 
npon the old rendering, " that I may know 
when I^shall cease [to be]," which certainly 
gives a very good sense. 

Ver. 5. — Behold, thon hast made my days 
as a handbreadth. It seems inconsistent 
that one who professes to be weary of his 
life should then complain of life's shortness. 
But such inconsistency is human. Job does 
the same (Job xi:v. 1, 2). And mine age is 
as nothing before thee. The short human 
existence can scaroely be regarded by God 
as existence at all; rather, it is meie 
nothingness. Verily every man living at 
ills best state is but vanity. So our Bevisers. 
But most moderns translate, " Verily every 
man living was ordained for utter vanity " 
{comp. Pss. Ixii. 9 ; cxliv. 4). 

Ver: 6. — Surely every man walketh in a 
vain show ; literally, in an image, or " as 
an image ; " i.e. with a mere semblance of 
life, but without the reality. Surely they 
are disquieted in vain. Their restless 
strivings are to no end, have no result. He 
heapeth np riches, and knoweth not who 
•hall gather them (oomp. Job xxvii. 16, 17 ; 
Eocles. it 18, 21). 

Ver. 7. — And now, Lord, what wait I for J 
Ky hope is in thee. And now — under 
these circumstances — human life being 
what it is, and all men nothing but vanity, 
what is my hope? what is my expecta- 
tion 7 what am I waiting for ? A cry, as it 
wonid seem, of utter despair. But when 
the night is darkest, day dawns. " Out of 
fbe depths " comes forth the voice of faith 
— "My hope is in thee I" There is 
always hope in God. When our father and 
mother forsake us, the Lord taketh us up. 
He will not leave us nor forsake us. So the 

CImist ends his complaint by throwing 
iself into the arms of the Divine mercy, 
and unreservedly submitting himself to 
God's will. 

Ver. 8. — l)eliver me from all my trans- 
gressions. The approach to God quickens 
in every God-fearing man the sense of sin 
and the longing for pardon. So tlie psalmist 
has no sooner thrown himself upon God as 
bis one Hope, than the thought of his sin 

FSALMB. 



occurs to him — the sin which has brought 
upon him all his misery ; and his first prayer 
is to be " delivered " from it. Make me not 
the reproach of the foolish. So long as his 
afSictions continued, the psalmist would be 
an object of scorn to tiie fool and the un- 
godly. He prays, therefore, secondly, that 
the punishment of his sin may cease. 

Ver. 9. — I was dumb, I opened not my 
mouth (oomp. vers. 1, 2). Because then 
didst it. The knowledge that my afiSictions 
came from thee, and were the just punish- 
ment of my transgressions, helped me to 
keep the silence which I observed while the 
ungodly was in my sight. 

Ver. 10. — Eemove thy stroke away from 
me (comp. Pa. xxxviii. 11). I am consumed 
by the blow of thine hand ; literally, by the 
quarrel of thine hand. JBut our version 
gives the true meaning. The "quarrel" 
has led the "hand "to deal the "stroke" 
by which the sufferer is "consumed" or 
" wasted away " (Kay). 

Ver. 11. — When thou with rebukes dost 
correct man for iniquity. The calamities 
which God sends on a man are of the nature 
of " rebukes " addressed to his spirit. They 
are intended to teach, instruct, warn, deter 
from evil-doing (see Job xxxvi. 8 — 10). 
Thou makest lus beauty to consume away 
like a moth ; or, " thou dost consume, as by 
a moth, what he prizes ; " t.e. his health, his 
strength, " all wherein he has joy and satis- 
faction " (Hengstenberg). As a moth cor- 
rodes a beautiful garment, so does thy 
displeasure and heavy band pressing on 
him corrode and destroy all which consti- 
tuted his delight and glory. Surely every 
man is vanity (oomp. ver. 5 ad fin.). This 
has become a sort of refrain, terminating 
the second as well as the first part of the 
psalm (comp. Fs. cvii. 8, 15, 21, 31; Ei cles. 
ii. 1, 11, IS, 19, 21, 23, 26; Isa. U. 12, 
17, 21). 

Ver. 12. — Hear my prayer, lord, and 
give ear unto my cry; hold not thy peace 
at my tears. Tears appeal to the Divine 
pity in an especial way. " Weep nut I " said 
our Lord to the widow woman at Nain ; and 
to Mary Magdalene, " Why weepest thou? " 
Be himself "offered up his supplications 
with strong crying and tears" (Heb. v. 7); 
and so his faithful servants (Job xvi. 20 ; 
Pss. vi. 6; xlii. 3; Ivi. 8; Isa. xvL 9; 
xxxviii. 3; Jer. xv. 17; Lam. ii. 11; Luke 
vii. 38; Acts xx. 19). Hezekiah's tears 
especially moved Gud to pity him (2 Kings 
XX. 5). If 01 1 am a stranger with thee, and 
a sojourner. " Here we have no continuing 
city " (Heb. xiii. 14), but are " strangers and ' 
pilgrims on the earth " (Heb. xi. 13). Henco^ 
being so weak and dependent, we may the 
more confidently claim God's pity. As all 
my fathers were (comp. Lev. xxv. 2:-!, " The 



3N> 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. XXXIX. 1 — 13. 



land ie mine ; ye are strangen and $ojourner$ 
with me "). 

Yet. 13. — spare me, that I may recover 
Btrength, before I go hence, and be no more. 
The pealmiBt, no longer anxious for death, 
but still expecting it, requests of God, in 
oonolusioii, a breathing-space, a short time 



of refreshment and rest, before he is called 
on to leave the earth and " be no more ; " 
i.e. bring his present state of existence to 
an end. Nothing is to be gathered from 
the expression used as to bis expectation or 
non-expectation of a future life. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 4. — A wise prayer. " Lord, make me to know mine end," etc. The writer 
of this most beautiful, though most sorrowful, psalm opens to us his inmost heart. 
The inspiring Spirit speaks through one of like passions with ourselves. His own 
sorrows 'had taught him sympathy. Looking at human life, he seems to see one vast 
funeral procession, in which business and pleasure seem alike vain. Yet he shrinks 
from uttering his pent-up feelings, lest he appear to the ungodly to be blaming God. 
So he turns to God and pours out his grief in prayer. 

I. This seems an rraNBCEssABT pbatek — at least at first sight. If anj 
truth is obvious, it is this — of the brevity and frailty of life. Brief at longest 
(Ps. xc. 10), especially if we reckon the time spent in sleep or dissipated in numberless 
trifles (ver. 5); frail, ever carrying within it the germs of decay and dissolution. Utterly 
uucertain — the strongest life may in a moment snap like a thread or be torn like a tree 
from its root. Who knows not all this ? 

IL Yet it ib a very needful and wise pratbb. For there is no truth so 
obvious and certain which men take so little to heart. "All men think all men 
mortal but themselves." The picture Charles Dickens has drawn of the lawyer who is 
for ever harping on the duty of making your will in health, and who dies intestate, is 
very true to human nature. The psalmist's prayer is not for everybody else, but for 
himself — " Teach me . . . my days." How account for this blind insensibility of men 
to the certainty of the future — this " walking in a vain show " ? It seems unaccount- 
able, yet so ingrained, nothing less than Divine teaching will cure it. 

III. The teaching here prated fob is not to inform us of the fact, wbioh 

EVEBTBODT KNOWS — AND FOKGETS, BUT TO ENABLE US TO LBABN ITS LESSONS. Not 

mere knowledge, but wisdom. 1. Do not anchor your hope on a life so frail, or store 
your treasure in a world you may leave to-morrow — must leave soon (ver. 6 ; Matt. vi. 
19 — 21). 2. Do not leave to-day's work to be done to-morrow. A certain eminent 
statesman is said to have made it a rule to "do nothing to-day which you can put oflf 
till to-morrow." This has two great disadvantages : (1) To-morrow will have its own 
burden, without being double-weighted. (2) You may not be here to-morrow to do it 
(John ix. 4). 3. Cast the care of the unknown future on God. The frailest thread of 
life cannot break in his hand unless he wills (Matt. x. 22 — 31 ; vi. 30). 4. Live as 
pilgrims, " like unto men who wait for their Lord" (ver. 12). If you are a believer in 
Jesus, a child of God by faith, then the keys of life and death are in the bands once 
nailed for you to the cross, of which he says, " Neither shall any pluck them out of 
my hand " (John x. 28). Death will but come as his messenger. Learn to look full 
in the dark angel's face and smile, and you will see an answering smile (Heb. xiii. 14 ; 
2 Cor. V. 1, 8). 

Ver. 7. — God, the Eefuge of the soul. " My hope is in thee." This is the single 
note of joy the psalmist strikes from his harp amid its mournful music — like a ray of 
sunshine from a stormy sky. From his own private sorrow, from his wide survey of 
the troubles of human life, he takes refuge in God. 

I. A HOPE OF PBBSENT HELP, IMMEDIATE DELIVERANCE. (Ver. 13.) He is » 

itranger and a sojourner with God (Lev. xxv. 23) ; but he hopes the brief* remainder 
of his pilgrimage will be divinely led, even as his fathers bad the manna, the water 
from the rock, the pillar of cloud and fire, in the desert. Hope in God is not a far- 
away hope, but looks to him as "a very present Help" (Ps. xlvi. 1 ; John xiv. 18). 

IL A HOPE THAT LOOKS BEYOND THIS LIFE, FOB GoD IS THE EVEE-LIVINO. (Johl» 

xiv. 19.) If hope in God stopped short at the grave, the transient gleam would mak» 



P8. XXXIX. 1—13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 307 

the darkness but more terrible (1 Cor. xv. 19 ; comp. Heb, xi. 13 — 16). Wonderful 
pleasure seems taken by critics and commentators in casting doubt on the knowledge or 
hope (.if a future life among God's ancient people. How could they be ignorant of what 
formed the basis of Egypt's religion and wisdom, on the one baud, and was no less 
believed, on the other, by the Greeks, Assyrians, Babylonians, etc. ? King Saul was 
DO saint, but certainly he fully believed that the spirit uf Samuel existed after death 
(1 Sam. xxviii. 11). 

III. This hope rests with oebtainty only on God. This is our Lord's argu- 
ment against the Sddducees, to prove that the Old Testanient Scriptures do teach 
immortality (Matt. xxii. 31, 32). Immortality apart from God would be no glorious 
hope, but the most appalling of our terrors. 

IV. This blessed hope — to those ancient believers matter of sheer faith — rests 
FOE Christians on an immovable double foundation — the resurrection of Christ, 
which is an actual physical demonstration of life beyond death ; and the promises of 
Christ, which bind our lives personally to his (2 Tim. i. 10; 1 Pet. i. 3; John xiv. 
1 — 3). No wonder if the faith of the ancient saints sometimes wavered; but ours 
should be as strong as its foundation (2 Tim. i. 12). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS, 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Unburdening the heart to Qod in a time of sore affliction, vhen 
nothing can be said to man. Jeduthun, whose name stands at the head of Pss. xxxix., 
Ixii., and Ixxvii., was one of a musical family entrusted with the conduct of the 
musical service in the time of David. The psalms having his name at the head were 
probably intended to be sung by his choir.* It would thus seem that in the Hebrew 
•ervice of sacred song the prayers and plaints of the individual believer were included, 
when set to music. If so, the " service of song in the house of the Lord" covered a 
much wider ground than is usually supposed, and was made to include not only direct 
address to God, whether of prayer or praise, but also the rehearsal of personal 
experience; and thus a holy fellowship of song would arise, anticipating long ages 
before, the expression of the apostle, " Speaking to one another in psalms and hymns 
and spiritual songs ; " only it should be noted that these would be musical utterances 
of an actual experience going on then and there. It does not follow that the like 
utterances would be suitable for the service of song now. Discretion and discrimination 
are needed in the use thereof. This is evidently an individual psalm ; it is neither 
national, prophetic, nor Messianic ; * it is one of those which reflect the care and 
anxiety with which David was bowed down at one crisis of his life, though to which of 
his numerous crises it refers it is not easy to decide.' Nor, indeed, is that of moment. 
It will profit us more to note the course taken by the psalmist at a time of crushing 
sorrow, and then to see how far the course which he took may be a guide for us under 
like circumstances. 

I. Let us note the ootTBSB adopted bt the psalmist at a time of ceushino 
BOEBOW. There is a somewhat wide divergence among expositors in their estimate of 
this psalm, and of the mental revelations therein contained.* But we feel bound to 
look at the psalmist's words tenderly rather than harshly, knowing as we do, how often, 
in agonies of soul, the best men may utter words which would not escape them in their 
calmer hours (cf. Ps. cxvi. 11). 1. Here is a case of sore affliction. " Thy stroke" 
(ver. 10); "the blow of thine hand" (ver. 10). Whatever the sorrow may have been 
to which reference is made, it is regarded as coming directly from God. " Thou didst 
it " (ver. 9). It was so heavy that David was " consumed " thereby (ver. 10). And 

• See an interesting article on Jeduthun, by Lord Arthur Hervey, in Smith's ' Bibl. Diet.' 

• See Pei'owne's introduction to this psalm. 

• See Fausset hereon; anl Bderaheim's ' Bible History,' vol. v. p. 16 (R.T.S.). 

• Calvin, Hengatenberg, Delitzaeh, Lange, may all be consulted with advantage. Arch- 
bishop Leighton's expository lectures on this psalm are deserving of careful perusal. 
Many of his words are golden. On the word "selah," at the end of vers. 5 and 11, see Mr, 
Wright's article in Smith's 'Bibl. Diet.,' and an instructive and suggestive article bj 
Edmund Layfielde, quoted in Spurgeon's ' Treasury of David,' vol. ii. p. 219, et aeq. 



808 THE BOOK OF PSALMS, [ps. xx.«:x. 1-13. 

it was looked on by him as a chastisement for his transgressions (of. rers. 8, 11), 
2, It is, wider such circumstances, very hard to he absolutely still. So the first verse 
implies. There is little indication that the disturbing trouble arose (as some suggest) 
from seeing the prosperity of the wicked ; but evidently there is some distinctively 
personal trouble, probably sickness and weakness, which, with all the public demands 
made upon him, weighs heavily upon his soul, and he is tempted to complain and to 
seek sympathy from without. But: 3. Ee is in the midst of uncongenial souls. 
(Ver. 1.) " The wicked is before me." Note : Earthly men are poor companions in 
the distresses of spiritual men. To the natural man the sorrows of a spiritual man 
would be altogether unintelligible. And supposing that the troubles here referred to 
arose about the time of and in connection with Absalom's rebellion, the majority of 
those round about David would be men whose thoughts and aims moved entirely in 
the military or political sphere. Hence : 4. Here is a wise resolve. (Vers. 1, 2.) He 
will say nothing. There would be many reasons for this. (1) No one would enter 
Into his feelings. (2) What he said would be misunderstood. (3) He would conse- 
quently be misrepresented. (4) The more he said, the worse matters would be. And 
(6) if he told men what he thought and felt, he would be very likely to say something 
which he would afterwards regret. "That I sin not with my tongue." Hence silence 
is his wisest course, 5, But suppressed grief consumes like a fire. (Ver. 3.) There 
is nothing which so wears out the soul, nor which so burns within, as woe to which no 
vent can be given ; so David found it, and consequently : 6, The silence is broken. 
" Then spake I with my tongue." But, in breaking the silence, he speaks not to mac, 
but to God, After the word " tongue," the Authorized Version has a comma, but the 
Revised Version a colon, indicating that what he said is about to follow. What an 
infinite mercy that when we cannot say a word to man, through fear of being mis- 
understood, we can speak to God, and tell him exactly what we feel, as we feel it, 
knowing that then we touch a heart infinitely tender, and address an intelligence 
infinitely wise! 7. In speaking to Ood he moans and groans. (Vers. 4 — 6,) Does 
David speak petulantly? Is he asking God to let him know how long he has to 
endure all this? Is he adducing the frailty and nothingness of man as an argument 
against his being allowed to suffer thus? So many think, and some, as Calvin, are 
very hard on David — very. But why ? There is a vast difference between thefretful- 
ness of an overburdened man and the waywardness of a rebellious man. And he who 
knows our frame, takes the difference into account. When Elijah pettishly said, 
" Now, O Lord, take away my life ! " God did not rebuke him ; he sent an angel to 
him, and said, " Arise an& eat ; the journey is too great for thee." * 8. He declares tftat 
his expectation of relief is in God alone. (Ver. 7.) Just so. These are not the words 
of a rebellious, but of a trusting one. And from that point of view the whole psidm 
must be regarded (cf. Ps. Ixii.). 9. Ee will not utter a word of complaint. (Ver, 9.) 
Render, " I am dumbj I open not my mouth, because thou hast done it" ('Variorum 
Bible '). " Thyself hast done it." On this fact faith fastens ; and when this is the case, 
not a word of murmuring will escape the lips. The cry of a trusting soul is, " Here 
am I ; let him do with me as seemeth him good " (2 Sam. xv, 26). 10, Tet he 
supplicates. (Vers. 8, 10, 13.) First, he desires deliverance from sin, then a mitiga- 
tion of the suffering; such is the order, and the order which only a saint would name. 
The last verse is, in our versions, obscure. The word " spare " should not be read in 
the sense intended when we say, " If I am spared," etc., but in the sense of " spare 
me this sorrow ! " It is a repetition of ver. 10, " Remove this stroke away from me." 
It asks not for prolongation of life, but for mitigation of pain. The Revised Version 




" and be no more seen," gives the sense. 11. The supplication is accompanied by a 
tender plea. (Ver. 12.) " I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers 
were." Archbishop Leighton beautifully expresses the force of this plea, "In this 
world, wherein thou hast appointed me to sojourn a few days, and I betake mysel/ 
to thy protection in this strange country. I seek shelter under the shadow of thy 
wings, therefore have compassion upon me." 

' See a sermon on Elijah, by Robertson of Brighton. 



PB. XXXIX. 1—13.] THE BOOK. OF PSALMS. 301 

II. How FAR 18 THE COURSE TAKEN BY DaVID, IN HIS AFFLICTION, A GUIDE FOB 

UB? 1. In some respects we may well imitate him. In restraining our words before 
man, and in telling all our cares and woes to God exactly as we feel them, and in such 
a way as will best relieve an overburdened heart. 2. In other respects we should go 
far heyond him. Believers ought nut to confine themselves now within the limits of 
such a prayer as this ; they sliould always trnnscend it. We know more of God's 
Fatherly love; we know of our great High Priest; we know the fellowship of the 
Spirit ; we know of " the unsearchable riches of Christ ; " and hence our prayers 
should rise above those of David as much as the prayer of Eph. iii. 14 — 21 is above 
the level of this psalm. Note : The best preventive of sins of the tongue is the fuller 
and more frequent outpouring of the heart to God. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Lessons from a funeral. It is toli of Archbishop Leighton that a 
friend once met him by the way, and said, "You have been to hear a sermon?" 
His answer was, " I met a sermon — a sermon de facto, for I met a corpse, and rightly 
and profitably are the funeral rites performed, when the living lay it to heart." This 
psalm, so often read at deaths and funerals, suggests some precious lessons for such 
solemn occasions. 1. A funeral is a time for silence. There is much to think of and 
ponder in our hearts. We have need to put a restraint upon ourselves, lest we speak 
rashly or fall into idle and unprofitable talk. But silence cannot always be maintained. 
As we muse the fire burns, and we are constrained to speak. Let us take care that we 
speak wisely, with feeling and solemnity, as in the presence of God. 2. A funeral is 
a time when we are tausht the vanity of life. One thing forced on our attention is 
that life has an end. We know it had a beginning, but we are slow to recognize, at 
least as to ourselves, that it must have an end. " All men think all men mortal but 
themselves." 3. Another thing brought to our mind is that life is frail and soon 
passes away. Measured by human standards, it is but a very little thing — a "hand- 
Breadth ; " looked at in the light of God and of eternity, it dwindles away to 
"nothing." And yet of what stupendous importance to us is this "nothing"! 
4. Another thing is that life at the best is full of sorrow and disappointment (ver. 6). 
Sophocles, one of the wisest of the heathen, said, " I see that we who live are nothing 
else but images and vain shadows." The gre^t orator, Burke, said, " What shadows 
we are, and what shadows we pursue I " Shakespeare also speaks to the same effect— 

" Out, out, brief candle, 
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player 
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage, 
And then is heard no more." 

What, then, comes of all our labours, all our cares and disquietudes, all our hopes and 
ambitions ? Is there no good that abideth ? Is there no wealth laid up which will 
endure? Must we say, "All is vanity"*? Yes, if there were no God, no future 
world. But let us take heart ; let us turn from the thoughts that vex and disquiet 
our souls, and that leave us without hope, to the Lord our God and to Jesus Christ 
who has brought life and immortality to light through the gospel. When we mourn 
the loss of friends, or when we take part with others in love and sympathy in the last 
rites of the dead, let us renew our faith in God. " My hope is in thee." Thus we 
shall gain strength to bear our trials meekly, and to rise, even at the grave's mouth, 
to the bright vision of immortality. Let us also cry to God for deliverance from sin 
(vers. 8—11), from the burden of its guilt, from the slavery of its power, from the 
miserable reproaches which it brings upon us from without and from within, from the 
base murmurings and discontent which it breeds, and from the cruel forebodings of 
evil with which it darkens our lives. God alone can bring us help and comfort in such 
■traits. Finally, let us pray earnestly for spiritual invigoration, that we may not ' 
fail in our duty to God and to our brethren. We have not only to sympathize, but to" 
act. The best way we can honour the dead is to work for the living. Every breach 
made in our ranks is a call to close up and to quit ourselves like men, as good soldiers 
of Jesus Christ. Every bereavement is a reminder to us that we too are but 
" strangers " and sojourners here, and that soon God will call us home. If some father 
in the Church is gathered as a " shock of corn in his season," let us give thanks, and 



310 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [vs. xxxix. 1—181 

take courage to follow in his steps ; if some young man of rare gifts and promise, and 
very dear to our hearts, is cut down early, let us be assured that it is because his 
Master has need of him for service in nobler fields, and let us strive to fill up what he 
may have left undone of good work for God ; if some child, the light of our eyes, has 
been taken from us, let us believe that it is to enter a higher school than ours, where 
the holy angels are the teachers, and where progress is quick and sure under the radiant 
smiles of God.— \V. F. 

Ver. 13. — Death deprecated. "Spare me!" This prayer is common. From 
many a bed of sickness, and in the time of weakness and of fear, the mournful cry 
goes up to heaven. Often there is a gracious answer (Isa. xxxviii. 2, 5). But the 
mercy of God is not always remembered, nor the vows njade in trouble performed. 
The words suggest — 

I. That death is an event of dread sionifioancb. 1. It puts a/ti end to ow 
•present mode of being. " Be no more." Yet a little while, and what a change 1 You 
will see no more with those eyes; your heart will cease to beat; and your spirit, 
disengaged from the fl«sh, will wing its flight to other worlds. What your experiences 
will be at the awful moment of dissolution, and afterwards, none can tell. All is 
mystery. 2. It separates us from all we hold dear on earth. " Go hence.'' This 
world is dear to us. Here we were born, and have lived; here our minds have been 
formed and powers developed; here we have tasted the delights of knowledge, of 
friendship, and of personal achievement ; here, in a word, has been our home. To 
separate fiom all, to have no more anything to do with what goes on under the sun, is 
a distressing thing. No wonder if we recoil with pain. 3. It settles for ever our 
spiritual destiny. " Before I go hence." Life is associated with hope, death with 
doom. So long as a man lives, there is a possibility of amendment. Errors may bo 
corrected, follies retrieved, evil courses abandoned ; but let death come, and it will end 
all this. Any event that affects our future is important, but this is the most important 
ofalL 

"Great God, on what a slender thread 
Hang everlasting things I 
The eternal states of all the dead 
Upon life's feeble strings I " 

No wonder, if ia thought of these things, we should cry, " Spare mel " 

II. That good men sometimes shbink fbom death under a sense op weak- 
ness AND unprepakedness. Some are prepared to die. But such a state of mind is 
rare and inconstant. The best of men have their times of misgiving, as well as their 
moments of exulting faith. Doubting Castle and the Valley of the Shadow of Death 
lie in the pilgrim's path, as well as the Delectable Mountains. Even the sweet Land 
of Beulah is bounded by the cold flood and the swellings of Jordan. The moods of 
the soul vary. He who says to-day, " I will fear no evil " (Ps. xxiii. 4), may cry 
to-morrow from the dust, " Oh, spare mel " Paul had a large experience. He had been 
" in deaths oft " (2 Cor. xi. 23) ; his heart had been well-nigh broken by separations 
^Acts XX. 37) ; his whole soul shuddered at the thought of being a " castaway " 
(1 Cor. ix. 27) ; but what chiefly moved him in the thought of death was sin. "The 
sting of death is sin." And this has been the feeling of many, and therefore the cry 
is not merely, "Spare me 1 " but, " that I may recover strength." 1. Strength is needed 
to face death with fortitude. 2. Strength is lost through sin. There is the action of 
the body (ver. 11) and of the affections (ver. 12), but worst of all is sin. It clouds the 
mind, burdens the conscience, racks the heart, darkens the future (Pa. xxxi. 10). 
3. Strength may be recovered if sought in due time. " Before I go hence." To every- 
thing there is a season. Hence the urgency of the prayer. Life should be used for 
invigoration of the soul. To be ready we must have our lamps burning. We all 
receive warnings. Perhaps we have been " spared " already. Therefore take heed. It 
is as we can say, "To me to live is Christ," that we can add, "To die is gain." 

III. That in the soul's darkest hour God is a sufficient Refuge. " Spare 
me 1 " Why ? Is it that you are young, that you have bright hopes, that you are 
concerned about those near and dear to you, that you have the co''«:iousnesg of poweri 



PS. XL. 1—17.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



311 



unused, or that you desire to do more for God than you have yet done ? The great 
thing is — Are you seeking this high boon for yourself or for God? If you put your 
hand in the fire, or cast yourself before the railway car, what boots it to cry, " Spare 
me"? We can only be spared, in the truest and best sense, by being brought nearer 
God. God is the Lord of life (1 Sam. ii. 6; Rev. i. 18); God is very pitiful and of 
tender mercy (Exod. xxxiii. 11) ; God is mighty to save. Let us, therefore, trust in 
him. " Spare me 1 " — if not the body, the soul ; if not to longer life on earth, to 
eternal life with thee in heaven. — W. P. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The afflicted man. The old question of the retributive justice of God 
lies at the bottom of this psalm. Why should the righteous be afflicted and the wicked 
prosper, since the sins of the latter are greater and more numerous than those of 
the former? But he has determined that he will not discuss his difficulties before 
the wicked, lest he should seem to complain of the Divine ways. But when he can no 
longer restrain speech, this is what he says, in which we have two main divisions of 
thought. 

L An afflicted man's peeplexitibs. (Vers. 1 — 6.) 1. He wishes to know when 
his sufferings shall come to an end — in death. (Ver. 4.) 2. He is deeply impressed 
that human life should be so brief and fleeting. (Ver. 5.) Man is but a breath, so 
that it seeras scarcely wurth while to live. 3. The restless exertions which men make 
here are to no purpose. (Ver. 6.) Men are but fleeting shadows, and all that they 
seek for is evanescent ; they are troubled in vain. 

II. The afeliotbd man's hope. (Vers. 7 — 13.) In God. 1. ITie good man is 
waiting for Ood. (Ver. 7.) To unfold his purpose toward him more fully. 2. To he 
delivered from all his transgressions. (Ver. 8.) 3. His hope in Ood teaches him self- 
restraint. (Ver. 9.) 4. Teaches him to pray for the Divine mercy to remove his 
sufferings. (Ver. 10.) 5. He pleads for mercy because of the brevity of his life. 
(Ver. 12.) A stranger, "one who is but a passing guest;'' a sojourner, " one who 
settles for a time in a country, but is not a native of it." 6. And because it is near its 
close. (Ver. 13,) I shall soon be no more. Help before it is too late for help. Such 
faith in Gud, with such views of this life as being all, is something marvellous, when 
compared with our faith in him, who believe in an immortal life. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XL. 

Thb occasion of this psalm is some great 
deliverance which has been vouchsafed to 
the author of it, for which he desires to 
praise and thank God. Of this deliverance 
he speaks in vers. 1 — 3, which form a sort 
of introduction to the wliole. He then passes 
on to a more general praise of God for all 
his glorious manifestations of himself in the 
I history of his people (ver. 5). The tliought 
next occurs — How is he (the writer) to mani- 
fest his gratitude ? And this leads to the 
noble outburst in vers. 6 — 10. Not by 
sacrifice and offering, not by a mere legal and 
formal obedience, but by complete devotion 
of the inner man as regards himself (vers. 
6 — 8), and constant proclamation of God's 
gooilness as regards others (vers. 9, 10). The 
strain then changes. Although recently 
delivered from somo great peril, the psalmist 
is still encompassed by sufferings and 



dangers. There are sin and infirmity within 
(ver. 12), there are cruel enemies without 
(vers. 14, 15). He therefore (in vers. 11 — 17) 
betakes himself to humble supplication for 
himself (vers. 11, 13, 17) and for the godly 
generally (ver. 16), that God will be their 
Helper and Defender, and, above all, will 
" make no tarrying " (ver. 17). 

The author of the psalm, according to the 
title, was David, and no argument of the 
least weight has been brought agaiust this 
view. The occasion may be conjectured 
to have been his restoration to his throne 
after the brief usurpation of Absalom. 
Absalom's aiders and abettors may be 
alluded to in ver. 4, and the remnant of his 
party in ver. 14. 

The psiilm falls into three portions : (1) 
the intruduotion (vers. 1 — 3); (2) praise of 
God and promise of obedience (vers. 4 — 10); 
(3) prayer to God (vers. 11—17). 



312 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS, 



[is. XL. 1 17: 



Ver. 1. — I waited patiently for the lord ; 
literally, waiting, 1 waited — a common 
Hebrew idiom, when an idea is to be empha- 
sized. No writer enforces upon ua more 
earnestly than David the duty of awaiting 
God's pleasure (Pss. xxvii. 14 ; xxxvii. 7 ; 
Ixii. 1, 5 ; Ixix. 8, etc.). And he inclined 
unto me ; literally, hent toviards me — an 
anthropomorphism, but moat expresaive. 
And heard my cry; i.e. answered it — gave 
me whab I prayed for. 

Vei-. 2. — He brought me up also out of an 
horrible pit; literally, a pit of tumult or 
uproar, which is variously explitined. Some 
imagine a pit with rushing water at the 
bottom of it, but auch pits are scarcely known 
in Palestine. Others a pit which is filled 
with noise as a warrior, with crash of arms 
and amid the ahouts of enemies, falls into it. 
But pita, though used in hunting, were not 
employed in warfare. The explanation that 
jlKBi here is to be taken in the secondary 
sense of " destruction " or " misery," seems 
, to me preferable (see the Septuagint, ix 
KaKKou raXaiTTapias). Out of the miry clay 
(comp. Ps. Ixix. 2, 14). Such " clay " would 
be frequently found at the bottom of disused 
cisterns. And set my feet npon a rock ; i.e. 
upon Bolid ground, where I had a firm foot- 
ing. And established my goings ; literally, 
and malte my etepafirm (oomp. Pss. xvii. 5 ; 
xviii. 36 ; xciv. 18). 

Ver. 3. — And he hath put a new song in 
my mouth (see the comment on Ps. xxxiii. 
3). Even praise unto our God. Mercy and 
praise are cause and effect. The deliverance 
recorded in ver. 2 produces the praise of 
vers. 3 — 5. The phrase, " our God," ahows 
na how David instinctively identifies him- 
self with his people. A mercy shown to 
him is one sliown to them. Uany shall see 
it, and fear (comp. Deut. xiii. 11 ; xvii. 13 ; 
six. 20; xxi. 21, where tiie phrase, "all 
Israel shall hear and fear," ia used of the 
effect produced by the capital punishment 
of a high-handed transgressor of the Law). 
There may be an allusion here to Absalom's 
end, wliich was probably followed by a 
certain number of executions. And shall 
trust in the Lord; i.e. shall have their 
faith in God strengthened. 

Ver. 4. — Blessed is that man (rather, the 
man} that maketh the Lord his trust, and 
respecteth not the proud ; or, turneth not to 
the proud — does not go over to their party 
or espouse their principles. Absalom's ad- 
herents are probably the persons intended. 
Nor Buoli as turn aside to lies ; i.e. " prefer 
falsehood to truth," the cause of the ungodly 
to that of God himself. 

Ver. 5. — Hany, Lord my God, are thy 
wonderful works which thon hast done. 
It is not only for hia recent deliverance 
(vei. 2) that the psalmist owes tlianks and 



gratitude to God. God's mercies in the 
past have been o^vntless, and have laid him 
under unspeakable obligations. And thy 
thoughts which are to us-ward. God's 
thoughtfulness for man, hia consiilerution 
and providential care, deserve praise and 
thanks equally with his wondrous acts. 
They cannot be reckoned up in order unto 
thee. They are so numerous that it is im- 
possible to reckon them up. Many of them, 
moreover, are secret, and escape our notice. 
If I would declare and speak of them, they 
are more than can be numbered. Words, 
therefore, are insufficient ; and some better 
return than mere words must be found. 

Ver. 6. — Sacrifice and offering thou didst 
not desire. Will the right return be by 
sacrifices and burnt offerings? No, the 
psalmist answers to himself; it is not these 
which God really "desires." Samuel had 
already preached the doctrine, " Behold, to 
obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken 
than the fat of rams" (1 Sam. xv. 22). 
David goes further. Apart from a spirit of 
obedience, sacrifice and offering are not 
deaired or required at all ; rather, aa Isaiah 
says, they are a weariness and an abomi- 
nation (Isa. i. 11, 12). The one thing 
needed is obedience — a cheerful, willing 
obedience to all that God reveals as his 
will. Uine ears hast thou opened. Either, 
" Thou hast taken away my deafness, and 
given me ears open to receive and embrace 
thy Law ;" or, perhaps, with special reference 
to Exod. xxi. 6 and Deut. xv. 17, " Thou hast 
accepted me as thy voluntary servant, and 
bored through mine ear, to mark that I am 
thy servant for ever." Burnt offering and 
sin offering hast thou not required. Of 
the four kinds of offering mentioned in this 
verse, the first (rat) is the ordinary offer- 
ing of a victim at the altar in sacrifice ; the 
second^ (nraa), the meat offering of flour, 
with oil and frankincense accompanying it; 
the third (rhtv) is the « whole burnt offer- 
ing," representative of complete self-sacrifice; 
and the fourth (nstsin), the " ain offering," 
or " trespass offering," of which the special 
intention was expiation. 

Ver. 7. — Then said I, Lo, I come : in the 
volume of the book it is written of m«; 
rather, then said I, Lo, I come teith the roU 
of the book written concerning me. " Then " 
means " as soon as my ears were opened." 
"Lo, I come," marks ready and prompt 
obedience (see Numb. xxii. .S8 ; 2 Sam. xix. 
20). The psalmist represents himself as 
bringing with him "the roll of the book,'' 
I.e. the book of the Law in its ordinary form 
of a parchment roll, to show what it is that 
he ia prepared to obey. This book, he says, 
is written " concerning him," since it con- 
tains precepts concerning a king's duties 
(Deut. xvii. 14—20). 



PS. XL. 1 17.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



313 



Ver. 8. — I delight to do thy will, my 
God : yea, thy Law is within my heart. The 
obedience to be rendered will be a true arid 
acceptable obedience, (1) olieerful, and (2) 
from the heart. Consciously or uncon- 
Boiously, David speaks as tlie type of Christ 
(see Heb. x. 5 — 7). 

Ter. 9. — I have preached righteousness 
in the great congregation: rather, 1 have 
proclaimed rightenusness. David has sung 
the praises of God in the "great congre- 
gation," and extolled his righteousness and 
truth (Ps. XXXV. 18). He has not 
"preached," in the modern sense of the 
word, since the preaching ofBce was reserved 
for the priests and Levites. lo, I have not 
refrained my lips; or, I will not refrain 
my lipa. I will continue tu glorify tliee 
openly, and praise thy Name while I have 
my being (Ps. civ. 33). Lord, thou knowest; 
i.e. thou knowest the truth of my statement 
as to the past, and the sincerity of my 
promise as to the future. 

Ver. 10. — I have not hid thy righteous- 
ness within my heart ; I have declared thy 
faithfulness and thy salvation ; I have not 
concealed thy loving-kindness and thy truth 
from the great oongregation. David's 
psalms furnish a running commentary on 
these statements. Composed, as appears 
from the titles, mainly for use in the " great 
oongregation," they set forth the righteous- 
ness, faithfulne«8, salvation, loving-kind- 
ness, and truth of God in the strongest 
possible way. Contemporary Israel, and 
later Israel, and the Church which has 
succeeded to the place of the original 
Israelites, and become " the Israel of God," 
are alike indebted to him for the wonderful 
strains in which he has shown forth and 
magnified these equalities of the Almighty. 

Ver. n. — Withhold not thou thy tender 
mercies from me, Lord. The supplicatory 
portion of the psalm here commences. David 
beseeches God, whose loving-kindness is so 
great (ver. 10), not to withhold from him those 
" tender mercies" which he lavishes so I'reely. 
As he is bent on "not withholding," or 
" refraining," his lips (ver. 9), so it is fitting 
that God should not " withhold,'' or " re- 
frain " (vhs) his kindness. Let thy loving- 
kindness and thy truth continually preserve 
me (compare the last clause of ver. 10). 

Ver. 12. — For innumerable evils have 
compassed me about; literally, for evils 
have ga&ered upon me until there is no 
number (comp. vers. 1, 2). The exact nature 
of the "evils" is not mentioned; but the 
worst of them appears to bs " the deep and 
bitter consciousness of sin " revealed in the 
next clause. Another was, beyond all doubt, 
the continued animosity of enemies (ver. 
14). Mental and bodily weakness may have 
been added, and have completed the crush- 



ing load whereof complaint is made. It is 
noted that the exceedingly deep conscious- 
ness of sin here displayed '* belongs alto- 
gether to a late part of David's life" (Canon 
Cuok). Mine iniquities have taken hold 
upon me, so that I am not able to look up ; 
rather, so that 1 am not able to tee. An 
actual failure of sight seems to be intended 
(comp. Pss. vi. 7; xxxi. 9; xxviii. 10), 
They are mOre than the hairs of my head ; 
i.e. they are moi e in number. Therefore my 
heart faileth me ; i.e. " my courage " and 
" my strength of mind " (comp. Ps. xxzviii. 
10). 

Ver. 13. — Be pleased, Lord, to deliver 
me. Though one deliverance is just effected 
(ver. 2), it is nnt enough ; something more 
is required. The psalmist's life is still 
threatened by enemies (ver. 14) ; he is still 
scoffed at and flouted (ver. 15). •■ Lord, 
make haste to help me ; literally, Lord, make 
haste to my help (comp. Pss. xxii. 1 9 ; xxxi. 
2; xxxviii. 22). The Church follows the 
example set, when she says in her versicles, 
" O God, make speed to save us. O Lord, 
make haste to help us." 

Ver. 14. — Let them be ashamed and con- 
founded together that seek after my soul to 
destroy it; let them be driven backward, 
and put to shame, that wish me evil. The 
remainder of the psalm from this point is 
detached later on in the Psalter, and becomes 
a separate psalm — the seventieth. Whither 
the detachment was the work of David or 
another, is uncertain. The differences 
between the two versions are slight (see the 
comment on Ps. Ixx.). The present verse 
repeats almost exactly Ps. xxxv. 4 and 26. It 
is again repeated, with slight variations, in 
Ps. Ixxi. 13. 

Ver. 15. — Let them be desolate for a 
reward of their shame; rather, hy reason 
of their shame (Kay, Alexander, Eevised 
Version). Let the shame and disgrace that 
attach to them (ver. 14) cause them to be 
desolate, or deserted of all. That say unto 
me, Aha, aha ! (comp. Ps. xxxv. 21, 25). 

Ver. 16. — Let all those that seek thee 
rejoice and be glad in thee. The psalmist 
cannot long be satisfied with mere prayer 
for self. He must extend his supplication, 
and make it cover the whole body of the 
faithful, " all those that seek God " (comp. 
Pss. XXV. 2, 3, 20—22 ; xxviii. 1—9, etc.). 
Let such as love thy salvation say continu- 
ally. The Lord be magnified ; i e. " Give them 
constant occasion to say, and give them 
the grateful heart to say. The Lord be 
praised for his mercies " (comp. Ps. xxxv. 
27). 

Ver. 17. — But I am poor and needy. 
David could say this in time of trouble. Nc 
one is more in need than a discrowned king, 
driven from his throne and land, and not 



314 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. XL. 1—1.7, 



yet restored to either (2 Sam. ix. 4 — 20). 
Yet the Lord thinketh upon me. The " poor 
and nsedy " are those whom God especially 
considers (sea Pas. ix, 18; x. 12, 17, 18; 



xxxiv. 6; XXXV. 10, etc.). Thou art m> 
Help and my Deliverer ; make no tarrying, 
my God (comp. ver. 13, and the comment 
ad he.) 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 3. — The song learned in tribulation. " He hath put a new song," etc. Trouble 
impoverishes the children of this world, but enriches the children of God. As St. 
Paul says, if our hope in Christ were an illusion, Christians would be of all men most 
pitiable; just as one who has been left heir to an immense fortune, and then by dis- 
covery of a later will loses all, is far poorer than he was before. But, as our hope is no 
illusion, but " a living hope," resting on a living Saviour, and the word of the living 
God, this life is immensely the richer for it. The "new song" of whicrh the text 
speaks is one to learn which the heart must be tutored in the school of trouble. 

I. A BONG OF DELIVERANCE. An ungodly heart, emerging from trouble, has the 
sense of relief, escape, not deliverance. Like a shipwrecked man, swimming for his 
life, heaved by a high wave on shore ; not like sinking Peter, caught in the hand of 
Jesus, treading the waves at his Saviour's side. The difference is immense. Was it 
worth while for tlie mariner to be shipwrecked, half-drowned, and lose his all, for the 
pleasure of standing again on dry ground ? Certainly not. He has lost much, gained 
nothing. But was it worth while for Peter to go through that terrible experience ? 
Had the night been twice as dark, the storm twice as fierce, had he sunk to the very 
bottom, it would have been a small price to pay for the joy of feeling himself grasped 
and lifted up in the Saviour's hani ; the triumph of walking on the raging waters at 
his side (see Ps. xxxiv. 4 — 6, 17). 

II. A SONG OP FORGIVENESS. The deliverance celebrated wag not from mere 
calamity, but from guilt and its terrible consequences (see ver. 12). This is taking 
the psalm as uttering David's own experience. But the contrast is so startling, even 
violent, between the tranquil thankfulness, sense of rectitude, and spiritual insight 
of vers. 4 — 10, and the awful sense of sin in ver. 12, that it seems very hard to recon- 
cile, except by understanding that the Spirit of prophecy here made David tho mouth- 
piece of an obedience, excelling and superseding sacrifice, only realized in Christ; and 
of that appalling, overwhelming view and sense of the terrific nature and amount of 
human guilt, which only he could have who "knew no sin," but "was made sin 
for us." 

III. A BONO OF PRAISK. Deliverance is sweetest, most joyful, in the exercise of 
God's love, power, care; the answer to prayer; the fulfilment of promise. Forgive- 
ness of sin is, of all God's good gifts, that which most reveals his love in compassion 
for the unworthy and disobedient, and in the provision of atonement. " Herein is love " 
(1 John iv. 9, 10 ; Eom. v. 8). 

IV. A SONG OF DEEPENED EXPBEIBNCB ; enriched spiritual life ; wiser, stronger, 
humbler faith. When tribulation has wrought patience (Rom. v. 3, 4) ; when " our 
extremity has been God's opportunity," and his presence has grown more real, his 
promises more precious and full of comfort ; when we have learned to pray as never 
before, and prayer has been answered ; when we have been made to feel our own utter 
weakness, and our Saviour's strength has been perfected in us ; — then the very trial 
wLich threatened to confound and uproot our faith becomes the school ih which we 
learn to trust God and know him, and therefore to praise him, as never before (1 Pet. 
i. 7). So we gain some foretaste of the "new song" sung before the throne (Rev. v. 
9, 10). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Out of the pit and on the rock : a song of praise. The title of the 
psslm indicates that it is one of David's : against that no adequate argument has been 
raised.' Therefore, as David's we regard it. We are called on to a treatment of it in 
* See Dr. Moll's introduction to this psalm in SohafTs Lange. 



M. XL. 1—17.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 315 

three several topics. In this, the first, we look at it as a song of praise for deliverint 
mercy — for delivering mercy experienced by the psalmist himself, who, having written 
this grateful hymn, hands it "to the chief musician" for use in sanctuary service. 
Where can our notes of praise for Divine interpusition be more appropriately sung 
than in the fellowship of the saints in the house of the Lord? We are left in doubt, 
indeed, as to whether the help thus celebrated was temporal or spiritual. Either way, 
the progression of thought in these ten verses is the same. For homiletical purposes 
we can scarcely let our remarks run on both lines at once. We shall, therefore, confine 
our thoughts to one kind of deliverance, viz. that from spiritual distress ; while a 
pulpit expositor will find the progression of thought equally appropriate, shodld he 
desire to use it to incite to praise for temporal mercy. But our present theme is — 
praise for delivering grace. 

I. Here is a case of soeb distbbss.i (Ver. 2.) " An horrible pit ; " " the miry 
clay." Two very striking expressions, which may well represent, figuratively, the 
wretchedness and peril of a man who is deep down in the mire of sin and guilt, and on 
whose conscience the load of guilt presses so heavily, that he seems to be sinking — to 
have no standing ; as if he must soon be swallowed up in misery and despair. 

II. The distress leads to pbayer. (Ver. 1.) There was a "cry" sent up to 
Grod for help. And this help seemed long delayed. There was a prolonged waiting in 
agony of prayer, that deliverance would come. The Hebrew is not exactly, " I waited 
patiently," but " waiting, I waited," signifying " I waited long." He who, broken down 
under conviction of sin, pleads with God for mercy, and will not let him go except 
he blesses him, — such a one shall never wait in vain. 

III. Peayeb is answered, and delivering grace is vodchsafed. (Ver. 2.) 
How great the change 1 From sinking in a pit, tlie psalmist is lifted up and set upon 
a rock I How apt and beautiful the figure to set forth the change in the penitent's 
position, when, after being weighed down by sin, he is lifted up and set firmly on the 
Bock of Ages 1 

IV. Hence there is a new song in the mouth. (Ver. 3.) How often do we 
read of a new song 1 The song of redeeming grace •« new, superadded to the song 
of creation. It will be eyer new ; whether on earth or in heaven, it can never grow ol^ 
it can lose none of its freshness and glory I 

V. As THE RESULT, THERE IS A TWOFOLD EXPRESSION OF GRATITUDE. 1. Surrender 

of will, heart, life, and all, to Ood. (Vers. 6 — 8.) "In the roll of the book" it was 
prescribed that Israel's king was to fulfil the will of God, and that such fulfilment of 
the will of God was more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices. Note : The 
doctrine here expressed is no mark of a later date than David (see 1 Sam. xii. ; xv. 22 ; 
Pas. 1. ; li. 16 ; Isa. i. 11 ; Jer. vii. 21 ; Hos. vi. 6 ; Micah vi. 1—8). 2. The proclamation 
of GocFs mercy before men. (Vers. 9, 10.) There is nothing like the experience of 
" grace abounding to the chief of sinners," to give power in speaking for God. He who 
having been first "in the pit," then "on his knees," then "on the Rook," is the man 
who will have power when he stands " in the pulpit." — 0. 

Vers. 11 — 17. — " Poor and needy : " a prayer and a plea. There are many psalms 
which begin in a sigh and end with a song, showing us that even in the act of waiting 
before God, and of waiting on God, the darkness often passes away. We find our 
burden rolling off in the very act and energy of prayer. In this psalm, however, 
matters are reversed; and immediately following on a song of triumph and a vow of 
surrender, there is a piteous wail. This dissimilarity, nay, almost discordance, has Vd 
to a very general opinion that what here seems to be the latter part of this psalia ig 
actually another psalm, which has somehow or other come to be attached to this one. 
The probability of this is confirmed by the fact that Ps. Ixx. is the same as the closi 
of Ps. xl. But, of course, at this distance of time, data which would fully explain that 
cannot be expected to be available. Still, it is a great comfort to be permitted to think 
of this paragraph as being penned at a different time and under different circum- 
stances from those which called forth the preceding ten verses. It would be discouraging, 

' Bishop I'erowae's notes throughout this psalm are even more than usually full and 
helpful. 



316 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xi,. 1— 17. 

indeed, if we found that in one and the same breath the psalmist was triumphantly 
set upon a rock, and then in a minute or two bowed down with a weight of woe ! We 
are not called on to entertain such a doleful supposition; and are glad, therefore, to 
deal with this piteous prayer and plea as standing by itself. It is not difficult to 
seize the progress of the thought. 

I. Hbee is a soul in deep distress. (Ver. 12.) Whether the " evils " are the 
iniquities themselves, or the form in which those iniquities are brought home to him, is 
not absolutely clear. Probably the latter is the case. Very often surrounding oircum- 
atiinces may bring to us bitterly painful reminders of past sin. And this may be one of 
God's means of bringing a soul to repentance through the avenue of remorse and shame. 

II. Herb is an utter absence of sympathy from the outside world. Yea, 
something more than a lack of sympathy ; for there is ridicule (ver. 15), there is joy 
over his sorrow (ver. H, latter part) ; there is even an effort to destroy his peace, and 
perchance to further a plot against his life. Note : In the moments of deepest distress, 
when we look for succour from man, we find that the greater part are so engrossed in 
their own affairs, that they have never a tear to shed over another's sorrows, nor a hand 
to help in another's needs. This is hard. But it is a part of the discipline of life j 
and it is made use of by God to drive us to himself. 

III. The psalmist is shut up to God. (Vers. 11, 13, 17.) It is not for nought 
that we are sometimes shut off from the sympathies of man. However trying, it is an 
infinite mercy when we are left with God alone. There, however, we have a perpetual 
Refuge. There are no fewer than four comforting thoughts specified here. (1) There 
is the name — Jehovah ; (2) there is the assurance of having a share in the thoughts of 
Ood (ver. 17) ; there is in God (3) loving-kindness ; and (4) faithfulness. " Thy 
truth," i.e. thy fidelity to thy promises. Note : Whoever has such a Befuge to which 
to flee, is well prepared for the worst of times. 

IV. To God he utters a fervent, pleading prater. 1. One part of his 
prayer, and a prominent part too, is against his enemies. (Ver. 15.) We need not 
imitate David here " (see our homily on Ps. xxxv.). Let us leave our enemies in 
the hands of God ; or, rather, let us pray for them. 2. A second part of his prayer 
is on iehalf of the godly. (Ver. 16.) Note : This indicates that the psalmist was not 
moved by private feeling only, but by a pious public spirit. 3. A third part of his 
prayer is for himself. (Vers. 13 and 17.) Note : It will be very selfish of us if we 
pray only for ourselves, and very unnatural if we do not include ourselves. — 0. 

Vers. 6 — 8 (taken along with Heb. x. 5 — 9). — The supreme surrender, and its eternal 
value. That some of the psalms are applied to Christ does not warrant us in applying 
them all to him ; ^ and even if some verses of any one psalm are applied to the Messiah, 
we are not thereby warranted in applying all the verses in such psalm to him.* There are 
direct Messianic psalms, which apply only to the Lord Jesus Christ ; such are the second 
and the hundred and tenth psalms. Critics — some of them, at least — demur to this as 
being contrary to psychological law. But it is not merely by the psychological law of 
the natural man that these Messianic psalms are declared to have been written. We are 
pointed, for their origin, to a fourfold divergence from naturalistic psychology. 1. It 
is not of psychology we have to think, but of pneumatology. 2. Of the pneumatology 
of the spiritual man. 3. Of the pneumatology of the spiritual man when "borne 
along" by the Divine Pneuma. 4. Of such action of the Divine Pneuma on the 
human for a specific Divine purpose. All this is indicated in 2 Pet. i. 21; and 
therefore all such critics as those to which we refer are totally beside the mark (see 
our remarks on Ps. xxxii.). But there are also psalms which are indirectly Messianic. 
They are marked, speaking generally, by the pronoun " I." The writer speaks for 
himself, in the first instance ; but whether he knew or intended it or not, the words 
had such a far-reachingness about them, that they could only be filled up in their 
perfect meaning by the Lord Jesus Christ.' Such is the case with the verses now 

' See Perowne's able article on the theology of the Psalms : ' Introduction to the 
Psalms,' eh. iii. ; and also his notes on Fs. xl. 

' Hot even Bishop Alexander seems to do so in this psalm. See his ' Witness of the 
Psalms,' etc., p. 217. 

• See Dr. J. Pye Smith's ' Script. Test.,' vol. i. oh. iii. 



l-s. XL. 1- -17.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 317 

before us. They first of all apply to David, and it is quite possible that he inteoded 
nothing further; if so, unwittingly to himself, he was borne along to utter words 
whose fulness of meaning could only be disclosed by the Incarnation, by David's Son, 
who had eternally been David's Lord; and, as such, the doctrines they contain are 
truly sublime. There is a somewhat difficult matter, which may be indicated by the 
questions : (1) How came the phrase, " Mine ears hast thou opened," to be rendered 
by the LXX., " A body hast thou prepared me " ? and (2) whether of the two readings 
is to be accepted ? Dean Alford (see his Commentary, in loo.) prefers to leave the 
difficulties unsolved. Dr. J. Pye Smith (' Script. Test.,' vol. i. p. 208), Dr. Booth- 
ri;yd,i and others, with little hesitation, express their conviction that the original and 
correct phrase is that adopted by the LXX. Calmet' suggests, "On lit dans I'hebreu 
aures, peut-Stre pour corpus autem." Archdeacon Parrar' says, in his notes on Heb. x. 
5 — 7, " Finding the rendering in the LXX., believing it to represent the true sense of 
the original (as it does), and also seeing it to be eminently illustrative of his subject, 
the writer naturally adopts it." On the whole, then, the variation presents an 
interesting point in textual criticism, rather than any doctrinal difBculty. Since, in 
either case, the substantial meaning is, " My bodily frame has been marked out and 
sealed for the performance of thy will." By the very frequent quotation from the LXX. 
rather than from the Hebrew, even when they vary, the sacred writers show how much 
more important in their view was the main thought than the precise form of expres- 
sion.* Having, then, in two separate homilies, dealt with this psalm in its application 
to David, we will now luxuriate in these verses as finding their highest and noblest 
application in Christ, and in him alone. In so doing, eight lines of thought require 
to be laid down. 

I. There is a momentous principle underlying both the Hebrew and the 
Christian economies. It is this — that sin has disturbed the relations between man 
and God, so that nothing is right with man till these relations are readjusted and 
harmony is restored. The whole of the Mosaic economy was an education in the evil 
of sin. " By Law is the knowledge of sin " (Rom. iii. 20) ; " The Law was our child- 
guide unto Christ" (Gal. iii. 24). 

II. Undee the Law, the people were taught that sin must be put aw at by 
BACBinoE. "Without shedding of blood is no remission" (Heb. ix. 22). But there 
will ever remain this wide, this infinite, difference between Jewish and pagan sacrifices 
— the pagan sacrifices started from man, and expressed his desire to propitiate God ; 
the Jewish sacrifices were appointed by God himself, as by One pardoning iniquity, 
transgression, and sin, who would cancel guilt only as sin had been condemned. 

III. The varied sacrifices under the Law were but a "figure fob the 
TIME THEN PRESENT." The doctrine of the insufficiency of fleshly sacrifices is found not 
only in the Epistle to the Hebrews, but also in the Old Testament (see 1 Sam. xv. 22, 23 ; 
Pss. li. 16 ; xl. 6—8 ; Isa. i. 11—17 ; Jer. vii. 22, 23 ; Micah vi. 6—8). The more dis- 
cerning and spiritually minded of the Hebrew saints saw and felt how ineffective were 
all the varied oflerings " to ensure peace with God ; and, because ineffective, they were 
necessarily typical. Hence — 

IV. The Old Testament dispensation was in its entirety but prophetic of 
One who should come. (Cf. Luke xxiv. 44; Acts xvii. 2, 3; xxviii. 23; Dan. ix. 
24 — 27.^) The entire argument in Heb. ix. and x. shows this. From the time when he 
who saw Messiah's day from afar said, " God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt 
offering," the outlook of the Church of God was towards One "who should come into 
the world." 

* In the notes to his English Version and to his Hebrew Bible. Doddridge's note 
hereon is worth notice. 

* ' SaiTite Bible,' tome dixifeme, p. 287. So, also, Bengel, in loo. 

* 'Early Days of Christianity,' vol. i. p. 443. 

* See Archdeacon Farrar, «J supra, " The saoied writers never aim at verbal aoouraoy 
in their quotations. . . . They hold it suffioieut to give the general sense." 

' See Geikie, ' Hours with the Bible,' vol. iii. p. 277. On the varied saorifioes, *es 
Oehler and Kurtz. 

" '■ The great principle of atypical predictiveness in all Jewish history ia the most satis- 
factory principle of interpretation in this and all similar cases " (Perowne, Introduction 
-to Ps. xl.). To the same effect Dr. J. Pye Smith. 



318 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xl. 1— IT. 

V. The Lord Jesus Christ, in the pact of his incarnation, declared that 

HE HAD COMB TO ACCOMPLISH THE UNFULFILLED MEANIN» OF OlD TESTAMENT 

SACRIFICES. We are not told here that he said this by his Spirit in the fortieth psalm, 
hilt that " when he came into the world " he said it. His entrance into our race was 
itself the great declaration.^ That act of "emptying himself" spake volumes then, 
and will do through all time ; and thus he put upon the ancient words the sublimest 
possible significance. 

VI. In aocomplishino type and prophecy, Jesus fulfilled the Word of God. 
His advent to earth was an absolute self-surrender to the Father's will (cf. John iv. 34 ; 
vi. 38). He fulfilled the Father's will (1) by revealing; the Father; (2) by honouring 
the Law ; (3) by condemning sin ; (4) by thus laying a basis for the forgiveness of every 
penitent. 

VII. On the ground of this surrender of himself, sin is put away. "He 
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself" (Heb. ii. 26). The absolute surrender of 
the will of the Eternal Son to the Eternal Father accomplished, in fact, that which all 
past sacrifices had accomplished only in figure. The surrender of that will ensured the 
fulfilment of all the purposes for which that will was surrendered. " He hath obtained 
the eternal redemption for us " (Heb. ix. 12 ; see John vi. 38 — 40). 

VIII. Sin having been put away for ever, the ancient sacrifices have 
ceased fob ever. " He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second '* 
(Heb. X. 9) ; " By one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified." 
Any pretended repetition of the Saviour's sacrifice in the Mass is impiety. No repe- 
tition of it is possible. All Old Testament sacrifices have ceased ; the Old Testament 
priesthood has ceased, and has never been renewed.* Note : What now remains for 
us ? Only (1) to accept the one offering of the Son of God as all-sufficient ; ' and (2) 
to render now the only sacrifice which is possible for us, viz. the loving, the absolute 
surrender of our will to him who hath loved us, and hath given himself for us, that we 
may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — Grace and gratitude. " Hearken to me, ye that follow after right- 
eousness, ye that seek the Lord, look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to 
the hole of the pit whence ye are digged." So said the prophet (Isa. li. 1), and it is 
good for us betimes to follow this counsel. It will not only teach us humility, but 
bind us more firmly in love and gratitude to God. It is the depth that proves the 
height. It is the misery that measures the mercy. It is by the utterness of the ruin 
that we realize the completeness of the restoration. It is by contemplating the gloom 
and horrors of the abyss into which we had sunk through sin, that we can best com- 
prehend the wonders of the redemption wrought for us through Jesus Christ. The 
psalmist dwells upon two things. 

I. What God had done for his servant. "Pit;" "clay." These images mark: 
1. The greatness of the danger. The pit w^s "horrible," gloomy and terrible, the place 
of certain destruction if no help came (Gen. xxxvii. 24 — 27). The clay is called " miry," 
to indicate that there was no solidity — ^nothing but a foul, seething mass, where no 
rest could be found (Jer. xxxviii. 6). 2. !Z%e greatness of the deliverance. It was 
free — in God's time (ver. 1) ; complete (ver. 2) ; joy-inspiring (ver. 3) ; morally influential 
(ver. 4); prophetical, typifying and giving promise of many other " wonderful works" 
of God (ver. 5 ; cf. Paul, 1 Tim. i. 16). It should also be noticed that the deliverance 
was wrought out (1) in harmony with eternal righteousness. King Darius was bent on 
saving Daniel from the den of lions, and " laboured till the going down of the sun to 
deliver him ; " but in vain. The law was against him. The decree which he himself 
had established bound his hands. He could do nothing (Dan. vi. 14 — 17). But the 
King of kings is a just God and a Saviour (Isa. xlii. 21; Rom. iii. 25, 26). Also (2) 
in harmony with man's freedom. There is a certain order in the method. Man can do 
nothing without God, but God will do nothing without man. We are made willing in 
the day of his power. First there i» the cry ; then the hearing ; then the lifting up ; 

' See Perowne's special note here, 6th edit., p. 350, ool. i. 
• Ffirrar'B 'Lives of the Fathers,' vol. i. p. 101, lines 2 to .5. 

' " In this passage we have the theology as well as the fact of the Atonement" (Biehop^ 
Alexander). 



PB.XL. 1— 17.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 319 



then the setting upon the rock ; then the new song and the new service, as the outflow 
and the expression of the new heart. " By grace are ye saved, through faith " (Eph. ii. 
4—10 ; Eom. viii. 29, 30). 

II. What his servant would do for God. " Wherewith shall I come hefore the 
Lord?" is the question of the prophet; and he gives the answer, "He hath showed 
thee, O man, what Is good ; and what doth the Lord require of thee, hut to do justly, 
' and to love mercy, and to wallc humbly with thy God?" (Micah vi. 6 — 8). The same 
great truth had been taught long before by Samuel, " Behold, to obey is better than 
sacrifice " (1 Sam. xv. 22). 1. The sacrifice of the vjill. Without this all else is vain. 
There is death, not life ; the letter, but not the spirit ; the form of godliness, but not the 
power. 2. The obedience of the life. Whatever way we interpret the obscure phrase, 
" Mine ears hast thou opened," the meaning seems to be the free and complete surrender 
of the soul to God. The right disposition leads to the life-devotion (Bom. xii. 1 ; 
2 Cor. V. 14, 15). 3. The thanksgiving of the heart. Both privately and publicly, in 
our daily life before God and before men, we are to serve in the spirit of love and joy. 
Amidst all the changes and chances of our mortal state, we should continue faithful to 
him who hath called us that we might show forth his praise. Thus we shall have part 
with those saints of God — 

** Who carry music in their heart, 

Through dusky lane and wrangling mart, 
Plying their daily task with busier feet. 
Because their secret souls a holy utrain repeat.* 

w.r. 

Vers. 7, 8. — The heart of Messiah. "Lo, I come!" Many questions might be 
asked as to this announcement. Who is this ? Whence, and whither, and for what 
purpose, does he come ? It is enough that we can identify the Speaker (Luke xxiv. 44; 
Heb. X. 5 — 7). Let us therefore ponder his words. 

I. The will of God was the chief thodqht of his heart. We see this in 
his earthly life. See him at his first Passover. When Joseph and Mary found him in 
the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, his answer was, " Wist ye not that I 
must be about my Father's business ? " He was but twelve, and yet, at that tender age, 
how intense his consciousness of the trust committed to him 1 So it was on his baptism 
at the Jordan (Matt. iii. 16); in the temptation in the wilderness (Matt. iv. 4); at the 
well of Jacob (John iv. 34) ; and onward to the end. DaUy, hourly, constantly, to the 
last moment, it was his chief thought to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish 
his work (John iii. 34; v. 19; vi. 37). Evermore, as the will of the Father was 
revealed to him, it was accepted and obeyed in the spirit of love. The will of the 
Father was equally and truly the will of the Son. This is true freedom. 

II. The will of God was the sbobet strength of his heart. It was said of 
Moses, "He endured as seeing him who is invisible." So it has been with God's 
servants in every age. The sense of the invisible, commerce and familiarity with the 
great unseen world, alliance with God, make men strong for duty. So it was in the 
highest sense with Christ. The will of God was the strength of his heart, because : 
1. It harmonized with eternal righteousness. Our Lord knew he had the most absolute 
conviction, that in doing the will of God he was walking in the path of truth and 
righteousness. Hence he was strong and brave (Isa. xlii. 1 — 4). 2. It harmonized 
with the highest good of man. When men's hearts are not in their work, they soon 
weary. But when labour is congenial, it is no longer a task and a burden, but a delight. 
So it was with Newton in his love of truth; witii Howard and Wilberforce and Living- 
stone, in their generous enthusiasm for humanity. And so it was in the most perfect 
way with our Lord. He came to save, and not to destroy. 

" Good will to men and zeal for God 
His every thought engross." 

in. The will of God was the supreme jot and satisfaction of his hkart. 
Thus : 1. He enjoyed unbroken fellowship with God (John xv. 10). 2. He perfectly 
filled up the jilan of God for the development of his human nature. His life was the 
only life that answered perfectly to the will of God — with no defect to be supplied, no 



320 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. Ps. xl. 1—17. 



error to be corrected, no blemish to be remedied. 3. He accomplished the redemption 
of his people. 4. He glorified the Father. — W. P. 

Ver. 17. — Ood''t thoughts. "1 am" — ^what? The question is important. In 
order to judge rightly, we must have a right standard. We are not to measure 
ourselves by ourselves, or by the rules of society, but by the perfect Law of God (2 Cor. 
X. 12 ; Rom. iii. 20). " I am poor and needy." What then ? If comparing ourselves 
■with all that is true and noble and good, with all that is highest and holiest, we are 
penetrated with a sense of our own sins and un worthiness, what are we to do? Cast 
down, lying prone in the dust, there speaks within us the " still small voice " of 
consolation, " Yet the L«rd thinketh upon me." Here is — 

I. Hope fob the wkbtohed. Ws may be " poor," wanting in all that is good. 
We may be not only " poor," but " needy," with cravings and desires which earth 
cannot satisfy. Like the miserable outcast, we may be ready to say, " No man cared 
for my soul " (Ps. cxlii. 4). Yet there is hope. God thinketh upon us. And we have 
the outcome of his thoughts. " It is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, 
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners " (1 Tim. i. 15). It is when we 
realize our state that we are open to help. It is when we turn to God that we find 
that he has already turned to us, and that his thoughts towards us are thoughts of 
mercy and of love (Isa. Iv. 6 — 9). 

II. CoMFOET AMIDST THE DESOLATIONS OF LIFE. Many are " poor and needy " 
because bereft of what they held dear. In time of trouble what should we do ? Some 
say, " Trial is common." Others tell us, " You have had your turn of joy : why complain 
now that you are visited with sorrow ? " Others exhort us to patience ; they say, " Time 
is the great healer." Others again exhort us to submission, to bow to the inevitable. 
To such and such-like we can but answer, as Job did, " Miserable comforters are ye all " 
(Job xvi. 2). But when we remember God, then we are truly comforted. Sympathy is 
sweet, but more is necessary for us. The Lord not only " thinketh upon us," but he 
has provided for us " strong consolation " (Heb. vi. 18). The Bible contains the 
thoughts of God, and it is rich in instruction and comfort. Christ Jesus has come to 
make known to us the thoughts of God, speaking to us as a Brother, in dear words of 
human speech, and remembering what he has said, we are comforted (Isa. xli. 14 — 17 ; 
John xiv. 1 ; 2 Cor. vii. 6 ; i. 3—6). 

III. Inspibation foe the laboub of life. It is a great thing to know what our 
true work is ; but we may know this and shrink with a sense of our unfitness. So it 
was with Moses, but God thought of him (Exod. iv. 10 — 14). So it has been in a 
humbler way with many. We feel, when face to face with duty, that we are ill equipped 
aud weak. We are ready to halt. But if we keep our minds open, if we watch for 
opportunities, if we are ready to do the work that lies nearest to us, what our " hand 
findeth to do," God will not fail to help us. Whatever is good in us is of God, and 
showeth that God thinketh upon us. Our best thoughts are his thoughts. All the 
greatest things done by men have been, first of all, God's thoughts, put into their minds 
to quicken, to inspire, to move them on to noble ends. So it was with Carey, and 
Wilberforce, and liaikes, and hosts of others. It is helpful to a servant to know that 
his master thinks of him ; to a soldier that his captain thinks of him ; to a young man, 
far from home, that his mother thinks of him ; and so, and in a far higher way, it is 
inspiring and comforting to every true worker in the cause of truth, to know that Christ 
thinketh of him, and that whatever he does is done under the great Taskmaster's eye, 
and will not fail of due recognition and reward. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 10. — Thanksgiving and prayer. The first part (vers. 1 — 10) is a thanks- 
giving, the second part a prayer. The situation is that of one who, on one side, set 
free from a heavy affliction, is still oppressed on the other. We have all ground for 
thanksgiving for the past, and for prayer for the present and future. This section may 
be divided thus : what God had done fur the psalmist and for his country ; and what 
the psalmist had done for God. 

I. What God had done. 1. For t?ie psalmist. (1) Delivered him from threatened 
destruction into great safety. The specific nature of the salvation is not mentioned. But 
it suggests and describes what Christ does in the deliverance of the man who trust* in 



fB. XLi. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 821 



him, the greatness of the salvation. (2) The deliverance had filled him with gratefui 
joy. "Put a new song into his mouth." Every new experience of the Divine love 
should rouse anew the spirit of thanksgiving ; it is a new revelatioD of God's mercy. 
His experience is, " Blessed is the man that maketh the Lord his trust." 2. F(yr the 
Bebrew j)eople as a nation. (Ver, 5.) Turns from the goodness of God towards himself 
to his larger manifestations of himself in the national history. His wonderful thoughts 
or purposes, and his wonderful deeds on behalf of Israel, are too great and too manifold 
to be enumerated. But we turn to what God is doing for the world, and say, " God so 
loved the world," etc. ; not only our country, but the whole world. How great a Worker 
and Thinker God is for the whole xmi verse 1 

II. What the psalmist had done fob God. (Vers. 6 — 10.) To manifest his 
gratitude. 1. Sy his deeds. (Vers. 6—8.) (1) He gives obedience to his Law, instead 
of seeking to please him by sacrifice. God had opened his ears to hear and his eyes 
to read his will as prescribed to him in the roll of his book. Obedience better than any 
ceremonial observance. (2) His obedience was thus not only intelligent, but came 
from the heart. The Law was in his heart; he loved obedience. 2. By his words. 
(Vers. 9, 10.) Unwearied in proclaiming to others what Jehovah had done for him. 
(1) What he preached. The righteousness, faithfulness, and loving-kindness of God. 
He preached what he saw in his own history and the history of the nation. (2) Grati- 
tude gave him courage openly to declare God's goodness. If he had been ungrateful, 
or had wanted courage, he might have been tempted to hide God's dealings among the 
secrets of his private experience. Every man's duty to profess his convictions ; and to 
declare that he is on the side of Christ and the Church. — S. 

Vers. 11 — 17. — Discipline lifelong. Though the sufferer has been delivered from 
one great distress, he is still encompassed by great sufferings and dangers, from which 
he prays to be rescued. Suggests — 

I. That the wobk of oub disoiplinb aistd salvation is a lifelong wobk. 
No one act of deliverance is sufficient ; no one deliverance can cover the whole of our 
experience.' 1. Fresh sin Irings a renewed consciousness of suffering. (Ver. 12.) The 
psalmist suffered so in this respect that his eyes hecame dim from exhaustion / he felt 
his sins to be more than the hairs of his head, so that his heart failed in strength. 
Sense and soul both gave way. 2. Men in high station are in constant danger from 
enemies, (Vers. 14, 15.) However righteous in conduct and blameless in character. 
Bad men have selfish ends to attain, and they try to get good men out of their way 
by slander and persecution. 3. As life advances, the sense of our poverty and need 
deepens. (Ver. 17.) If we are growing wiser and better, we get a deeper insight into 
what we ought to be and might become, and so nourish a Divine discontent with our 
poverty and weakness. 

n. Lifelong need will beget lifblono pbateb. 1. Gratitude for the poet 
will inspire us to prayer. This was the case with the psalmist (vers. 1 — 10). 

2. We are encouraged to pray hy the thought of the goodness of God. (Ver. 11.) He 
appsals to "the tender mercies," " the loving-kmdness," and "the truth," or the faith- 
fulness, of God to those who trust in him. He knows that " God thinketh upon him." 

3. He appeals also to the retributive Justice of God. (Vers. 14, 15.) He is sure that 
Qtoi will deal righteously with his enemies. 4. Se is emboldened to seek for speedy 
deliverance. (Ver. 17.) In the first verse he says he waited patiently for the Lord ; 
here he becomes impatient for the Divine interference. The patience means persevering 
prayer ; the impatience means urgent prayer ; and both are right and acceptable and 
necessary to the believer in earnest about salvation. — S. 



EXPOSITION, 
PSALM XLL 



Thb forty-first psalm completes the first 
book of the Psalter. All the psalms con- 
tained in it are assigned to David by the 

PSALMS. 



titles, except Pas. L, U., x., and xxxiii. 
The present psalm is closely connected with 
the other psalms of the concluding group 
(Pss. xxxviii. — xli.), which seem to have 
been all composed a little before, during, 



322 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. XLI. 1 — 13. 



or jnet after the revolt of Absalom. It 
oonsistg of an introduction (vers. 1 — 3), 
respecting the blessedness of those who 
"consider the poor;" a bitter complaint 
against his enemies generally, and one 
enemy in particnlar (vers. 4 — 9); and a 
eonclusion, in which prayer and an ex- 
pression of confident hope are united (vers. 
10 — 12>. The concluding paragraph (ver. 
1 3) is no part of the psalm, but a mark of 
division between book i. and book ii. 
(compare the terminations of Pss. Ixxii., 
Ixxxix., and cvi.). Metrically, the psalm is 
remarkably regular, since it consists of four 
stanzas, each of three verses. 

Yer. 1. — Blessed is he that considereth 
the poor. David had concluded the pre- 
ceding psalm by calling himself " poor and 
needy." He commences the present one by 
pronouncing a blessing on all those who 
" consider," or tenderly regard, and, so far 
as they can, assist the poor and aiBicted, 
It is not so much actual poverty, as humili- 
ation and weakness, of which he is speak- 
ing. The lord will deliver him in time of 
trouble ; literally, tn the day of evil. As 
he has pity on his fellow-men, so God will 
have pity upon him (oomp. Matt. vi. 14, 
15; X. 42; xviil.33; Prov.xix. 17; Eocles. 
xi. 1, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — The lord will preserve him, and 
keep him alive. Continuance in life is 
always regarded as a blessing in the Old 
Testament ; it is only in the New that to 
" depart, and be with Christ," is pronounced 
" far better" (Phil. i. 23). And he shaU be 
blessed upon the earth; i.e. his long life 
shall be a happy one. And thou wilt not 
deliver him unto the will of his enemies; 
rather, as in the margin, do not tliou deliver 
him (comp. Pss. xxviL 12 ; Ixxiv. 19). The 
psalmist changes from dogmatic assertion 
to prayer, not, however, intending to ex- 
press any doubt that his prayer will be 
granted. 

Ver. 3. — The Lord will strengthen him 
npon the bed of languishing. If he falls 
into a sickness, God will support him 
through it. Thou wilt make all his bed in 
his sickness; literally, thou wilt turn all his 
led; i.e. rearrange it, turn its cushions, 
make it such that he can comfortably lie 
on it (see Kay, who quotes Bellarmine). 
Others understand, " Thou wilt change 
his couch from one of sickness to one of 
sonvalescenoe." 

Ver. 4. — I said; rather, at for me, I said. 
The writer pointedly marks that he turns 
here from considering the bk-ssednesa of 
the compassionate man to contemplation of 
liis own case — his afflictions and sufferings. 
Lord, be meroifol unto me : heal my soul ; 



for I have sinned against thee. The worst 
of all his woes — the root and origin of them 
all— /ojM et origo mali, is his own sin- 
fulness. Unless that is cured, all other 
alleviation is vain. Hence, after the first 
general cry for mercy, he goes to the root 
of the matter, "Heal my soul." There, 
within me, in the depths of my nature, is 
the worst malady. Heal that, and soon all 
will be well with me. 

Ver. 5. — Mine enemies speak evil of me. 
Another head of suffering, viz. misrepre- 
sentation, calumny, abuse, on the part of 
enemies. Absalom had stolen away the 
hearts of the children of Israel from David 
by misrepresenting him (2 Sam. xv. 3, 4). 
Shimei had followed the example, adding 
to his misrepresentation abuse and cursing 
(2 Sam. xvi. 5—8). Absalom's aiders and 
abettors generally, no doubt, joined in the 
chorus. This, theti, is David's second subject 
of complaint, and one that he felt keenly — 
his enemies spoke evil of him. Further, 
they desired and anticipated his death. 
When (they said) shall he die, and his name 
perish ? David evidently was, or had been, 
when his enemies thus spoke, on the bed of 
sickness, prostrate, and in danger of his 
life. While he thus suffered, they rejoiced, 
expecting his early demise. When he was 
dead, they intended that his name should 
*' perish ; " i.e. that his memory should be 
utterly noted out. 

Ter. 6. — And if he come to see me, he 
speaketh vanity; rather, he speaketh false- 
hood (see the comment on Fs. xii. -2). It 
is suggested that Ahithophel is especially 
aimed at. But there is no proof of this. 
AU the enemies are probably intended, only 
distributively instead of collectively. His 
heart gathereth iniquity to itself. Dr. 
Kay's comment is, "He makes a show of 
friendship, using hollow compliments ; but 
he is treasuring up every expression as 
material for misrepresentation." When he 
goeth abroad, he telleth it. He reports 
what he has seen and heard, but untruly. 

Ver. 7. — All that hate me whisper together 
against me; i.e. gather themselves into 
knots, and hold whispered conversation! 
about me^as conspirators are apt to do. 
Against me do they devise my hurt ; lite- 
rally, hurt to me. 

Ver. 8. — An evil disease (literally, a thing 
of Belial), say they, cleaveth fast unto him. 
(On the meaning of " Belial," see the com- 
ment on Ps. xviii. 4.) The " thing of Belial " 
here intended may, perhaps, be the disease 
from which David was suffering, but is 
more probably sume disgraceful charge or 
infamous calumny which had been circulated 
concerning him, and was now crushing him 
down. This calumny is represented as 
poured out upon him like a coating uf molten 
metal (see Job xli. 23, 24), and so cleaving 



■PS. ILL 1—13.] 



THE BOOK OF VSALMS. 



S2S 



to him. And now that he lieth ; i.e. " now 
that he is prostrate upon a eick-bed." He 
shall liie np no more. He shall not recover, 
but die of his malady. 

Yer. 9. — Yea, mine own familiar friend 
(literally, the man of my peace), in whom 
I trusted. Here Ahithophel is almost 
certaiuly intended. He is called " the man 
of my peace," since he was one of David's 
official counsellors (2 Sam. xv. 12), and 
consequently on the most friendly terms 
with him (comp. Fs. Iv. 13, 14). Which 
did eat of my bread. At Oriental courts, 
the king's counsellors, together with many 
other members of the court, habitually" eat 
at the king's table " (comp. 2 Sam. iz. 7 — 
13 ; I Kings iv. 28, 27 ; xviii. 19 ; Neh. v. 
17; Esth. i. 10, 11; iii. IS, etc.). Hath 
lifted np his heel against me. (For Ahitho- 
phel's defection from David, and share in 
Absalom's conspiracy, see 2 Sam. xv. 12, 
31; xvi. 15—23; xvii. 1—23.) His conduct 
is here compared to that of a vicious horse, 
which kicks his own master. (For the 
relation of type and antitype between 
Ahithophel and Judas, see John xv. 18.) 

Yer. 10. — But thou, Lord, be mercifnl 
unto me (comp. ver, 4). The writer passes 
from complaint to prayer, and once more 
calls on God to deliver him. And raise me 
np. Falsify the prediction of my enemies 
(ver. 8) ; raise me up from my sick-bed, and 
re-establish me in a position of authority. 
Zhat I may reqnite them. This was not 



private revenge, but David's duty as n 
king (Eom. xiii. 4). 

Yer. 11. — By this I know that thou 
favonrest me; or, delighteit in me (corap. 
Pss. xviii. 19; xxii. 8; 2 Sam. xv. 26). 
Because mine enemy doth not triumph over 
me. David's enemies had not triumphed 
over him, and he felt assured that they 
would not be allowed to triumph. This 
assurance was so strong that he could make 
it an argument on which to ground his 
belief that God " delighted in him." David 
argues from effect to cause. 

Yer. 12. — And as for me, then upholdest 
me in mine integrity (comp. Fs. xzvi. 1, and 
the comment ad loo.). And settest me before 
thy face for ever. So that there falls upon 
me the light of thy countenance (comp. Fs. 
iv. 6). The expression, "for ever," is 
remarkable in this connection, and may be 
fairly taken as indicating a hope of im- 
mortality (comp. Fss. xvi. 11 ; xvii. 15" 
xxiii. 6; xxx. 12). 

Yer. 13. — Blessed be the Lord Ood of Israel 
from everlasting and to everlasting. Amen, 
and Amen. A similar doxology occurs at 
the end of Pss. Ixxii., Ixxxix., and cvi., not 
(apparently) as part of the psalm to which 
it is attached, but as a mark of pause and 
separation. The Fsalter is thus divided 
into five books (comp. Hippolyt., p. 153, edit. 
Lagarde, " The Hebrews divided the Fsalter 
into five booka, so that it ii another Penta- 
teuch"). 



HOMILBTICa 

Ver. \.— Considerate sympathy. " Blessed is he that considereth the poor." A 
double blessing waits for those who are worthy of it, in these words — a blessing of 
heaven above, and a blessing of the deep that lieth under. As Holy Writ, they utter 
a Divine promise ; as the voice of human experience, they breathe heart-felt gratitude. 
They are " the blessing of him that was ready to perish." This word " poor " is not to 
be restricted to what we specially call " poverty." It sometimes has that sense (e.g. 
Bxod. xxiii. 3),. but also means " weak, miserable, downcast." The psalm expressly 
refers to bodily sickness and weakness, aggravated by the heartless cruelty of false 
friends. Consider (1) the reasons, and (2) the nature, of this blessing. 

I. The reason of the blessino. 1. Considerate sympathy, helpful compassion 
for the needy, weak, or suffering, is " blessed," because it is a feature of likeness to 
God. It is " the mind which was in Christ Jesus." See the Divine example and the 
practical inference (1 John iii. 16, 17). When our Lord rebuked the hypocrisy of Judas 
("not that he cared for the poor"), he took care to add, " The poor always ye have 
with you " (John xii. 8). St. James keenly satirizes the mock charity in which words 
are not coupled with deeds (Jas. iii. 15, 16). Compassion for the poor runs through 
the Bible. Care for the poor, for widows, etc., was one of the earliest and most sacred 
cares of the primitive Church. Our inonmerable hospitals and asylums of all kiods 
receive munificent support from many who lay no claim to Christian faith; yet they 
lave their deep and sure root in Christian sympathy. They are among those blessings 
which " Religion scatters on her march to immortality " (Robert Hall). Two of the 
main forms of human suffering are specially set before us in these words — poverty and 
sickness. Poverty begins where plenty ends. A man is not to be counted " poor " 
because he dwells in a cottage, lives simply, dresses plainly, earns his children's bread 



324 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xli. 1— 13» 

by the sweat of his brow, as long as his work is healthy, his food plentiful and whole- 
some, and he can keep out of debt, and have a little to give to God's work and to 
a needy neighbour. But when strength is overtasked, when toil and thrift cannot 
keep the wolf from the door, and work fails or health breaks down, and the question 
has to be faced how long the home can be kept together, — then, indeed, poverty is felt 
to be one of the bitterest forms of the curse which sin has brought into human life. 
For though this cruel form of suffering often falls on those who have not themselves 
to blame for it, somebody is to blame, or society is to blame. Trace it to its deepest 
root, aud you shall find sin. And then it is that the pitiful eye of the All-giver rests on 
that darkened home, and his voice say?, " Blessed is he that cousidereth the poor." 
Sickness often comes as the direct fruit of poverty. Often they terribly aggravate one 
another's burden. It would be a heart-rending sight to see all the sick-beds in a 
nation, or even in a single city ; but a blessed and heavenly sight if we could see all 
the tender sympathy, self-sacrificing love, sleepless, patient labour, self-devoted skill, 
which sickness is hourly calling forth. None tread closer than the nurse and the 
physician in the earthly footsteps of him who " went about doing good." What a 
hard, selfish world, one imagines, this would become, were there no self-denying 
ministry to the helpless and suffering I So God brings good out of evil, and " blesses 
him that considereth the poor." Note the tender promise, ver. 3, Authorized Version, 
which, I doubt not, is the true sense. 2. There is Justice as well as mercy in this 
claim, enforced not only by Chrisf s example, but by his Law (GaL vi. 2). True, both 
poverty and disease are largely the direct result of sloth, intemperance, dishonesty, 
neglect, or other vices and follies — sin's wages. Tet even in these cases the heavy 
end of the burden very often falls on innocent shoulders. And in multitudes of cases 
these calamities come on those who have done their best. They fought bravely, but 
the battle of life went against them. The causes may lie far back in the past — in bad 
laws, misgovemment, wars, wasteful expenditure ; or in trade disputes ; or in far-off 
lands, by the failure of a crop or the origin of a pestilence. Then, since the poor and 
the sick are so largely the victims of the mistakes, follies, or crimes of society, nations, 
mankind ; nay, even suffer often from the very causes by which others grow rich, — is it 
not simple justice that those for whom the great wheel of life is spinning a smooth 
and golden thread should step in to lift their burden, " as good stewards of the manifold 
grace of God"? 

II. Thk nature of the BLEssma bebe pbonounoed. 1, One of the greatest of 
all blessings is to be like Ood (Matt. v. 45). 2. It is blessed to be QotTs ahnontr 
(Matt. z. 8). 3. The sweetest happiness is to make others happy. 4. It is blessed to 
have a place in the prayers of God's afSicted children. Perhaps, if the balance could 
be struck, it would not be always where the giver expects ; he may be more a debtor 
to their prayers than a creditor by his gifts. 6. After aU this, it seems on over- 
measure of repayment to speak of any future recompense ; yet our Saviour does (Luke 
xiv. 14 5 1 Tim. vL 17—19 ; Matt. x. 42). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 3. — The poor man's charter; or, a blessing pronounced on the benevolent. 
Though there is no sufficient reason to question the accuracy of the title of this psalm, 
Tet the blessing here pronounced on benevolent souls is entirely independent of its 
human penman. The two key-words in the first verse — " considereth " and " the poor " 
— are words of very wide significance. The first would mean " he who takes a kindly, 
continuous, intelligent interest in, and who cherishes a tender sympathy for, them ; and 
the word " poor " would include the weak, sick, insignificant, impoverished, wretched, 
and unfortunate — even the debtor and the slave. Now, we are so accustomed to such 
kindly thoughts for the helpless, that we often come to regard care fdr the poor as one 
of the " ordinary virtues of humanity ; " yet such is verj', very far from being the 
case. Where the light of Divine revelation has not shone, it is no social sin, in the 
estimation of men, to trample on the poor.^ Thus the merciful consideration for 

' Information on this and cognate themes will be found in Dr. Uhlhom's * Christian 
Charity in the Ancient Church,' the chapter entitled, "A World without Love;" the 



P8. XLi. 1— 13.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 325 

" the poor, the fatherless, and the widow," shown in the Law of Moses,* markerl an 
immense uplifting in legislation; while the continuation of this same philanthropy, on 
religious grounds, was made of so much account hy the prophets, that if it was neglected, 
men's external worship was an offeoce in the sight of God (Isa. i. 17; x. 1, 2; iii. 14; 
Mii. 5 — 11 ; Jer. xxii. 3 ; Amos ii. 6). The Lord Jesus Christ confirmed all this by 
his precepts, illustrated it by his life, and actually deems it of so much importance 
that, looking onward to the time when he shall be the Judge of all the nations, he 
declares that, according as men have attended to his poor or not, will be the stupendous 
distance between a " Come, ye blessed ! " and a " Depart, ye cursed I ", (Matt, xx v. 31 — 46). 
Hence the theme before us now is one that is vitally bound up with the essentials of 
true religion and of acceptable worship to God, so that we have the warrant of the 
entire Scriptures for dealing with this blessing, which is here pronounced on the 
benevolent, as being not only the words of Duvid, but a continuous utterance of Divine 
revelation from beginning to end. Hence it would wonderfully enlarge and strengthen 
the basis of such an appeal as this verse suggests, to combine with it the two 
benedictions in Matt. v. 7 and xxv. 34, "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall 
obtain mercy ; " " Come, ye blessed of my Father ! " 

I. The kevealed will of God shows us how tbult man is the object of a 
Divine beoabd. No one can study intelligently the book of God and compare it 
with the pagan estimate of human nature, without being struck with the amazing 
contrast between heathenism and Christianity, and, indeed, between heathenism and 
Hebraism. Often, indeed, both Moses and Christ are accused of indifference to the lot 
of the slave, because neither of them overthrew slavery with a single thrust ; but they 
did a better and a nobler thing— they dropped those seeds of thought concerning man's 
dignity, concerning men's relation to God and to each other, that, in springing up and 
bearing fruit, would cause slavery to fall most utterly, never to rise again. And, even 
nowi the kindly thoughts of and for us which pervade the book, given in germ in 
the Law of Moses, and in ripest form in the Epistles of St. John, are such that when 
they take effect in human hearts and lives, they turn selfishness to love ; and if such 
effect were to be universal, we should have a Paradise below I A common Fatherhood 
is over all ; hence a common brotherhood should bind all in one. " There is no respect 
of persons with God." To despise the poor, to turn aside the right of a man before the 
face of the Most High, the Lord approveth not. And this pure leaven of the kingdom 
b gradually diffusing itself through the race, and will, till the care of God for us all 
comes to be mirrored in our care for each other. 

II. When akd whbbe God's caee fob man as man is understood and copied, 
THEBE will speino UP PBACTIOAL BENEVOLENCE; and this wiU take effect in every 
form in which such kindness can be shown. The special feature noted here is that of 
" considering the poor," which would involve a looking out for cases in which we can 
render aid of any kind whatever ; and when such cases are before us, making them the 
objects of our deep interest and practical concern. Briefly we may set these under four 
heads. We should be ready and ever (1) anxious to be helps everywhere ; (2) anxious 
to help men for Christ's sake ; (3) anxiously caring for men as men, either because Chrisi 
died for them, or because Christ lives in them ; and (4) anxiously seeking out the cas. s 
of special sorrow and distress, that we may cheer the suffering and the sad.* 

Ven. Archdeacon Parrar's • Early Days of Christianity,' vol. i. oh. i. ; Schmidt's ' Essai 
Bur la Civilisation de I'Empire Eomaine, et sa Transformation par la Christianisme ; ' 
Mr. Bruce's ' Gesta Christi ; ' and Dr. Storr on ' The Historical Effects of Christianity ; ' 
articles by the present writer in the ' Pulpit Commentary : First Epistle of John,' pp. 82, 
105, 109; an article. "The Outcast Poor," Contemporary Eemeui, December, 1883; and a 
small volume by Bar. Dr. Paton, M.A., on ' The Inner Mission of the Church.' 

' Cf. Exod. xxiii. 11; Lev. xix. 10; xxiii. 22; xxv. 25; Deut. xv. 7. See articles by 
the present writer, ' Pulpit Commentary : Deuteronomy,' pp. 101, 102, 254—260, 356. 

' •' We must not imagine that the benediction pronounced belongs to all who casually 
give money to the poor, or leave it in their wills, or contribute to societies. . . . The 
blessing is for those whose habit it is to love their neighbour as themselves, and who, for 
Christ's sake, feed the hungry and clothe the naked. To imagine a man to be a saint who 
does not consider the poor as he has ability, is to conceive the fruitless fig tree to be accept- 
able. 'There will be sharp dealing wiih many professors on this point in the day when 
the Kins; cnmeth in liis slorv" (C. H. Rpursi-nn. fn ?n'''). 



326 TllK iJOuK OF FaALMb. fps. x',i. 1— 1 3 

III. On those who live a life of such practical benevolence fob CHRIg'.;'s 
SAKE, THERE 18 A BLESSING PKONOUNCBD. It will be the blessing of both the Father 
and of the Son, yea, and of the Spirit too. The Spirit; for he pronounces it ir the 
inbreathing of these sacred words. The Son ; for he proclaims it now, as our Teacher, 
in the Sermon on the Mount, and will pronounce it, as Judge, at last. The Father; 
for the very words of the blessing which the Son pronounces are, " Ye blessed of my 
Father." In this love he blesses specially all whose love is the reflex of his own. And 
the people's blessing will attend him who lives to bless the people ; in such a case, in 
a high and holy sense, " vox popuU, vox Dei." 

IV. The BLESSING of Heaven on those who live to bless others is divinely 
RICH AND full. "What does it invcjlve? 1. Divine approval ; for Grod's heart of love 
has diffused its own glow of sympathy within. 2. The heart of the Lord Jesus is 
touched; for he feels kindness done to others for his sake as done to him. VVondarful, 
indeed, is his " Inasmuch." 3. Those who love like Jesus will find, their home with him. 
How inspiring are the words, " Come, ye blessed of my Father " I 4. 2%ere will be the 
recompense <^ "a kingdom prepared." Oh, how infinitely do the recompenses of 
abounding grace outweigh any little acts of kindness the saints may have shown to 
the poor of Christ ! Only " grace " can account for a reward so large. 

V. Of such IMPORTANCE IS THIS LIFE OF SERVICE FOR OTHERS THAT, APART 
FROM IT, ALL RELIGIOUS FORM IS EMPTY AND VAIN. (Matt. vii. 12, 21 — 23; XXV. 

41 ; Mark x. 21 ; Luke xvi. 19—31 ; 1 John iii. 17 ; Jas. ii. 6, 13 ; v. 1—4.) To 
call Christ " Lord, Lord," and then to disregard his injunctions, will be of no use. Note : 
Here are three lessons urgently calling for enforcement. 1. Let the agnostic and 
positivist, who are calling out for a religion that means " living for otheis," see if they 
have not here the religion for which they call, and which is only waiting for its 
professors to act up to it, to revolutionize the world. 2. Let but the spirit of the text 
inspire man universally, and all struggles and alienation between class and clasB would 
forthwith cease. 3. Let some who have given disproportionate attention to doctrine, 
and who have paid toi little heed to life and love, aim at a readjustment. We want 
doctrine and life ; not one without the other. 4. Let Christian Churches learn that if 
they would commend themselves to the age, they must live to serve the age, by holy 
thought, pure living, and manifested love I 5. Let us thank God with all our hearts 
for the ameliorating influence on the lot of man, of this Divine command to care for 
others; e.g. homes, refuges, hospitals, etc. — 0. 

Vers. 4, 10. — 111 treated by man, he fleet to Ood. (Cf. homilies on Pss. riL, xvii. 
div. II., xxvi. div. III., xxxix. div. I. 4.) — 0. 

Vers. 5 — 9. — David suffers from the hirshness and treachery of men. (Cf. homilies 
on Pss. xii., xvii. div. I., xxvi. div. II.) — C, 

Ver. 9. — Here is an instance of very special treachery, which would be regarded as 
black indeed in the light of Oriental hospitality. Yet he who was in all points tempted 
like as we are, endured treachery viler still. To this reference is made in John xiii. 
18. The note of Bishop Perowne hereon is so truly helpful, that we quote it in full 
below.' — C. 

' " The Oriental feeling as to the saoredness of hospitality would stamp such oonduct with 
peculiar blackness. If David wrote the psalm, the ingraiitude was worse, because of the 
honour conferred on one who was admitted to the king's t ible (2 Sam. ix. 10, ff, ; 1 Kings 
xviii. 19 ; 2 Kings xxv. 29). Part of tliis verse is quoted by our Lord in John xiii. 18, as 
applioahli' to the treacliprous conduct of Judas, but with the si<;nificant omission of the 
words, ' Mine own familiar friend, whom I trusted; ' for our Lord knew what was in Judas 
from the beginning, and therefore did not trust him. Nothing can be more decisive, both 
as to tlie way in whioli quotations wore made, and also as to the proper interpretation of 
the a; piuently strong plirase, 'Iva. ri ypa(j)ii ir\ripa9xj, with which the quotation is introduced. 
First, it is plain that particular expressions in a psalm may I'C applicable to events which 
befell our Lord, whilst the whole psalm is not in like manner applicable. And next, it is 
evident that ' the Scripture is fulfilled,' not merely when a prediction receives its accom- 
pliehment, but when words, descriptive of certain circumstances in the life of the Old 
Tf'stampnt saints, find a still fuller and truer ipalizati-in — one not foreseen by the psalniist.. 



PB. XLi. 1—18.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 827 

Vers. 10 — 12. — He prarp against his enemies. (Of. homily on Ps. xxxv.)— 0. 

Ver. 13. — Z%e doxology of the Hebrew Church. This doxology does not appear to be 
a part of the psalm to which it is annexed. The Psalms are divided into five books. 
The first book closes with the forty-first psalm. In all probability this was the earliest 
portion of the songs of the Hebrew sanctuary ; and when made up (as we should say) 
into a volume, the collator added thereto a doxology — as was done also at the end of 
Pss. Ixxii., Ixxxix., and cvi. Perhaps the omission of any doxology after Ps. cl. is 
because that psalm is entirely one of praise. We have no information as to the name 
of the collator, nor as to the date at which this first division of the Psalms was made 
up, and the doxology appended thereto. But, nevertheless, it is of no small interest, 
and ought to convey no mean instruction ; showing us, as it does, most strikingly what 
Jubilation resulted from revelation. In pagan worship there is no delight in God ; 
there is dread, there is homage to greatness, there is even thankfulness for a good 
harvest ; but as for delight in God as God, there is none, and can be none, save where 
God has revealed himself; nor can there be any delight in adoring the Unknown, nor 
in the positivist's worship of humanity. Eeligious worship, as glad and jubilant, 
belongs only to those to whom God is known ; paganism, whether in ancient or 
modern days, knows no such songs of delight or ascriptioni of loving praise as those 
which rise up from the lips and hearts of the saints of God. 

L God, ab thb revealed God of cue salvation, is the fitting object op 
GLADSOME SONG. The declared name of God would yield delight to pious souls (Bxod. 
xxxiv. 6, 7). The various terms added to the covenant name Jehovah show how the 
saints rejoiced in God : Jehovah-jireh, Jehovah-rophi, Jehovah-nissi, Jehovah-tsidkenu. 
Many expressione in the Psalms show what God was to his people^Rock, Fortress, 
Light, Strength, Eefuge, their exceeding Joy, their Deliverer, their Sun, their Shield, 
(itying as a father, gentle and comforting as a mother, One who put beneath his people 
"everlasting arms." Well might their joy rise to songs of rapturous delight — as in 
Deut. xxxii. 26 — 29. This joy in God would arise (1) from what Ood is in himself 
— as a God of power, wisdom, loving-kindness, faithfulness, pity, and love ; and also (2) 
from what he declared himself to he as Israel's Ood — giving pardon, help, strength, 
guidance, light, salvation. And now that, through the larger Scriptures, through the 
Person of Christ, and through the baptism of the Holy Ghost, our knowledge is so 
much the larger, our joy shotild be proportionately greater, and our songs the louder 
and sweeter, rising to such heights as Eph. iii. 20, 21 ; 1 Pet. i. 3 — 5 ; Rev. i. 6, 6 ; 
V. 9—13 ; vii. 10 ; xv. 3. 

n. The oladbome praise of the saints is the befitting response to GoD'h 
REVELATION OF HIMSELF. " Blessed be," etc. Here believers have a changeless Object 
of delight. " From everlasting to everlasting." " The same yesterday, and to-day, and 
for ever." The response of believers to the revelation of so glorious a Being may be 
looked at in two ways. 1. As that which Ood desires to evoke by revealing himself. 
God, being love, yearns to be loved. Divine love yearns for its object to respond, even 
as our need yearns for a Being to meet that need. 2. With the Divine revelation of 
himself there is a power working in and on human souls, whereby sttch response is 
elicited. A mighty host of believers, whom their God has rescued from darkness and 
death, are now exulting in songs of praise to the God of their salvation, acknowledging 
that all good is from him, that all their trust is reposed on him, that all their love 
centres round him, that all their strength is derived from him, and that all their hopes 
are fixed on him ; they know that he will never leave them nor forsake them. Yea, it is 
the revelation of a redeeming God to which we owe the happiest hearts, the noblest 
songs, the grandest music, and the highest inspiration. And this song will never 

yet one no less designed of God — ^in the oiroumstanoes of our Lord's earthly life. This 
will be peculiarly the case here if Ahithophel be meant ; for as David was in much of his 
life a type of Christ, so the treachery of his trusted counsellor would be a foreshadowing of 
the treachery of Judas. The rendering in John xiii., 'O TpdryoiD /le-r' ifiov rhv iprov, iiriipfp 
4'm' ifii riiv vripvav axnov, is independent of the LXX., who have here more literally, 
intyiXvvfv in' ifih itrefvurtUv. The Hebrew phrase is, 'hath made great his heel,' which 
may either mean, • he hath lifted it up on high, so as to trample on the object of attack,' or. 
' has given a hard, violent blow with it ' " 



328 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xu. 1—13. 

die. First on earth, and then in heaven, the sacred will ascribe all honour to their 
God ; while the vast redeemed host will never cease to add their grano " Amen." • — C. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — QocPa poor. There may be a good time coming, when the poor will 
cease out of the land ; but it is not yet. The state of things in our day is much the 
same as in the past (Deut. xv. 11 ; Mark xiv. 3). God has always shown his care for 
the poor. Under the Law of Moses, special provisions were made for their help (cf. 
Deut. XT. 7 — 11). Besides this, there were manifold exhortations in the Psalms and 
prophets tending to foster a spirit of love and brotherhood. The duty of kindness to 
the poor is inculcated still more clearly and forcibly under the sospel. The Jews are 
remarkable for their charities, but they limit tlieir care chiefly to their own poor. 
Christians are called to act in a more generous spirit. While we are bound to have 
special regard to the poor of our own blood and faith, we must not restrict our charity 
to them ; but " do good to all " as we have opportunity, after the example and teaching 
of our blessed Lord. We may make use of this psalm to illustrate — 

L The duty op oarino fob the poor. (Ver. 1.) "Considereth," This impliei 
thought, insight, and practical brotherly kindness. The very fact that there are so 
miiny "poor" should arrest our attention. Surely there must be great wrong some- 
where, or there could not be such inequalities and miseries. The more closely we 
look into the matter, the more will it be impressed upon us that we are bound to take 
part in remedying the evil. Circumstances and needs vary. Indiscriminate charity 
is bad. We cannot relieve all. Our powers are limited. We need, therefore, to act 
circumspectly. But whatever we do should be done in the spirit of love. Consider- 
ation without sympathy is torture (Jas. ii. 15, 16 ; 1 John iii. 17 ; Bom. xii. 10). 

IL The blessinq promised. 1. The blessing is first to the man himself. We 
cannot do good without being the better for it. Every act of true self-denial and 
love raises us in dignity and strength. We are " blessed in our deed " (Jas. L 25 — 
27). 2. There is also the blessing of the poor. We have helped them in the time of 
need. They feel that they have not been forsaken. They have still brothers and 
sisters who care for them, and they are grateful. It is better to have the confidence 
of the poor than their contempt ; their gratitude than their hate ; their prayers than 
their curses. Bemember Job (Job xxix. 12). 3. Besides all this, there is the blessing 
of God. He is the God of the poor. He marks their state. He defends their rights. 
He provides for their relief. He counts what is done to them as if it were done to 
himself. The law and order of God in the world secure that a blessing will surely 
come to him who " considereth the poor." 

III. The difficulties and encoubaoements. We have not only the abstract, 
but the concrete. The doctrine is translated into fact. It seems as if the psalmist 
had been bringing the word home. Let each of us put himself in his place. Then 
we may not only consider the poor, but consider ourselves with regard to the poor. 
What are we, what have we done, and what has been the result ? In this case there 
will be : 1. Consciousness of great shortcomings in love and duty. We have not done 
what we could, and what we have done we have done weakly and imperfectly. Pride 
and vanity and other unlovely things have mixed themselves with our best endeavours. 
Men may praise us, but before God we are grievous sinners. 2. There will also be 
disappointments. We should " do good, hoping for nothing again ; " but few of us are 
so disinterested. Besides, it is reasonable to consider results. Perhaps we have 
" enemies," who misrepresent what we do. Or, worse still, there may be people who 
come to us in the guise of friendship, and profess to inquire as to what we have done — 
as to our plans and endeavours, and, finding out the secrets of our life, turn their 
knowledge to base uses. Instead of truth, they spread falsehoods. Instead of giving 
sympathy, they exaggerate our failures, and prate maliciously of our troubles. But 
there may be even a worse trial still. Our familiar friend, in whom we trusted, may 
turn against us (ver. 9). Amidst all such difBculties there is always encourage- 
r. ent. We turn to God, and find comfort. We know what he is, and what he would 

ve us to be. We know that he will surely perform hia word, and that if we are 

A very thoughtful homily by Mr. Conway, on what he calls "the much-neglected 
word, 'Amen,'" will be found in the volume of the 'Pulpit Commentary' on the 

Revelation. 



P8, XLi. 1—13.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 329 

true, and honestly try to do our duty towards others, and especially the poor, we shall 
in no wise lose our reward. 

Learn a lesson of humility, as we think of our own sins, and ill deserts ; of gratitude, 
when we remember God's goodness to ourselves; of charity, as we consider the evil 
case of many of our brethren, and their claim upon us, if we are of the same mind with 
Christ, to help them as we can. 

" The holy supper is kept indeed. 

In whatso we share with another's need ; 
Not what we give, but what we share, 
For the gift without the giver is bare. 
Who gives himself with his alms feeds three^ 
Himself, his hungering brother, and me." 

(Lowell.) 

W. F. 

Vers. 10 — 12, — Influence. This passage may suggest to us some thoughts as tu 
influence. We have all the power of influencing others for good or for evil. This is 
the necessary result of our being and relationships. Our chief influence will be upon 
those with whom we are most closely associated ; but we also influence others, often 
unconsciously. You cannot pay a visit, or reside for a short time in a district, without 
making some impression upon those you meet, and leaving them the better or the 
worse for having known you. There are differences as to the way people judge. 
Some over-estimate themselves. They have a high opinion of their own importance. 
You might think, from the way they talk, that the world could not get on without 
them. Others under-estimate themselves. They are poor, and think they can do 
nothing. They are modest and humble-minded, and set little value on what they can 
effect. Or it may be they have met with disappointments and reverses, and have lost 
hope. They have laboured in vain, and have not the heart to try again. It is well 
to remember that we have this awful power of influencing others, and while we confess 
our responsibility, we should be careful so to live and act as that our influence shall- 
be for good, and not for evil ; a blessing, and not a curse. How is this to be secured ? 

I. By living near to God. It is as God is merciful to us, and raises us up, bringing 
us nearer to himself, that we are able to " requite " others, not after the desire of our 
own evil hearts, but after the loving way of God (ver. 10; Matt. v. 45 — i8). Pray 
God, that he may set you " before his face " (ver. 13), and then as you receive his 
grace, you will reflect his goodness ; as you rejoice in the liglit of his presence, you 
will bring sunshine into many a shady place, and hope to many a troubled heart. 

II. By having a high btandakd of duty. We must not make custom, or con- 
venience, or the etiquette of the world, our rule, but we must learn the " perfect will 
of God " from Christ. The more loyal we are to our highest ideals, the more shall 
we gain of moral force, and the greater will be our power of doing good to others. 
Character settles influence. It is the salt that is good, and not the salt that has lost 
its savour, that is fit for use. It is the man who has the Spirit of Christ, and not the 
man who minds earthly things, who is the greatest force in the world. How weak 
was Lot as compared with Abraham ! 

III. By doing oub work faithfully in que several places. People are 
influenced more by what others do than by what they say. Example is better than 
precept. If there be a man of undoubted " integrity," he is not only respected, but 
his daily life has a salutary effect upon those with whom he is associated. It is the 
man we trust that we are disposed to follow. How many are there who do their 
duty quietly and unobtrusively, and who are never heard of far ironi home, who yet 
prove a blessing in the society with which they are connected I Their lives are 
prayers towards God, and powers for good towards men. Virtue goes out of them, 
even when they know it not. God's favour is upon them, and they grow in favour 
with men. 

IV. By cultivation of the bfibit of brotherly kindness and lovb. Much 
depends upon the spirit that is in us, because our spirit determines our actions, and 
our actions are seen of men, and have their effect upon their minds. If we are proud 
nud .selSsh we cannot win the hearts of others. But if we are self-forgetful and kind, 



830 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. XLII. 1 — H. 



our influence will be beneficial. There are some who try to do good, but hold them- 
selves aloof, and their efforts are of little avail. Let us strive, therefore, to follow 
Christ (John xiii. 12 — 15) humbly, lovingly, patiently, doing good as we hav« 
opportunity, and, above all, living ourselves according to the law of godliness, and let 
us leave results witli God. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — The aggravation and consolation of bodily affliction. Written by 
some mighty man, probably by David, on his recovery from an affliction during which 
conspiracy and slander bad been active against him. It may refer to the time of 
Absalom ; and the " familiar friend " may have been AMthophel. 

L The AGGEAVATI0N8 OP BODiLT AFFLICTION. 1. The oonsdousnets of guHt. (Ver. 
4.) But he was penitent, and prayed for forgiveness and spiritual healing. 2, The 
malicious conduct of enemies and false friends. (Vers. 5 — 9.) At a time when we 
are little able to contend against them. 

IL The consolations of affliction. 1. ITiat he had himself sympathized with 
sufferers. (Ver. 1.) He had not been like the enemies and false frieads whom he 
describes, but bad been a tme friend to the weak and afQicted. 2. He is assured on 
this account of the Divine sympathy and deliverance. (Vers. 1 — 3.) The mercifiil are 
blessed,, in receiving mercy. 3. He has already received tokens of the deliverance for 
which he is looking. (Vers. 11, 12.) His enemy has not triumphed over him. God 
has upheld him in general right conduct, or integrity. He does not forget hi8 
particular sins (ver. 4) ; but he is conscious also of living in the sight of the Divine 
countenance, and receiving Divine help. — S. 



BOOK II. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XLH 
Tbu psalm, committed (like so many other*) 
to the precentor, or chief musician, for its 
mnsical setting, is entitled " Maschil of the 
sons of Korah" — i.e. an "instruction," or 
didactic ps^ilm, composed by the Korahite 
Levites — a Levitical family of singers (1 
Chron. xxvi. 1, 2 ; 2 Oliron. xx. 19). To the 
same family are assigned Pss. xlv. — xlix. in 
the present book, and Pss. Ixxxiv., Ixxxv., 
Ixxxvii., and Ixxxviil. in Book III. The 
composition, though assigned by some to 
the commencement of the Babylonian Cap- 
tivity (Four Friends, p. 168), belongs more 
probably to the time of David, and the 
words seem put by the anthor into the mouth 
of David himself. The date of the composi- 
tion is probably the year of David's flight 
&om Jerusalem on the revolt of Absalom 
(2 Sam. XV. 16), when he spent some months 
in the Trans-Jordanio territory, chiefly at 
Mahanaim (2 Sum. xvii. 24 ; xix. 32). The 



psalm is chiefly an ontponrlng of sorrow and 
complaint; but still is an "instruction," 
inasmuch as it teaches the lesson that in the 
deepest gulf of sorrow (ver. 7) the soul may 
still turn to God, and rest itself in hope on 
him (vers. 5, 8, 12). 

There is an intimate union between this 
psalm and the next, which is a sort of 
additional stanza, terminating in the same 
refrain (oomp. Ps. xliii. 5 with Ps. xlii. 5 
and 11). 

Ver. 1.— As the hart panteth after the 
water-brooks. Stags and hinds neeil abun- 
dant water, especially in hot countries, and, 
in time of drought, may be said, with a slight 
poetical licence, to " pant," or " oiy " (Joel 
i. 20) for it. They are still found in Pales- 
tine (Tristram, «Land of Israel,' pp. 418, 
447), though rather scarce. So panteth my 
soul after thee, God. The "panting" of 
the soul does not mean any physical action, 
but a longing desire for a blessing that is, 
at Buy rate for a time, withheld. 

Ver. 2. — My soul thirsteth for God (comp 



PS. XLII. 1 11.] 



THE BOOK OF PdALMS. 



331 



Pss. Ixiii. 1; oxliii. 6; Isa. Ir. 1). The 
derout soul is always athirst for God. Dayid 
felt his severance from the tabernacle and 
its services as a sort of severance from 
God himself, whom he was accustomed to 
approach through the services of the 
sanctuary (see 2 Sam. iv. 25, 26). For the 
Uving God. This title of God occurs only 
in one other psalm (Ps. Ixxxiv. 2) ; but it 
was a title familiar to David (1 Sam. xvii. 
27). It is first used in Deut. v. 26; and, 
later, in Josh. lit. 10 ; 2 Kings xix. 4, 16 ; 
Isa. xxxvii. 4, 17 ; Jer. x. 10 ; xxiii. 36 ; 
Dan. vi. 26 ; Hos. 1. 10. It expresses that 
essential attribute of (jod that lie is "the 
eternal Life " (1 John v. 20), the Source and 
Oiigin of all life, whether angelic, human, 
or animal. When shall I come and appear 
before God 'i Appearance in the tabernacle 
must here be specially meant, but with this 
David connects hia return to God's favour 
and to the light of his countenance (2 Sam. 
XV. 25). 

Ver. 3. — My tears have been my meat day 
and night, while they continually say unto 
me, Where is thy God t (comp. Fb. Ixxx. 9, 
" Thou feedest them with the bread of 
teari; " and Ovid, ' Metaph.,' x. 288, " Cum 
dolorque animi, lachryinseque, alimenta 
fuere" — "They who grieve deeply do not eat; 
they only weep; " yet they live on, so that 
their tears appear to be their aliment). 
David's grief at being shut oat from God's 
presence is intensified by the reproaches of 
his enemies, " Where is thy God ? " i.e. " la 
he not wholly gone from thee ? Has he not 
utterly oast thee off? " (comp. 2 Sam. xvi. 8). 

Yer. 4.— When I remember these things ; 
rather, these things I remember — the things 
remembered being those touched on in the 
rest of the verse — his former free access to 
tlie house of God, and habit of frequenting 
it, especially on festival occasions, when the 
multitude " kept holy day." " Deep sorrow," 
as Hengstenberg remarks, "tries to lose 
itself in the recollection of the happier past." 
I pour out my soul in me. "The heart 
pours itself out, or melts in any one, who is 
in a manner dissolved by grief and pain." 
David dots not alleviate his sorrow, but 
aggravates it, by thinking of the happy 
past. " Nessun maggior dolore che ricordarsi 
(li tempo felice nella raisevia " (Dante). For 

1 had gone (rather, how I weni) with the 
multitude, I went with them to the house 
of God, with the voice of joy and praise, 
with a multitude that kept holy day (comp. 

2 Sam. vi. 12—19). 

Ver. 5. — Why art thou oast down ? or, 
Why art thou bowed down 1 i.e. brought low 
— a term indicative of the very extreme of 
dejection. my bouL The spirit, or higher 
reason, rebukes the "soul," or passionate 
oaturc, for allowing itself tubesodeixosscd. 



and seeks to encourage and upraise it And 
why art thou so disquieted in me ? rather. 
Why dost Ihoa make thy moan over me? 
literally, make a roaring noise like the sea 
(c(.mp. Ps. xlvi. 3 ; Jer. iv. 19 ; v. 22). Hope 
thou in God (comp. Pss. xxxiii. 22 ; xxxix. 
7, etc.). For I shall yet praise him fur the 
help of his countenance. Another reading 
assimilates the refrain here to the form 
which it takes in ver. 11 and in Ps. xliii. 5. 
But, as Henttstenberg observes, Hebrew 
poets, and indeed poets generally, avoid an 
absolute identity of phrase, even in refrains 
(see Pss. xxiv. 8, 10; xlix. 12, 20; Ivi. 4, 
11, etc.). 

Ver. 6. — my God, my soul is cast down 
within me ; or, bowed down, as in the first 
clause of ver. 5. Therefore will I remember 
thee. As a remedy for my depression, I will 
call thee to mind, and cast myself on thee. 
From the land of Jordan. From the place 
of my present abode — the Trans-Jordanio 
region — to which, on the revolt of Absalom, 
David had fied (2 Sam. xvii. 24). And of 
the Hermonites ; rather, and of the Hermons, 
This expression is not elsewhere used, and 
can only be explained conjeoturally. It 
probably means the mountain ranges which, 
starting from Hermon in the north, extend 
in a southerly direction down the entire 
Trans-Jordanio territory. From the hill 
Uizar. This name occurs nowhere else; 
and can be assigned to no special locality. 

Ver. 7. — Deep oalleth unto deep at the 
noise of thy waterspouts. Blow follows 
blow. Misfortunes " come not in single file, 
but in battalion!." The imagery may be 
taken from the local storms that visit tlie 
Trans-Jordanio territory (see Lynch, 'E.x- 
pedition to the Jordan and the Dead Sea; ' 
and Wilson, ' Negeb,' pp. 26, 27). All thy 
waves and thy billows are gone over me 
(comp. Pss. Ixix. 1, 2; Ixxxviii. 7, 17; 
oxliv. 7). 

Ver. 8. — Yet the Lord will command his 
loving-kindness in the daytime. Notwitli 
standing all these present woes, God will 
at some time " command " hia loviug-i>ind- 
nesB to make itself apparent (comp. Pss. 
xliv. 4 ; Ixviii. 28), and both " in the day- 
time " and in the night will so comfort me 
that his song shall be with me, and my 
prayer unto the God of my life ; i.e. I shall 
offer him both praise and prayer continually 
both day and night (Pa. xoii. 2) for his great 
mercies. 

Yer. 9. — I will say onto God my Beck 
(comp. Pss. xviii. 1; xxxi. 3). Why hast 
thou forgotten me ? (see the comment on 
Ps. xiii. 1). God does not forget even when 
he most seemj to forget (comp. Pss. iz. 12 ; 
xxxvii. 28). As the event showed, he had 
not now forgotten David (see 2 Sam. xix. 
9 — 40). Why go I mourning because lJ 



332 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. xi.ii. 1 — il. 



the oppression of the enemy? Why am I 
allowed to remain so long an exile, sorrowing 
and oppreBBed (comp. Ps. xliii. 2) ? Even 
to repentant sinners Gol's judgments are 
apt to seem too severe, loo much prolonged, 
too grievous. 

Ver. 10. — As with a sword in my hones, 
mine enemies reproach me. Tlie repioaohes 
of his enemies were as daggers struck into 
his bones ; or, according to others as blows 
that crushed his bones (LXX.). So keenly 
did he feel them. The worst of all was tliat 
they could say daily unto him, Where is thy 
■God ? What has become of him ? Has he 
wholly forsaken thee (see above, ver. 3) ? 



Ver. 11. — Why art thea cast down (or, 
bowed down), my soul I and why art thou 
disquieted within me ? hope thou in God : 
for I shall yet praise him. Thus far ii 
identical with ver. 5 ; but what follows is 
slightly different : who is the health of my 
countenance, and my God, instead of " for 
the help (health ?) nf his eountenanae." Most 
commentators assimilate the text in ver. 5 
to that of the present verse, which can be 
effected by a mere alteration of the pointing ; 
but Hengstenberg, Kay, Professor Alex- 
ander, and others regard the variant forms 
as preferable. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — The intense longing of the soul after God. "My soul thirsteth," etc. 
Amid the trackless mountains and rugged valleys beyond Jordan, where the roaring 
torrents seem to answer one another from glen to glen, the heart of the pious exile 
turned with passionate yearning to the city and temple of God. It was, perhaps, as 
difficult for him to dissociate his deep spiritual yearning after God from the solemn 
and glorious services of the temple, as it is for us fully to realize the power and value 
of those services for an ancient believer. Remember that we, as Christians, have in 
Christ all that the Israelites had in the temple sacrifices and priesthood, and which he 
<;ould find nowhere else. Nevertheless, the central inspiration of these words is the 
intense longing of the heart and soul after God himself. 

I. This longing after God is the highest ArrEOTioN of which human natubb 
IS CAPABLE. It is BO, becausc fixed on the highest Object, and capable of lifting homan 
character to the highest level. What we love most both tests and moulds our 
character ; shows what we are, and makes us such. Ignoble, foul, false, and trivial 
objects degrade in proportion as tliey attract ; pure, noble, worthy objects of afieotion 
and pursuit elevate. Misdirected worship, therefore, degrades. The sincerity of the 
idolater's religious faith and feeling makes no amends for the degrading and polluting 
influence of his false creed. Heathendom offers the miserable choice of either the gross 
and even vicious and foul conceptions of God (or the gods) exemplified in Greek 
mythology and Hindu incarnations; or the shadowy, unreal, far-away ideas of philo- 
sophers, which inspire neither love nor worship, neither obedience nor trust. Contrast 
the psalmist's view of God — " the living God " (cf. Deut. xxxii. 40, not Revised 
Version). The Old Testament saint could not anticipate the full revelation of God in 
Clirist Jesus. But the books of Moses and history of Israel carried the personal revela- 
tion of God as far as was possible (before the Incarnation), except as supplemented by 
the teaching of the prophets. The Book of Psalms is filled and inspired with the con- 
templation of God, as thus known — the Creator, the Author of all life, whose glory filU 
the l]eavens, his goodness the earth, his tender mercies reaching even the lowest 
creamres; as the righteous Judge and Lawgiver, not of Israel merely, but mankind; 
the Holy One, eternally opposed to sin, yet pardoning the sinner freely ; the pitying 
Father, the onlv Refuge in trouble, the Hearer of prayer, the soul's true Portion. What 
does the gospel add ? The manifestation of God in Jesus Christ (Col. i. 19) ; and reife- 
lation of God's love (1 John iv. 9, 10). 

II. This thiest foe God ib God's own voice within the soul. The germ and 
capacity of this affection are inborn in our nature. Heathenism bears world-wide 
witness to men's longing for some kind of worship. But not worship o( the holy, 
wise, righteous, loving, infinite Creator. This is practically dead (Rom. i. 28). The 
majority, even in a (Christian land like this, live in careless forgetfulness of God; 
utterly indifferent ; others (as in France) hating the very name of God. The presence, 
therefore, of this overmastering desire after God implies an adequate cause to awaken 
?iijd maintain. No cause can be suggested but the Spirit of God quickening the 



PS. XLH, 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMA 833 

dead soul and changing enmity or indifference into love (John iii. 3, 6 ; 1 Cor. ii, 14 • 
Kom. V. 5). 

III. A SBAEOHINO TEST OP OHAEAOTBE AND OP SPIRITUAL LIFE IS THUS SUPPLIED. 

This experience is genuine, real, beyond all doubt. Therefore possible for us. With 
the full revelation of God in Christ, this affection ought to be both easier and mora 
intense. 7s it ours ? If not, why ? Is it from defective views of God ? From secret 
love of what is sinful, and so indifference or antipathy to perfect holiness ? Or, in many 
cases, neglect of meditation, study of God's Word, and communion with Christ ? Note, 
as caution : Some natures are far colder than others, incapable of the same spiritual 
ardour. There may be a quiet devotion, an undemonstrative but unswerving con- 
secration, which our Saviour accepts as the true evidence of love (John xiv. 21 ; zv. 14). 
But shall any real Christian be content without some experience of that love and 
longing of heart towards God, which can make a sanctuary in a desert solitude, and 
without which heaven itself would be no true temple ? 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Athirst for God. This is one of the most touching, pathetic, and 
beautiful of the Psalms. It is not possible to decide either its author or the time of its 
composition. Its tones are very much like the plaintive sounds from David's harp, 
whether or no he was its writer (but see homily on Fs. xliii.). Leaving untouched, 
owing to want of space, the historical and geographical matters suggested in the 
psalm,^ we shall devote ourselves entirely to the opening up of its deep pathos and 
spiritual fervour, so as to administer instruction and comfort to those saints of God 
who may even now be ready to say, " All thy waves and billows are gone over me," and 
from whom, for a while, the face of God seems to be hid. May they find help in tracing 
the experience of a like sufferer in the ancient days I 

I. Only the living God can satisfy thb obayingb op human bpibits. (Vers. 
If 2.) So the writer of Ps. Ixxxiv. 2. The words of Augustine are well known, 
declaring that our hearts want rest, and cannot find it till it is found in God. There 
are four lines of illustration along which this thought may be worked out. 1. In the 
heathen world. There are many Corneliuses longing for the Peters to come and tell 
them about God. The late Mrs. Porter, widow of a missionary at Madras, assured the 
writer that her husband and herself often came across instances of this sort, and said, 
" Oh, if Christian people did but know how men long after God, they surely would hasten 
to send them the news of his love 1 " ' This yearning after God shows itself in what is 
best in the several religions of the world. 2. In the worldly, even in Christian lands. 
Men thirst after riches, honour, rank, etc., and yet the raging thirst of the spirit remains 
imquenched. Some, indeed, may have suppressed the craving till it ceases to be felt. 
But such numbness of feeling is not to be confounded with satisfaction. At the moment 
we are writing, an Italian, named Succi, is making the experiment of going without food 
for forty days, having made similar attempts before, though for a shorter period. He 
declares that after the first week no desire for food is left. But, for all that, he is a 
shrivelling, starving man. Will any be so foolish as to mistake the absence of desire 
for food tor the satisfaction and sustenance of his nature ? So in spiritual things, a man 
may trifle with the yearnings of the Spirit, till the yearning ceases. But he wants God, 
fw all that I 3. In the awakened soul, when the first throbbings of the renewed life 
are felt, the desire after God becomes intelligent, clear, and strong ; the soul craves its 
■God, in whom alone it can find light, pardon, friendship, power, to the/«M extent of its 

• For suggested historic oircumstanoes, see Stanley's ' Sinai and Palestine,' ch. viii. § 6, 
also ix.and xi. ; for geographical elucidation, see Perowne's instructive notes ; for a refer- 
ence to the wonderful play of emotion in this and other psalms, see Irving^s introductory 
essay to Bishop Home on the Psalms ; Perowne's second chapter In his introduction on 
' The Use of the Psalter in the Church and by Individuals ; ' and the preface to Dr. Parker's 
" Psalter," in vol. xii. of his ' People's Bible|' although, as Dr. Parker confesses, he has left 
the Psalter " almost untouched," so far as exposition is concerned. 

' A touching illustration will be found in M. Godef s ' Commentaire sur I'Bvangile de 
St. Jean,' tome troisifeme, p. 17, deuxifeme edition : Paris and London ; and in the Engliah 
translation of the same, vol. ii. p. 277 (Clark). 



334 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlii. 1— 11 

longings. 4. In the experienced believer. Hu lias found God as his God, as hi« 
" exceeding Joy ; " but there are times in the experience of njany such when all that they 
have known aud realized of God's love seems like a dream of the past ; when the light 
of heaven is partially or even totally eclipsed. This may arise from bodily weakness, 
from overwhelming sorrows, or Irora mental and spiritual gloom. But let the cause be 
what it may, it is agony to the saint when he can neither see, nor feel, nor find his God 
(see Job xxiii. 3 — 10 ; also Ps. xxi. 1, and our notes thereon). 

II. At times of sorb depression, the believer lokgs for the joys of bygone 
DAYS. (Vers. 2, 4.) At the time when this psalm was penned, its waiter was unable 
to attend the house of God. He looked back to the time when he used to accompany 
the throng and to lead them in procession to the sanctuary. In those days, " the Lord 
loved the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob ; " and on many grounds 
the worship in the courts of Zion played a very large part in the spiritual delights of 
the saints. And though changes of circumstance and the advance of the Divine 
dispensations have altered to some extent the relations between temple worship and 
home life, yet even now it is a sore privation to be debarred from the fellowship of 
saints, especially when other causes of depression are active at the same time; for 
in such a case the saints are shut out from the public service when they are most 
dependent on its helpful aid. Note : Even so, it is far better to have the heart to g& 
and not be able, than to be able to go and not have the heart for it. 

III. The enemy often takes advantage of our times of special weakness. 
(Vers. 3, 10.) " They say daily unto me. Where is thy God ? " We know not wha 
these were that could be so intensely cruel to the psalmist when they vritnessed his 
woe. But he was not alone in his experience, tliough in detail the form of it with us 
may vary. 1. Very often the taunt of the unbeliever is equivalent to this, when we 
are pointed to the weaknesses and distresses of the Church, and asked — ^How can your 
Christianity be Divine, if this is allowed ? And in more private ways : 2. The evil one 
will take advantage of our moments of distress to insinuate racking doubts. Ko kindly 
considerations will ever lead the devil to refrain from tempting us because we are weak. 
He seized on the Master " when he was an hungred." " The disciple is not above hia 
Master, nor the servant above his Lord." 

IV. Still, the childlike heart must cry out, " God ! " (Vers. 1, 6, 9.) If 
the light of heaven is shut out, the soul will cry after it. There is a world of difference 
between the light being kept out because the eye is closed, and its being hidden behind 
a dense black cloud. And even if the strength is so feeble that the tongue cannot 
cry, " Father I " yet the heart will. We were once visiting a dear friend in sickness. She 
said, " I am so weak, I cannot think, I cannot pray, I cannot enjoy God at all." We 
said to her, " Your little Ada was very iU some time back, was she not ? " " Very." 
" Was she not too ill to speak to you ? " " Yes." " Did you love her less because she 
couldn't speak to you ? " " No ; I think I loved her more, if anything." Even so» 
when all that is possible is for the heart to yearn out, "0 my Godl" the loving 
relations between God and the saint are not for a moment disturbed. 

V. At the darkest moment, there is reasoning within reasoning. (Vers. 6,. 
11.) If there be any who have not passed through any such experience as that in this 
psalm, these words will be wonderfully uninteresting, if not unintelligible. They baffle 
the logic of the intellect; but the heart has a logic and an eloquence too, that are all 
its own. It is cast down, and yet chides itself lor being cast down. It caunot see God,, 
cannot feel him, yet knows he is there. It is in the depths, through billow after billow 
rolling over it, and yet at the very moment indulges in blessed memories and hopeful 
faith. Such are the mazes of the soul. It can scarce understand itself; but "He 
knoweth our frame," with all its complicated and vexing play of doubt and chiding, of 
hope and fear. 

VI. From a rift in the blaok cloud there is a gleam of sunshine. (Ver. 9.)' 
" The Lord will command his loving-kindness," etc. Then all is not lost. The saint 
may be " perplexed, yet not in despair ; persecuted, but not forsaken ; cast down, but 
not destroyed." Here is a fine group ol' words for a man to take upon his lips : 
" Jehovah ; " " loving-kindness in the daytime ; " " in the night, a song ; " " the God 
of my life." Downcast soul, take heart. If all these words are true, take heart. Th» 
eclipse will soon be over. He wliose face is as yet concealed will soon be revealed. 



P8. xLii. 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 335 

VII. For the whole of this moanino ckt is one continuous pbatbb. Though 
not every seatence is in orderly petition, yet the outgoing of the soul in this psalm is 
one prayer from beginning to eud. And however broken the prayer may be, it is real, 
it is intense, it is wrung out of the necessities of a living soul. And such a prayer, 
with all its ruggedness and brokenness, is infinitely better than one of those orderly, 
cold, lukewarm petitions which come from no suffering, and cry for no relief. Far 
better to hear a man who prays as if he had something to pray for, than one who prays 
as if he must pray for something. For note : Those who have gone down to the 
lowest depths in suffering and humiliation will be led up to tbe noblest heights of glad- 
ness and of honour. Our God never did, never will, never can, desert the soul that 
leans on him. We are never in a surer or safer position than when, deep in sorrow and 
care, deserted by friends, slighted by neighbours, taunted by foes, we, in loneliness of 
spirit, look up to God, and to God alone. Who shall separate us from his love ? Let 
our earthly sorrows now be what they may — 

" He who has loved us bears us through. 
And makes us more than conquerors too I " 

a 

Vers. 1 — ^11. — Spiritual depression. The scene of this psalm seems to have been on 
the other side of Jordan, near the shining heights of Hermon. Here we may imagine 
the writer, probably a Hebrew exile, siraining his eyes to catch a glimpse of the dear 
land of his fathers that was soon to pass from his sight. To him it seemed as if to be 
separated from Jerusalem was to be separated from God ; as if losing the fellowship of 
the saints were losing God. The hart panting for the water-brooks imaged the grief 
of his heart athirst after God. The Jordan with its winding rapids, " deep calling unto 
deep," reflected the tumults of his soul, and reminded him of his distance from home 
and from the house of God. But he encourages himself by meditation and prayer, 
and the hope of better times. We may take the psalm as a picture of spiritual 
depression. 

L The godly man oast down. His trouble does not arise from outward causes ; 
it is within, it is from the absence of God. There were still faith, affection, the going 
forth of his whole being toward God in love and desire ; but there seemed to be no 
response. Like the hart, hard pressed by the hunters, " the big tears rolling from his 
eyes, and the moisture standing black upon his side," and panting for the water-brooks, 
hia soul thirsted, but thirsted in vain, for God. His sorrows were increased by the 
taunts of scoffers and the remembrance of happier times (vers. 3, 4). Repulsed on all 
sides and lonely, and feeling as if God had forsaken him, he is in sore trouble, and his 
own heart sadly echoes the cry of his enemies, " Where is now thy God ? " Such 
experiences are not uncommon. We all know what it is to " thirst ; " but what do we 
thirst after ? Is it gain, or pleasure, or worldly honours, or such-like ? If so, our 
thirst will not be satisfied. But if we have been quickened by the Spirit, we cannot 
but thirst after God. He and he alone can supply our need and satisfy our hearts. 
And if we " thirst for God," let us remember that this implies far more than longing 
for outward ordinances and joys which for a season we have lost. We are persons, and 
want a personal God. We are living souls, and crave a living God. We love truth 
and justice and goodness, and therefore we cry after the eternal God, in whom all truth 
and justice and goodness dwell. There will come to us, as to others, times of trial, 
days of darkness, when God seems afar off and silent. But let us not be cast down 
with overmuch sorrow. " The feeling of forsakenness is no proof of being forsaken. 
Mourning an absent God is an evidence of love as strong as rejoicing in a present one." 
With God, for us to desire is to have ; and to hunger and thirst is to be filled. 

II. The GODLY MAN COMFORTED. "Why?" This question is first of all addressed 
to the soul. There is self-interrogation. This is good. When we ask, " Why ? " this 
gets us to inquire as to the reason of things. Light will arise. We may see that the 
cause of depression is not in God, but in ourselves. For us to abide in this state is 
unreasonable, contrary to our past experiences, and inconsistent with God's mercy and 
truth. We can therefore call upon ourselves to cast out fear, and still to hope in Ood 
as our God and our Kedeemer. But though something has been gained in this way, u 
is not enough. Old foes rise up, and beat down the soul into the deep waters, wheie 



U6 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xm. 1—11 

the tumult drowns the voice of mercy, and the billows rising higher and higher threaten 
MS with total engulfment. The cry now takes a nobler form. It is not to the soul, 
but to God (ver. 6). Mark that there is hope. This points to coming good. Further, 
it is hc^e in God. This gives rest. Our own feelings vary. We cannot get comfort 
from them. Neither can we rely upon past experiences. We may deceive ourselves. 
Nor can we of ourselves change the circumstances which cause us pain. But the 
living G-od is a sure Befuge. He cannot change. He is more stable than the everlasting 
hills. This hope in God also opens up to us a way from the darkness into the bright 
future. " I shall yet praise him." At last it rises to full assurance, and the joy of 
inviolable and everlasting possession, " My God." — W. F. 

Ver. 6. — " TJie hill Mizar." Association is a potent factor in life. Here it may 
have worked by contrast. " Mizar," as a little hill, may have called to the mind of 
David, in exile, the mountains of Judah, and the far-ofi land of his fathers and his God. 
We may take " Mizar " to illustrate — 

I. The ohanobs op life. As with David, so with us, changes come. We may 
have rest or be compelled to wander. We may have the joys of home or we may be 
doomed to solitude and to exile. Wherever we are, let us " remember " God (Ps. Ivi. 8 ; 
Dan. ix. 3, 4). 

II. The KBSTrNG-PLACBS OP LiPB. We may be weary and sad, but God is able to 
give us comfort. Seated on some " Mizar," we may rest and be thankful. Looking 
back, there is much to awaken, not only our penitence, but our praise. Looking on, 
there is much to inspire us with hope. There are heights before us to be won. Let us 
press on with renewed courage. 

III. The baobed memories op lips. The noblest and most inspiring associations 
are those connected with God. Jacob had Bethel, Moses had the burning busli, 
Daniel the lions' den. So we too may have our holy places, to remember with gratitude 
and love and hope. The thought of what God has been to us leads us to remember 
what we should be to God. Fast kindnesses and deliverances assure us of continued 
favour. Let us walk worthy of our high calling. 

IV. The UNDTHsro hopes op life. Whatever happens, God is with us. He does 
not change. His purposes and his love are the same now as in the past. From our 
" Mizar " let us say, " I will remember thee." Thus " Mizar " may be to us as " the 
Delectable Mountains " to the pilgrims, and though it be little in itself, by faith it may 
enable us to gaze upon the way before us with hope, and to gain glimpses of the glorious 
land which, though far off, is yet near, where we shall see the King in his beauty, and 
serve him in love for ever and ever. 



** Not backward are our glances bent, 
But onward to our Father's honse." 



W.F. 



Ver. 1 — ^Ps. xliii. 5. — Eemonstranee of the spiritual man against the natural man. 
Supposed to be written by some king or priest on his way into exile, perhaps somewhere 
in the region of Mount Hermon. It is the remonstrance of the spiritual man within 
him against the despondency of the natural man. 

I. The causes op his despondency, 1. An unsatisfied longing/or God. He was 
being carried away from the temple to a land of heathen idolaters, and this aroused in 
him an intense longing for some manifestation of God which should deliver him iirom 
such a calamity. As the hunted stag pants for the watercourses, so he pants for the 
living God. 2, His enemies r&proaxih him with leing forsaJeen of God. (Ver. 3.) And 
he can only answer them with tears. His adverse circumstances seem to warrant the 
reproach ; for he sees no prospect at present of a Divine deliverance. They were like 
Job's comforters. Spiritual calamity the greatest of all calamities. 3. He remembers 
with anguish the religious privileges he has lost. (Ver. 4.) In former days he bad gene 
up with the pilgrim-processions to worship at Jerusalem, to keep holy day ; and now he 
was going in a Tory different procession away from Jerusalem, as a captive to Babylon, 
and he is filled with bitter sorrow. Worship and fellowship with Qod the very ur 
that he breathed. 



P8. XLIII. 1 5.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



837 



II. How HE ATTBMPTS TO CONQUER HIS DBSPONDENOT. 1. .h the repeated question 
" Whyf" he remonstrates with himself /or yielding to it. As if it was only his lower 
self that was giving way, his higher self was braving itself to courage and strength. 
2. He comforts himself with the everlasting resource of the soul. He hopes in God; for 
Grod is still the Health of his countenance and his God, who will show his loving- 
kindness in the open day o( his favour, and give him songs of praise in the night of 
adversity. This is a hope that springs into the highest regions of faith. 3. He antici- 
pates with assurance a time when he shall praise God for his deliverance. (Vers. 5, 11.) 
Here again is unconquerable faith, which refuses to believe that God will abandon him, 
though now he has lost the evidence of his presence. Even Christ cried, " My God, my 
God, why hast thou forsaken me ? " — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XLin. 

The close connection of this psalm with the 
preceding has been already noticed (see the 
introduction to Pa. xlii.). We must not, 
however, suppose an accidental detachment. 
Bather Pb. xliii. is a supplementary stanza, 
added subsequently by the same or a dif- 
ferent writer. Being intended as a con- 
tinuation, the psalm has naturally no title. 

Ver. 1. — Judge me, Ood (comp. Ps. 
XXXV. 24). And plead my cause (so in Ps. 
XXXV. 1). God's intervention is asked in 
the struggle between David and his enemies, 
on the assumed ground that he is in the 
right, and not they. God will, of course, 
only interpose if this is so. Against an 
ungodly nation ; or, an unkind, unloeing 
nation. Tliough called 'p, as in Isa. i. 4, 
still Israel is meant. They were "un- 
loving," both towards God and towards 
tlieir king. deliver me from the deceitful 
and unjust man. Either Absalom or Ahi- 
thophel may be meant; or "man" may 
be used abstractedly for David's enemies 
generally. 

Ver. 2. — ^For thou art the God of my 
strength ; i.e. the God in whom is all my 
strength (Ps. xxviii. 7). Why dost thou 
oast me off 1 An equivalent to the "Why 
hast thou forgotten me?" of Ps. xlii. 9. 
Why go I mourning because of the oppres- 
cion of the enemy? Eepeated, with the 
variation of a single word, from Ps. xlii. 9. 

Ver. 3. — send out thy light and thy 
truth (Pss. xl. 11 ; Ivii. 3, where, however, 
" mercy (non) and truth " take the place of 
"light and truth"). Both words equally 
signify God's favour. Let them lejid me. 
As the pillar of fire and of the cloud led 



the Israelites into the promised land, so let 
God's "light and truth" now lead David 
back to Jerusalem and God's "holy hill 
of Zion." Let them bring me unto thy holy 
hill, and to thy tabernacles ; or, thy dwelU 
ing-pJace. In his exile it was David's most 
earnest desire to revisit the taberniiele 
which he had set up on Muunt Zion, where 
God's presence dwelt, and prayer was most 
acceptably offered (see 2 Sam. xv. 25 ; Ps. 
xlii. 2). He had made his being brought 
bauk to it a, test of the return of God's 
favour (2 Sam. xv. 25, 26). 

Ver. 1. — Then will I go unto the altar 6t 
God. As the special place where thanks- 
giving ought to be made, and sacrifice 
offered (see 2 Sam. vi. 17 ; 1 Chron. xvi. 1). 
Unto God my exceeding Joy ; literally, unto 
Ood the gladness of my exultation. Yea, 
upon the harp will I praise thee, God my 
God. The psalmist hag before him somA 
such scene as that depiol;ed in 2 Sam, vi, 
and 1 Ohron. xv. 25 — 29, where, amid 
shouts and singing and dancing, and " with 
sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and 
with cymbals, witii psalteries and harps," 
a joyful procession approached the taber- 
nacle, David himself taking part in it. 

Ver. 5. — Why art thou cast down, my 
soul? and why art thou disquieted withiit 
me t hope in Ood : for I shall yet praise him, 
who is the health of my countenance, and 
my God. The refrain of Ps. xlii. 11 is here 
repeated totidem verbis ; and the plaint of 
tlie exUed monarch is brought to an end. 
The burden of the refrain is hope and con- 
fidence. Notwithstanding the woes of the 
present, the writer has no doubt in respect 
of the future ; he will yet have occasion to 
"praise" God, whom he feels to be "hi$ 
God " — his Health and Salvation. 



HOMILBTIGS. 

Yer. 4. " Ood my exeeediiig Joy." As the Bible teems with thoughts which nevef 

would' have entered men's minds without Divine teaching, so also of feelings, which, 

PSALM3. • 



338 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xliii. 1—5. 



had they not heen real, men would never have aspired or pretendec to. Among these 
is til at " exceeding joy " in God which the text expresses (see margin). If it be true 
that " the fleshly heart is enmity against God," then this joy must be supernatural. 
But not ujinatural. Only because man is fallen can it ever be natwral to him to 
forget God, to be careless about his Maker. This joy is the returning of the heart to 
its original key-note. 

I. The EEAS0NABLENB88 OF THIS JOT. On account : 1. Of all that God is in him- 
self — his glorious perfection. 2. Of all that he is to us — to mankind ; to his people ; to 
each believer personally. " God, my God 1 " We can say this, as Christians, with 
fuller knowledge, more glorious warrant. " The God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." 

II. Hindrances to this jot. 1. Poor, unworthy thoughts of God. 2. Porgetful- 
ness, equivalent to temporary unhelief. 3. A murmuring, unthankful, discontented 
spirit, underrating our mercies and overrating or rebelling against our trials. 
4. Sin. 

III. Shall wb sat the babitt of this jot ? Let each one judge. At all events, 
its unspeakable desirableness. Both for the happiness and the usefulness of it ; a 
powerful motive to holiness ; a witness to others for God (Pss. xxxiv. 8 ; Ixvi. 16). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — God the salvation of the countenance ; or, a light heart makes a bright 
face. Dr. Binnie remarks, "The forty-second and forty-third [psalms] (which go 
together), were almost certainly written by the Korahites who accompanied David in 
his flight beyond the Jordan during Absalom's rebellion." * Nearly all modem critics 
consider that this and the preceding psalm formed originally but one.' So the simi- 
larity of Pss. xlii. 5, 11 and xliii. 5 would suggest. There is a variation between some 
of the expressions in the former and those in the latter ; but there is nothing in this 
psalm which needs elaborate explanation. There is, however, an expression in 
both of them, which contains in itself a doctrine of amazing depth, one of which 
thousands of living believers are perpetual illustrations and proofs, though, as a doctrine, 
it receives far too little notice. The doctrine is connecteii with the religion of the foot, 
and is this — that when Divine light shines in the soul of man, it will cause a radiance 
all its own to beam from the countenance ; that God is indeed the salvation of a 
man's features. An Irishman was once asked what made him look so happy after his 
conversion. "Oh," he said, "Christ lightens our hearts, and then he brightens our 
face." As Dickson quaintly remarks hereon, " As when the Lord withdraweth both 
the outward tokens of his favour and his inward consolation for a time, the counte- 
nance of the godly cannot but be heavy, cast down, and look sad, like a man that is 
sick ; so when God returneth to comfort and to own his own, either both inwardly and 
outwardly, or inwardly only, the man's face looketh cheerful : he is the health of my 
countenance."^ The Eev. Joseph Cook, of Boston, U.S., in a remarkable lecture on 
Solar Self-Culture, says, " There is only one form of culture that gives supremacy, 
and that is the form which produces the solar look ; and the solar look comes only 
from the Light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world. It may be incon- 
trovertibly proved, by the coolest induction from fixed natural law, that the highest 
culture must be that through which the solar look shines, and that this look is possible 
only when there exists in the soul glad self-surrender to the innermost holiest of 
Conscience. In that innermost holiest Christianity finds a personal Omnipotence."* 
We are all familiar enough, indeed, with the generally admitted fact that the face is 

' ' The Psalms, their History, Teaching and Use,' by Wm. Binnie, D.D., new edit., 188S, 
p. 72. Dr. Binnie has a most interesting chapter on " David's Ordinances for the Service 
of Song," pp. 58—76. 

• ' Variorum Bible,' in loc. 

• ' A Brief Explanation of the Psalms,' by Rev. David Dickson. There is no date to the 
book, but the author died in 1662. His life, by Wodrow, is dated 1726. 

• ' Boston Monday Lectures,' by the Eev. Jos. Cook, 2nd series, pp. 148, et eeq. : 
Dickinson. 



rs. XMIL 1— 5.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 833 

an index of character, but the truths underlying that fact demand from ua closer 
attention than is sometimes given thereto. 

I. It is an obdinance of God, that in a way bitheb op mebot ob of judg- 
ment, THE FACE SHOULD BE THE INDEX OF THE SOUL. When Moses had been on the 
mount, communing with God, hia face shone. When Hannah had laid her burden 
before God, her countenance was no more sad. When Stephen was before the council, 
in the midst of hostile, angry men, his face was as the face of an angel. The late 
devout Samuel Martin, of Westminster, had a face so radiant through fellowship with 
God, that when a friend had called on him with Dean Stanley, the dean remarked 
afterwards, " I am glad you took me to call there ; I have seen the face of an angel." 
The truth that communion with God lights up the face is recognized by Dante, who, 
speaking of Beatrice, says — 

"... with Buoh gladness, that God's love 
Seem'd from her visage shining." 

(Carey's Dante, p. 497 : H. G. Bohn.) 

To work out this thought on its darker side would be as terrible as on its brighter 
side it is enchanting. How are some faces that once bid fair to be beautiful, spoilt by 
the de.ply graven lines of vice and crime 1 Our present theme puts before us, however, 
the brighter side, and it is one on which we may well love to linger. For note 
further — 

II. That the devout soul loves to commune vtith God. The whole of Pss. xlii. 
and xliii. shows us this. And the experience of believers is perpetually verifying this ; 
in prayer there is an upward look of the whole being. " Unto thee, Lord, do I 
lift vp my sovl ;" "Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God;" "I will lift up mine 
eyes to the liills." And in this uplooking of the man there is an entirely different 
set of mental and spiritual powers and energies at work than when the habit of looking 
downward or around, or even the habit of not looking at all, is in exercise. The soul 
is in communion with the best and dearest of Friends, enjoying a luxury of fellowship 
with which a stranger cannot intermeddle. 

III. When the soul thus communes with God, God sends his oifts down into 
THE SOUL. God reveals himself within, and makes us full of joy with his countenance; 
and in revealing himself he brings with him purity, peace, and power ; and when such 
privilege is realized, the outer discomforts of life are forgotten in a joy unspeakable 
and full of glory. The temptations of the evil one cease to have power when Q^d is 
near; the heaviest toil can be undertaken, and the weightiest cross be carried with 
cheerfulness and even with song; and since by the law of association we grow like 
those we love most, we, beholding the glory of the Lord, shall be changed into the 
same image, from glory to glory I 

IV. The effect of all this will be the salvation of the face. Such is 
the remarkable expression in Ps. xliii. 6 ; it is translated, " the health of my counte- 
nance ; " literally it is, " the salvation of my face." Even so Christ is — is now — the 
Saviour of the body, and in the emancipation of the spirit from sin he is redeeming 
the face from ignoble marks and traits. How often have we known a man's face 
marvellously changed at his conversion, not by evolution, but by regeneration. " He 
doesn't look like the same man ! " is an exclamation often heard. A well-known 
minister was converted while preaching. Such a radiance instantly shone into his 
face, that an enthusiastic Methodist jumped up and exclaimed, " The parson's con- 
verted 1 The parson's converted 1 " A brave Scotch soldier, whose countenance rarely 
wore a smile, and from whose lips never a word was heard as to his personal religion, 
suddenly beheld the glory of the words, " Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out J " and as suddenly radiance gleamed from his face, the padlock fell off his 
lips, and he exclaimed, " I've Christ by the hand 1 I've Christ by the hand ! " And 
in his second volume the Rev. J. G. Paton, writinj; of a convert from heathenism, 
says, " His once sullen countenance became literally bright with inner light " (p. 217). 
See also • Leaves from my Note-book,' by Rev. Wm. Haslam (1890), p. 99. All the 
spiritual gifts which God bestows— joy, peace, purity, strength — will find corresponding 
expression in the lines and features of the countenance, giving demonstrative evidence 
of the present power of Divine grace even over the body, and yielding no dim prophetic 



340 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. XLin. 1— 5. 



forecast of the day when Christ shall alte' *M fashion of our bodies of humiliation, and 
transform them to the fixed type of his Ww, ^ glory. Hence throughout the Book o\ 
Bevektion, the purity of the blessed is indicated by their being robed in white, i.e. 
not the whiteness of snow, but the brightness of the star. If even here, with such 
partial sanctification, the bodily ■?hange is so great, what will it be- when the purifying 
and glorifying processes are complete — when every soul will be full of love, and every 
{ace will be a perfect index of the soul ? How beautiful must faces be when perfect 
love is reflected therefrom 1 

V. The Subject is not only one of geeat dootbinal intkrest; it is also 
FBAUaHT with DEEP PBAOTJOAL siaNiFicANCE. 1. Let US Cultivate the habit of 
obiarvation, and make a religious study of the human face. The holiest men will 
never be mistaken for hardened atheists. 2. Let us each seek to realize the duty of 
letting the face speak for God. And it will, if we are constantly in talk wit^ God. 
His peace, his purity, his power, imparted to the soul within, will certainly make their 
mark without. 3. Let the young take care of their faces. God made them to be 
beautiful, not with that beauty which is no deeper than the skin, but with the ** beauty 
of holiness." Be true. Love and follow the right. Live to please God. In all your 
troubles speak to God. And your face will show the result; for God will be the 
" health of" your " countenance." Amen. — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 5. — Strengthening the heart in God. What Jonathan did for David when 
he went to him into the wood of Ziph, David does here for himself — he strengthens his 
heart in God (1 Sam. xxiii. 16). " Hope in God." We learn here that — 

I. Hope ib based on God's bevelation of himself. We only know God as he 
is pleased to make himself known to us. In his works and in his Word we find the 
same character. The lesson comes to us from all sides that God is true, and that his 
laws should be trusted. Therefore we feel safe in putting ourselves in line with his 
will ; in wholly surrendering ourselves to his guidance and keeping. Whatever may 
have been dark or dim in ancient days is now made clear in Christ. He hath revealed 
the Father. Therefore we say to our heart, " Hope in God." 

II, Hope is chabacteristio of the biohteous. We cannot hope in God till we 
are reconciled to God. Hope is not a chance thing, but born of faith. We cannot 
hope in God but as we are of the same mind with God. Hope is not an easy thing, 
but requires the putting forth of our own strength and will. " Like the highest forms 
of courage, it is a refusal to be borne down and cowed and depressed by evil — a refusal 
to indulge in the melancholy pleasure of looking and dwelling on the dark side of 
things." This is an achievement possible only to the righteous, who not only have 
faith in God, but are able to enlist imagination in aid of faith (Joel iii. 16 ; 
1 Pet. i. 21). 

m. Hope in God is essential to the bioht discipline of life. All kinda of 
trials come to us. There are troubles without aad fears within. There are mistakes 
we cannot correct, losses we cannot repair, evils to ourselves and others sore to see, but 
sorer still because they cannot be remedied. Enemies rise up against ns(ver. 1). Our 
hearts are ready to fail for fear, and " for looking after those things which are coming." 
What are we to do ? Shall we give way to despondency, and cry, like Jacob, " All 
these things are against me " ? or shall we let Hope have her perfect work in calming 
and sustaining our souls? The answer is clear, "Hope in God." Thus we gain 
strength (ver. 2) ; thus we secure guidance. God's good angels of " light " and 
" truth " will lead us in the right way (ver. 3). Thus our path will be onward and 
upward, nearer to the serene heights and the pure air of heaven, where all is peace 
and love (ver. 4). 

IV. Hope in God ib a bueb prophet op the good tdoe coming. Every hope is 
in a sense a prophecy. But often the prophecy is false. Bright gleams the vision in 
the distance, but nearer approach and closer scrutiny prove that it is a delusion and a 
snare. It is like the mirage, which leaves the desert all the barer and the gloomier 
when it fades into the light of common day. But it is otherwise with the Christian's 
hope. It is reaL It stands inquiry. It verifies itself by the moral effects which it 
produces. All the future, onward into the vast eternal spaces, is covered by it ; and 
every fulfilment is but the earnest and foreshadowing of the more perfect fulfilments yet 



P8. XLIV. 1 — 26.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMfc. 



341 



to come. " Christ in ns the Hope of glory I " " Thus living;, eternal life is begun in our 
hearts ; thus »nd thus only, under the teaching and moulding of the Divine Begene- 
rator of our nature, does the heavenly life in time anticipate and herald and prepare 
for, and, hlending with it, at last is lost in, the life of heaven for eternity " (Archer 
Butler).— W. P. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XLIV 
Turn date and occasion of this psalm are 
greatly disputed. Moat oritios, from Calvin 
to Hitzig, refer it to the times of the Mac- 
cabees. Others suggest the fourth or fifth 
century b.o. One (Tholuok) dates it in the 
reign of Jehoiaolnn. Hengstenberg and 
Canon Cook argue for the reign of David. 
The time of Jehoram (2 Chron. iii. 16, 17) 
and that of the defeat of Joslah (2 Chron. 
XXXV. 20 — ^24) have also been proposed as 
possible. The Davidio date receives a cer- 
tain amount of support from Ps. Ix., which 
is in the same tone, and resembles the pre- 
sent psalm in several expressions (oomp- 
Pss. Ix. 1 with xliv. 9 ; Ix. 10 with xliv. 9, 
10; Ix. 11 witb xliv. 26; etc.). It also har- 
monizes witii.the place of the psalm in tbe 
Psalter, and with its ascription to the " sons 
of Korah," who were certainly among David's 
musicians. 

The occasion of the psalm is some serious 
reverse which tbe Israelites had sustained 
in a war with foreign enemies, but who 
were the enemies, and when exactly the 
reverse was sustained, are uncertain. No 
doubt there were many temporary reverses 
in the course uf David's wars, after one of 
which the psalm may have been written. 

The psalm divides itself into four parts. 
In part i. (vers. 1 — 8) the writer recounts 
Ood's mercies in the past, and from them 
confidently concludes that effectual help 
will be granted in the present emergency. 
In part ii. (vers. 9 — 16) he describes the 
emergency Itself. In part iii. (vers. 17 — 22) 
he urges the fact that it had nut been 
brought about by any infidelity or rebellion 
on the part of his countrymen. And in 
part iv. (vers. 23 — 26) he makes his prayer 
for deliverance. 

The style is throughout simple, pure, and 
noble, possessing all the characteristics of 
the best period of Hebrew poetry 

Ver. 1. — We have heard with our ears, 
Sod, our fathers have told us, what work 



thou didst In their days, in the times of old. 
The Law required all Israelites to teach 
their children the past history of the nation, 
and especially the mercies win<'h had been 
vouchsafed to it (see Exod. x. 2 ; xii. 26, 27 ; 
xiii. 8, 10, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — How thou didst drive out the 
heathen with thy hand ; i.«. " by thy power." 
The conquest of Canaan is the historical fact 
referred to. And plantedst them (comp. Exod. 
XV. 17, "Thou wilt bring them in, and 
plant them in the mountain of thine in- 
heritance;" and see also Ps. Ixxx. 8, 
" Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt ; 
thou hast cast ont the heathen, and planted 
it"). How thou didst afBiot the people; 
rather, fS» peoples, i.e. the Canaanitish 
nations. And oast them out. So the LXX., 
the Vulgate, and even the Eevised Version. 
But most modems, understanding " them " 
of Israel, render, hut didst spread them out 
(comp. Ps. Ixxx. 11). 

Ver. 3. — For they got not the land in pos- 
session by their own sword, neither did their 
own arm save them (oomp. Josh. xxiv. 11, 
12): but thy right hand, and thine arm, 
and the light of thy countenance, because 
thou hadst a favour unto them (see Deut 
iv. 37, 38 J Josh. xxiv. 11, 18). 

Ver. 4.— Thou art my King, God ; lite- 
rally, thou art he that is my King, God ; 
l.e. I acknowledge no other king but thee, 
no other absolute lord and master. Com- 
Duud deliverances for Jacob. Being King, 
thou bast a right to command. We pray 
thee at this present time to command our 
deliverance. 

Ver. 5. — Through thee will we push down 
our enemies. Do as we ask — command our 
deliverance — and then we shall assuredly 
" push down," i.e. overthrow and prostrate, 
our enemies. Thy help will be found as 
effectual in tbe future as in the past. 
Through thy Name will we tread them 
under that rise up against ns. Having 
pushed our foes to tbe ground (comp. Deut. 
xxxiii. 17), we shall then be able to " tread 
them under." The imagery is drawn from 
the practice of buffaloes and wild bulls. 

Ver. 6. — For I will not trust in my bow, 
neither shall my sword save me (comp. 
ver. 3). My trust, i.e., shall not be in my- 
self, but in thee. The sword and the bow 
were the ordinary weapons of Israel. 

Ver. 7. — But thou hast saved us from our 
enemies ; or, dost save im. It is the voice of 



i!42 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. x^.r 1—26. 



confident hope that speaks, not that of grati- 
tude. And hast put them to shame that 
hated us ; rather, and puttest them to shame 
that hate u«. The writer is sure that God 
will do in the future as he has done in the 
past, and will raise Israel up again from 
the low estate into which they have been 
brought by disaster. 

Ver. 8. — In God we boast all the day 
long, and praise thy Name for ever. We 
boast of God as our God, who saves un, and 
puts to shame our enemies (see ver. 7). 

Vers, 9 — 16. — These verses form the 
second stanza, and are a loud and bitter 
complaint. God has recently dealt with 
Israel exceptionally — has seemed to " cast 
them off," has " put them to shame," allowed 
them to be defeated and despoiled, slain 
and carried into captivity, made a scorn and 
a derision, a reproach and a byword. He 
no longer "goes foith with their armies," 
to secure them victory over their foes, but 
holds aloof, and covers them with confusion. 
The description implies, not a single defeat, 
but a somewhat prolonged period of depres- 
sion, during which several " armies " have 
been beaten, several battles lost, multitudes 
slain, and great numbers carried away cap- 
tive (ver. 11). Still, a general captivity, 
like the Babylonian, is certainly not spoken 
of. The nation is as yet unconquered. It 
needs but a return of God's favour to turn 
the vanquished into the victors, and to 
replace shame by boasting. 

Ver. 9. — But thou hast cast off (oomp, 
Ps. xliii. 2) and put us to shame (see also 
ver. 16). It is the $hame of defeat, rather 
than the physical puins or material losses, 
that grieve the writer. And goest not forth 
with our armies. Israel has still " armies " 
at her disposal. It is therefore certainly 
not the early Maccabean period, nor the time 
of the expiring monarchy. Her armies have 
free play, are sent forth, only God does not 
" go forth " with them (comp. Ps. Ix. 10). 

Ver. 10. — Thou makest us to turn back 
from the enemy. Thou bringest it to pass 
that we turu our baoks in shameful flight 
from the enemy, either making a feeble 
resistance or none at all. And they which 
hate us spoil for themselves Spuil us of 
(lur arms and ornaments, whioli they seize 
ami appropriate. 

Ver. 11. — Thou hast given us like sheep 
appointed for meat. "As sheep for the 
shambles " (Kay) — a free translation, which 
well expresses the meaning. And h««t 
scattered us among the heathen. Either 
" caused us to disperse ourselves among our 



heathen neighbours," or "to be sold for 
slaves among them by our captors." No 
general disper.^ion of the nation is intended. 

Ver. 12.— Thou sellest thy people for 
nought ; literally, for not-wealth (comp. Jer. 
XV. 13). The whole people is regarded, not 
as sold for slaves, but as delivered over to 
the will of their enemies; and all "for 
nought," God gaining notliingin exchange. 
Thou dost not increase thy wealth by their 
price. A repetition for the sake of emphasis, 
but adding no new idea. 

Ver. 13. — Thou makest ns a reproach to 
our neighbours (comp. Pss. xlii. 10 ; Ixxix. 
4; Ixxx. 6). They would be reproached, 
not so much as cowards, or as weak and 
powerless themselves, but rather as having 
a weak and powerless God (comp. 2 Kings 
xviii. 33 — 35; xix. 12) A soom and a 
derision to them that are ronnd about ns. 
(For instances of the " scorn and derision " 
u hereto the Israelites were exposed at the 
hands of the heathen, see 2 Kings xviii. 23, 
24; xix. 23, 24; Neh. ii. 19; iv. 2, 3; 
Ps3. Ixxix. 4 ; cxxxvii. 7.) 

Ver. 14. — Thou makest us a byword among 
the heathen (comp. Job xvii. 6 ; Jer. xxir. 
9). A shaking of the head among the people ; 
rather, among the peoples (comp. Ps. xxii. 7). 

Ver. 15. — My confusion is continually 
before me, and the shame of my face hath 
covered me (see the comment on ver. 9). 

Ver. 16. — Tor the voice of him that re- 
proaoheth and blasphemeth. The reproaches 
of the heathen were most commonly " blas- 
phemies," since they consisted very mainly 
of contemptuous expressions against the 
God of Israel (see the comment on ver. 13 ; 
and comp. Isa. xxxvii. 3, 28). By reason 
of the enemy and avenger. The persons 
by whom the blasphemous reproaches were 
uttered — Israel's enemies bent on avenging 
former losses and defeats. 

Vers. 17 — 22.— In this third stanza the 
psalmist strongly emphasizes bis complaint 
by maintaining that the calamities from 
which they are suffering have not come upon 
the people through any fault of their own, 
or been in any way provoked or deserved, 
Heis, perhaps,over-oonfideut; but we cannot 
doubt that he is sincere in the belief, which 
he expresses, that the people, both before 
and during their calamities, have been 
obedient and faithful to God, wholly free 
from idolatry, and exemplary in their con- 
duct and life. There are not many periods 
of Israelite history at which such a descrip- 
tion could have been given without manifest 
untruth, and the time of David is certainly 
more suitable for it than almost any other. 



«i. XLiv. 1 — 26.] 



THE BOOK. OF PSALMS. 



343 



Ver. 17. — A'l this is oome upon ua; yet 
hare we not forgotten thee, neither have we 
dealt falsely in thy covenant. Israel )iad 
neither put nside the thought of religion, 
and given herself up to wordliness, nor yet, 
while still professedly religious, transgressed 
habitually God's commandments. She 
maintained " thorough sincerity in religion, 
and consistent integrity of life." Yet " all 
this " — all that has been described in vers. 
9 — 16 — had cnme upon her. 

Ver. 18.— Oar heart is not tnrned back ; 
i.e. turned away from God, as it was when 
they p.issed through the wilderness (Ps. 
Ixxviii. 41). Neither have our steps declined 
^om thy way. Neither in respect of inward 
feeling nor of outward act have we strayed 
from the right path. 

Ver. 19. — Thongh thon hast sore broken 
UB in the plaee of dragons; rather, in the 
place of iaekalt; i.e. in wild and desolate 
regions, where jackals abound (comp. Isa. 
xiii. 22 ; xxxiv. 13). The expression is 
probably used metaphorically. And covered 
us with the shadow of death. Brought us, 
i.e., into imminent peril of destruction (see 
vers. 10, 11). 

Yer. 20. — If we have forgotten the name 
of our Ood, or stretohed out (rather, spread 
oat) our hands to a strange god. If Israel 
had either forgotten the true God (see above, 
ver. 17) or fallen away to the worship of 
false or strange gods— then her ill success 
against her foreign enemies would have 
been fully accounted for, since it would 
only have been in accordance with the 
threatenings of the Law (Lev. xxvi. 14 — 
17 ; Deut, xxvlii. 15 — 23) ; but as she had 
done neither of these things, her defeats and 
depressed condition seemed to the psalmist 
wholly unaccountable. We trace here the 
game current belief, which comes out so 
strongly in the Book of Job — ^the belief that 
calamities were, almost of necessity, punish- 
ments for sin ; and that when they occurred, 
and there had been no known precedent 
misconduct, the case was abnormal and 
extraordinary. 

Ver. 21. — Shall not God search this out! 
i.e. visit for it — punisli it. Such a result 
was to bo expected. But when there had 
been no precedent idolatry, no neglect of 
the worship of Jehovah, what then? For 
he knoweth the secrets of the heart. Secret 
idolatry would, of course, explain the state 
of things; but the writer evidently knows 
of no secret idolatry. 

Ver. 22. — Yea, for thy sake are we killed 
all' the day long; or, continually, as the 
phrase is often translated. Not only are 
the Israelites not suffering on account of 
any previous desertion of God, or other mis- 



conduct, but they are suffering for their 
fidelity to God. The heathen hate them, 
and make war upon them, as worshippers 
of (ine exclusive God, Jehovah, and con- 
temners of their many gods, whom they 
hold to be " no-gods." They are martyrs, 
like the Chiistians of tlie early Church (see 
Bum. viii. 36). We are counted as sheep 
for the slaughter (comp. ver. 11). 

Vers. 23 — 26. — Tlie appeal to God is now 
made, after the case has been fully repre- 
sented. God has alsvays hitherto maintained 
the cause of his people, and given them 
victory over tlieir enemies, unless they had 
fallen away from him (vers. 1 — 8). Now 
he had acted otherwise — he has allowed 
their enemies to triumph (vers. 9 — 1 6). And 
they have given him no reason for his de- 
sertion of them (vers. 17 — 22). Surely, if 
they call upon him, and plead their cause 
before him, he will relent, and come to their 
aid. The appeal, therefore, is made briefly, 
but in the most moving terms. 

Ver. 23. — Awake, why sleepest then, 
Lord 1 The psalmist does not really believe 
that Jehovah " sleeps." The heathen might 
so imagine of their gods (1 Kings xviii. 27), 
but not an Israelite. An Israelite would be 
sure that "he that keepeth Israel neither 
slumbers nor sleeps " (Ps. cxxi. 4). The 
writer consciously uses an anthropomor- 
phism, really intending only to call ou Gk)d 
to rouse himself from his inaction, and lay 
it aside, and come to Israel's aid. Arise 
(see Fss. vii. 6; ix. 19; x. 12, etc.). Cast 
us not off for ever (comp. ver. 9). Under 
the existing peril, for God to oast off his 
people will be to cast them off for ever. 
They had no strength of their own that 
could save them. 

Ver. 24. — Wherefore hidest thou thy face t 
(comp. Pss. xiii. 1 ; xxvii. 9 ; Ixix. 17, etc.). 
And forgettest our afdiction and our oppres- 
sion 'i (see Pss. xiii. 1 ; Ixxiv. 19). 

Ver. 25. — For our soul is bowed down to 
the dust; i.e. brought very low, humbled 
as it were, to the earth, so weakened that it 
has no strength in it. Our belly cleaveth 
unto the earth. The body participates in 
the soul's depression, and lies prostrate on 
the ground. 

Ver. 26. — Arise for our help; literally, 
arise as a help unto us ; i.e. arise, and oome 
to our aid. Help against the enemy is the 
one object of the entire prayer. And redeem 
us; or, save us — "deliver us" (comp. Ps, 
XXV. 22). For thy mercies' sake (comp. Psi 
vi. i ; xxxi. 16). 



344 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xliv. 1— 26. 



H0MILETIC8. 

Ver. 1, — 2%e blessing of memory: a commemoration sermon. "We haTe heard," 
etc. Memory is the thread which binds life together. A failing memory is one of the 
saddest infirmities of old age. Yet there is often this compensation — that the long- 
distant past is well remembered. The old man forgets what weather it was yesterday, 
but the sunny birthdays and snowy Christmas Days of childhood live in his memory. 
The old house, the old faces and voices, the old joys and sorrows, the lessons that sank 
mto his heart in childhood are with him still. Suppose the reverse possible — that one 
had a clear memory of even the least occurrences of the last few weeks or months, but 
no memory of things long ago ; no associations clinging, binding him to old scenes, old 
friends; not so much as an old prejudice; — ^what a shallow, mechanical, uninteresting 
life his would bel There are common memories as well as individual; household 
words, family traditions, public and national history, sacred heritages of former 
generations. One of the most precious possessions of mankind is the £iowledge and 
remembrance of the past. 

I. Thb duty and benefit of beuembebino the past is taught in the most 
impressive way in the Bible. Its whole structure is historical. Alone among books, 
it professes to trace an unbroken line of family history from the first human being to 
the beginning of the Christian era ; ending in him who is " the same yesterday, and 
to-day, and for ever." Its deepest and greatest lessons are bound up with the lives, the 
examples, the prayers, the spiritual experience of men who loved and feared Gtoi 
thousands of years ago. What could make up for the loss, if we could forget the faith 
of Abraham, the Laws of Muses, the Psalms of David ? But the lives of these and 
other spiritual heroes are but links in the history of a great spiritual community — ^ths 
Church of God. Christians, St. Paul tells us, are children of Abraham. The gospel 
itself is history. Our Saviour consecrated this principle when be said, "Do this in 
remembrance of me." 

n. FOBaETFCLNEBB OF THE PAST UEAN3 laNOBANCE OF God'S DBAUNQB. HlS 

most wonderful works and glorious manifestations. The great law of God's creation, 
providence, and grace is that the present grows out of the past, and is the root and 
seed of the future. The watchword of modem philosophy, "evolution," has been 
used as a sort of conjuring word to get rid of God ; to show how the universe may 
dispense with a Creator. But Scripture is full of evolution in the truest and highest 
sense, viz. the unfolding of God's purpose, the development of Divine thought and 
love. " Evolution " means " unfolding " or " o«<-folding." Nothing can be unfolded 
that has not been folded up. The plan, order, beauty, unity, life, happiness, of thif 
wonderful universe could not be folded up in atoms of fiery gas, which after millions 
of years come out still as unchanged atoms of gas. They could lae folded up nowhere 
but in a mind able to see the end from the beginning, and in the beginning to prepare 
for every following step and stage. What is true of God's works in creation is true 
of his providential government of men and of nations ; and equally true of his grace 
(Eph. i. 4; iii. 9). 

III. PoBGBTFULNESs OF THB PAST 18 GBEAT iNGEATiTUDB. True, we Suffer for the 
faults and follies of our ancestors ; but they conquered for us a rich inheritance. Who 
can reckon what we owe to the men who invented letters, figures, the plough, the 
loom, the anvil, the ship? Where shouW we be to-day without the mariner's compass, 
the printing-press, the steam-engine? So in spiritual things. What do we owe to 
the evangelists for the four Gospels; to St. Paul and the other apostles for their 
Epistles; to the translators of the Scriptures; to reformers, preachers, sacred poets, 
writers? Ungrateful forgetfulnesa and consequent undervaluing of the past is one of 
the dangers and faults of our age. We are in little peril of the Chinese superstition — 
worshipping our ancestors. Men's eyes turn feverishly to the future. What is old 
ii set down as antiquated, obsolete, worn-out. In the wonderful movement, amazing 
discoveries, manifold progress of our day, we are apt to forget that our ancestors sowed, 
or at least ploughed, where we reap; and made the roads along which we travel, and 
the ladders by which we climb. If lacguiige, institutions, art, science, industry, had 
to make a fresh start with each sfneralioii, life would never rise above barbarism. 



rs. xLiv. 1—26.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 845 

Conclusion. There is a sense in which it is well to forget the past — ^its failures, 
so far as they would discourage; its achievements, so far as they would content uf 
(Phil. iii. 13, 14). We are not to dwell among the tombs; not to resemble a man 
carrying a looking-glass before him, which reflects only what is behind, and hides his 
patli ; but we are to converse with the past, that we may l<'arn thankfulness (Pa. 
ciii. 2), humility (Job xv. 7), courage (Jas. v. 17), wisdom (1 Cor. x. 11), faith and 
hope (Pss. Ixxvii. 10, 11 ; xlviii 14). 

Ver. 21. — Oo^s knowledge of men's hearts. " Shall not God search," etc. ? A world 
of perfect, mutual knowledge, in which the secrets of every heart lay open to every eye, 
must needs be either heaven or hell. Every one must be perfectly good or else 
perfectly miserable. In this world of mixed good and evil, God has mercifully buUt 
a wall of secrecy, or at least thrown a veil of privacy, around the consciousnesB of 
each one of us. Every heart has its own secrets. But the text reminds us that there 
is neither wall nor veil to God's eye, nor thinnest film of obscurity (Heb. iv. 13). 

I. God knows the secrets of the heart. 1. Our thoughts. How impenetrably 
these are veiled from our fellows ! Our feelings often betray themselves. They escape 
our control. A look, a change of colour, a start, an exclamation, a tremor, may 
discover them against our will. But our thoughts lie deeper. Words may be used 
not to express, but to conceal them. A man's outward conduct and apparent character 
may be such that if the habitual current of his inmost thoughts could be laid open, 
his nearest friends would stand aghast. But God knows. Thought may flash go 
swiftly through the mind, that we ourselves are scarcely aware of it ; but God sees. 
It may fade in a moment from the mirror of memory ; but God remembers. 2. Our 
feelings lie as open to God at our thoughts. They are often a mystery to ourselves, 
not to him. They surprise us by their sudden and unexpected character and power. 
They do not surprise him. They perplex us by their mixture of good and evil. All 
is plain to him. Our inmost springs of character lie under his hand as well as eye. 
He knows how to work in us both to will <md to do (Phil. ii. 13). 3. Our hidden 
future ; vmconscious capabilities, good or evil ; undeveloped possibilities. Examples : 
Jer. i. 5 — 9; 2 Kings viii. 13; Luks v. 2 — 10. Our sins (known or unknown to 
ourselves), and all our spiritual needs. Perhaps you have not felt your sins. But 
God takes account (Ps. xc. 8) ; knows your need of pardon (Isa. i. 18) ; knows your 
weakness, and need of grace (John xiii. 37, 38); knows your need of trial and 
discipline (Heb. xiii. 6). 

II. We search in order to know ; God sbaeohbs because he knows. 1. By his 
providence, proving men and revealing their character. As Abraham (Gen. xxii. 12), 
Hezekiah (2 Chron. xxxii. 31). 2. By his Spirit (John xvi. 8). 3. By his Word 
(Heb. iv. 12, 13). 

Conclusion. The Lord Jesus claims this Divine prerogative (Rev. ii. 23; 1 Cor. iy. 
4, 5). But he loves to discover even the little that is good in us, and to reward it 
(Rev. iii. 8). He that probes can heal. He that knows can save (Rev. iii. 9). Let 
us open our hearts to him (Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24). 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. S!2 and Rom. viii. 36. — Martyr Churches, Eebrew and Christian ; a contrast. 
There is something marvellously touching about this psalm. It is the voice of a martyr 
Church, which has to witness for God amid persecution, flame,and sword. It divides itself 
into four parts. In the first there is a glowing retrospect (vers. 1 — 8) ; * in the second, 
a mournful plaint (vers. 9—17 and 22) ; in the third, a solemn appeal to the Church's 
King and Lord (vers. 18 — 21); in tlie fourth, an earnest prayer (vers. 23—26). As 
an historical document, which (as it has come down to us) is without date, we cannot 
but ask — To what period of Hebrew history can it apply ? Another question suggests 
itself, viz. — Is the whole of the psalm justifiable ? We will deal with these two questions 
as briefly as possible consistently with clearness, that wo may "open up" the theme 

' See two instructive articles, in Kitto's 'Daily Bible Headings,' on the Hebrew 
right to Canaan : Porter's edit., vol. iii. pp. 249, 253. 



346 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlit. 1—26. 

which the answers thereto will set before us. In order to ascertain the period of 
Israel's history to which the psalm refers, we must note the data presented to us 
therein. According to the psalmist's statements ; (1^ Israel had been scattered (ver. 11). 
(2) The people had been defeated in arms (ver. 10), (3) They were a reproach and 
a byword among the nations (vers. 13, 14). (4) They were sold into slavery (ver. 12). 
(5) They were " counted as sheep for the slaughter " (vers. 11, 22). (6) All this had 
happened to them, although they had not departed from their God; and although this 
had happened, still they were not departing from him (vers. 17, 18). (7) So lar from 
this, they were even slain for their fidelity to truth and to God. " For thy sake we are 
killed all the day long " (ver. 22). It is not easy to find a period in the national life 
when the whole of these leven data can be verified. By one consideration or other, we 
are almost driven forward to the time of the Maccabees, between b.o. 200 and b.o. 160 
(2 Mace. V. 11 — 23). Mr. Walford says, " That fierce and idolatrous prince Antiochus 
Bpiphanes, the King of Syria, was actuated by an inveterate hatred to the laws and 
religion of the Jews ; and he employed the utmost efforts of his policy and power to 
induce them to apostatize. Under the severest penalties, he prohibited the worship of 
Jehovah, the celebration of the sabbath, and other religious festivals, the practice of 
circumcision, and the whole of the precepts of the Mosaic Law. Notwithstanding this 
dreadf\il persecution, the greater part of the people steadily adhered to the Divine 
institutions, and refused to comply with the idolatrous acts to which their tormentors 
would have compelled them, though they suffered the most dreadful tortures for their 
noncompliance with the injunctions of their formidable adversaries." * To this period 
alone do we feel warranted in referring this psalm. There are two objections which 
have been made thereto. One, that the canon of Old Testament Scripture was finally 
closed long before. But such does not appear to have been the case.' Another, that 
at the time of the Maccabees the hope of a resurrection buoyed up the sufferers to an 
extent of which this psalm gives no trace whatever (2 Mace. vii. 6—17). But though 
this may haye some weight, yet we must be careful not to lay too much stress on what 
the psalm does not contain. In all probability the survivors were more broken in 
spirit than such as were appointed unto death. Anyway, it is fairly clear that in the 
period to which we now refer, each one of the seven data above named can be verified 
with tolerable ease. But this cannot be said of either of the other periods to which 
the plaint of this psalm has been assigned. These are : 1. The time of David. (So 
Hengstenberg, Delitzscb, Moll, Fausset, et al.) But in David's time we cannot verify 
either the first, second, third, or seventh of the above data. As Calvin remarks, the 
Church and nation, as a whole, were prosperous and victorious in David's time.* 2. 
Other periods assigned have been — the time of the Exile (Geikie); the times of 
Jehoiachin and Zedekiah (Baur, De Wette, and Tholuck) ; the times of Josiah and 
Jehoiakim (Barnes); the last days of the Persian dynasty (Ewald); but of one and 
all of these it may be said that they fail to meet the conditions of data 6 and 7. 
For the Chronicler expressly declares that the troubles of those periods came upon 
Israel in consequence of the peoples' unfaithfulness to their covenant and their God.* 

' Walford's translation of the Psalms. Notes to Ps. xliv. 

2 *' The persecution of Antiochus (b.o. 168) was for the Old Testament what the perse- 
cution of Diocletian was for the New, the final crisis which stamped the sacred writings 
with their peculiar character" (Westcott, art. "Canon," in Smith's 'Dictionary of the 
Bible'). See also Perowne's introduction to this psalm. Perowne, Calvin, Venema, 
Dathe, Bosenmiiller, and Cheyne, favour the Maccabean authorship thereof. So Scliiirar, 
in 'The Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ,' div. ii. vol. lii. § 32, ii. 1. 

' Hengstenberg, Delitzscb, and others deem this psalm a product of David's time; 
their remarks are worth reading, but their arguments fail to oonvime us. In the Davidio 
period of the Syro-Ammonite War, in which the Edomites took part, there was a vast 
amount of cruelty practised on David's side; the whole tone of the psalm seems alien 
from the state of things then. As Calvin remarks, the Church and nation as a whole were 
prosperous in David's time, and David himself was for the most part victorious. The only 
argument in Hengstenberg and Delitzscb that seems of weight is this, "The consoious- 
iioarf of fidelity towards the Lord, uttered in vers. 17 — 22, was scarcely possible at any 
i.ilier period" (Hengstenberg, p. 108 ; Delitzscb, p. 66). But if that assertion of national 
in ogrity be understood as named above, this argument ceases to have any force whatever. 

' 2 Chron. xixvi. 14—21. 



PS. XLiv. 1— 26.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 347 

Consequently, until further light is thrown on the subject, we adhere to the Maccabean 
period as that which most nearly fufils the conditions to which reference is made. 
Another question is this — Is the Church's strong assertion of national integrity to God 
justifiable? Some say, Yes (so Moll, Delitzsch). Some, No (so Perowne). But it is 
only fair to the writer to suppose him to refer simply to the occasion that drew forth 
the complaint ; he cannot mean that all the nation had been always and uniformly 
faithful. His intention evidently is this — that there was at thai time no defection from 
God on the part of the people to account for the specific persecution over which he 
mourns. And since this is the case, he feels he may appeal to God to fulfil his own 
promise, and to save them for his mercies' sake.* We are not prepared to question 
the propriety of this. AU depends on the spirit in which it was said. We well 
remember that, in the late American War, a noted and eloquent abolitionist went so 
far as to maintain that the North must win, because God was God! At the same 
time, there is no doubt that the complaint, the appeal, and the whole tone of the 
psalm bear traces of a partial revelation, and consequently of an imperfectly deve- 
loped faith. We have but to pass over the line that divides the two dispensations, 
to plant ourselves in the middle of the first Christian century, and there we find that 
Christians were having, and were likely to have, a struggle as hard and fierce as that 
of the Hebrews of old. So much so that one of their number adopts as his own the 
most touching words in the whole psalm, " For thy sake we are killed all the day 
long ; we are counted as sheep for the slaughter." And yet there is neither moan nor 
sigh, no, not a tear ; rather, a song of gladness, " In all these things we are more than 
conquerors through him that loved us ! " (Bom. viii. 36, 37). Whence the contrast 
between the Hebrews' sigh and the Christians' song whilst in the midst of persecution 
and death t 

I. In the Hbbbew dispensation God spake THKOtraH peophetb ; in the Chbistian 
God has spoken in his Son. (Heb. i. 1.) The great Transfiguration scene sets this 
forth in marvellous clearness. Moses and Ellas vanish from slight, and the favoured 
three are left with Jesus only ; in him believers saw the incarnate Son of God, the 
Father's express Image, who brought with him, in peerless union, the tenderness 
and sympathy of the brother-man, with the majesty and might of the infinite and 
eternal God. Hence the figure in the background of Hebrew thought was vastly 
difierent from that in the background of Christian thought ; the former commanded 
reverential heed, as a Messenger from heaven; the latter, unbounded love and entire 
consecration, as Saviour and Lord of all 1 

II. The 8T0BY OF THE BEDEMPTION WITH WHICH IsEABL's NATIONAL LIFE OPENED 
IS FAB OUTDONE BY THE HISTOET OF THE BEDEMPTION BBOTJQHT IN BT JeSUS ChKIST. 

It was with a glow of pride and thankfulness that the Hebrew singer recounted the 
deliverance from Egypt, and the entrance to Canaan's land (see also Pss. Ixxviii,, cv, 
cvi., cvii.). But how vastly is all this surpassed both in tenderness and in grandeur, 
by such words as these 1 — " He loved me, and gave himself for me " (Gal. ii. 20) ; 
" Having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing 
over them in it." ' The words fell with force and beauty on the ears of Old Testament 
saints, " I gave Egypt for thy ransom ; Ethiopia and Seba for thee ; " but how much 
greater the charm on Christian ears of the words, " He gave himself" (Isa. iliii. 3, 4 ; 
Gal. iL 20) I 

" God, in the Person of his Son, 
Has all his mightiest works outdone." 

III. The Hbbebw Church, teep.itoeial and national, has given place to the 
Chuboh of God, made up of men gathered from every nation, and kindred, and people, 
and tongue. The Church's " land " now can never be invaded. We can never s^h, 
" The heathen are come into thine inheritance." That is impossible. The entrance 
into Christ's Church is not decided by rites nor by birth, save by the new birth of the 
Holy Ghost. Neither features nor racial marks form any sign of this new brotherhood. 

> « This oonsoiousness of [legal] righteousness seems to most to indicate the Maccabean 
period " (Cheyne) But is an assertion of national fidelity the same ae a " consciousnen 
of legal righteousness " ? 

' Col. ii. 15. French, " iir cetle croix." 



348 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xliv. 1— 2& 

" In Christ JeBus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a 
new creature " (Gfal. vi. 15). 

IV. The hatbbd of the Jew by the Gentile is bucoeeded by the world's 
HATRED OF THE Chuech. Where religion is or has been regarded as a piece of state- 
craft, whether amon^ pagans, Papists, or Protestants, divergence from the rites 
appointed by state or Church has been punished with fire and sword. And the Antio- 
ohian persecution in the time of the Maccabees had its parallel in the Diocletian 
persecution in the Christian era. And although in our own land such treatment is not 
permitted, yet there is, though largely unseen to the public eye, a fierce hatred by the 
ungodly of pure and undefiled religion ; and many and many a faithful soldier of the 
cross has to endure petty insult, abuse, and scorn, to an extent known only to himself 
and his Lord. 

V. The hatbed of the world, which was the Hebrews' dread, is now the 
Christian's badob of honour. It was so with the apostles (Acts v. 41 ; Gal. vi. 17). 
It was so with private Christians in apostolic times (1 Pet. iv. 13 — 16). In enduring 
persecution in the early Christian centuries, believers so regarded it. And even now 
we have to remember the Master's words in John xv. 18 — 21. The ancient Hebrews 
could not bear the scorn of their foes ; Christians regard it as " the iellowship of 
Christ's sufferings," and delighted in the words, 2 Cor. iv. 10, 11. 

VI. In the midst of fiercest persecution. Christians have bealized the 
OHANGELESSNESS OF DiviNE LOVE ; even when they were " counted as sheep for the 
slaughter."* Where we have from the Hebrews a groan, we have from the Christians 
a song (Rom. viii. 35, 36 ; Stephen, Acts vi. 15 and vii. 55 — 60 ; Matt. v. 12 ; Rom. v. 3 ; 
2 Cor. xii. 10 ; Phil. i. 29 ; Heb. x. 3, 4 ; Jas. i. 2 ; 1 Pet. iv. 13, 16). Believers knew 
that nothing could ever separate them from Divine love; and that the stroke that 
closed the life below set them free for the higher life " with Christ, which was very 
far better." * 

VII. Hence Christians saw, with a clearness to which Hebrew saints could 
NOT ATTAIN, THAT THE Churoh EXISTS Qt TWO WORLDS. So our Lord has taught in 
Matt. xvi. 18 (Revised Version);' Rev. i. 18. And the disclosure of this became even 
clearer through the visions granted to the seer in Patmos, when (Rev. vii.) he saw one 
part of the Church, below, sealed in the great tribulation, and another part of the 
Church, above, caught up out of it. Knowing this, as the early Christians did, they 
knew also that the rage and hate of the enemy could in no wise really harm the 
Church, since their Lord was building it up in the realm above by the incoming of 
saints passing up from below. Hence even the slaughter of the people of God was bat 
as a chariot of fire conducting them to the region where " they cannot die any more." 

VIII. Thus, instead of an aoonizing cry to God to interpose, there is a peal 
OF triumph that no interposition is needed. " In all these things we are more 
than conquerors through him that loved us." More than conquerori I What a grand 
and noble defiance of the enemy is there herel And how richly glorious is this proof 
of the development of the Divine intent to reveal his love more fully as the ai;es 
rolled on i Note : If an expositor unfolds Ps. xliv. historically only, he must transfer 
himself to the ancient times; but if he will deal with that psalm from a Christian 
standpoint, he will have a glorious field for expansion in contrasting the piteous wail 
of Ps. xliv. 22 with the gladsomeness with which the very same words are quoted and 
applied in the eighth chapter of the Epistle to the Bomans. Blessed be God that we 
live in the days of Christ's fulness of light and life ! Amen. — C 

Vers. 1 — 26. — " In the days of old." From this psalm we may learn three great 
lessons — 

I. We are tauoet to see God's hand in history. There is no such thing as 
chance. " The chapter of accidents," as some one has well said, " is the Bible of the 

' The 'Life of the Bev. J. O. Paton ' (first part) helped ns to realize these words as no 
other recent history had done. 

* See Keander'a ' Christian Life of the First Centuries,' oh. xiii. : and Neander's ' History 
of the Church,' vol. i. pp. 118—217 (Bohn). 

' See a sermon on this text bv the present writer, in * To the Light through the Oroii ' 
(Dickinson). 



P8. XLiv. i— 26.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 349 



fooL" There are differences in the nations and the ages; but Qoi is in all. We 
acknowledge how Ood was with the Jews ; but we are not so ready to admit that he 
had to do just as really and truly with other peoples. The difference, in the case of 
the Jews is that as to them the veil has been lifted, that light has been thrown upon 
their history. The story of their nation was written as by the hand of God himself, 
and was committed as • sacred heritage to be transmitted pure and entire from 
s;eneTation to generation (Deut. vi. 7 — 20 ; of. Moses, Esod. xviii. 8 ; David, Ps. Iviii. 
8 ; Hezekiah, Isa. xxxviii. 19). But, as St. Paul has taught us, " All these things 
happened to them for ensamples ; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom 
the ends of the world are come " (1 Cor. z. 11). God governs the nations on the same 
principles as he governed the Jews. " There are diversities of operations, but it is the 
tiame Qod which worketh all in all " (1 Cor. xii. 6). 

II. How God is oaebtinq out his own great bhd THBonoH all thb aobb of 
HiBTOBY. The wise man said, " One generation passeth away, and another oometh ; 
but the earth abideth for ever" (Eccles. i. 4). But if the earth abidetb, it is because 
Giod abideth. He has his plans as to men, and throughout the ages he is working 
them out. There is the manifestation of himself. More and more the knowledge ol 
God has increased. The Jews knew more than the patriarchs. The Ohristians know 
more than the Jews. Besides, God is, in a sense, educating the world. We stand 
related to the past and the future. We have learned much from the past. God 
employs one age to benefit another. How great are our obligations, through books 
and otherwise, to the great men of the past — to Gentiles and Jews I We are the heirs 
of all the i^es. And if we have benefited by those who came before us, so we are 
bound to benefit those who come after us. Privilege is the measure of responsibility. 
' Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required " (Luke xiL 48). 
We see but a little, and, as oar knowledge is limited, our judgment must be imperfect, 
^et we see and know enough to be satisfied that God is working in and by all events, 
and that he works ever towards a perfect end. 

" Happy the man who sees a God employ'd 

In all the good and ill that checker life, 

Besolving all events, with their effects 

And manifold results, into the will 

And arbitration wise of the Supreme I ** 

(Oowper.) 

HL That God has oabed fob his people THBonan all the aoes of histobt. 
rfhif U the burden of this psalm. This is the great truth that gives life to the faith 
profeised (vers. 1 — 8); that awakens the complaint of desertion in time of grievous 
trial (vera. 9 — 16); that sustains the hope of help and ultimate deliverance (vers. 
17—26). As in the past, so still, there will be changes — not only mercies, but 
judgments. There will be trials of our faith; there will be the sharp discipline of 
chastisement; there will be, in some form or other, the "persecution" which tests our 
loyalty, and strengthens and purifies our love. But, come what wUl, God changes not ; 
ind Gtoi is our God. Our trust in men may fail, our hopes of earthly leaders may be 
iisappointed and put to shame ; but God is faithful who has promised, and he will 
aeret forsake those who trust in him. After OuUoden, a soldier of Prince Charles's 
army was found lying dead on the field, with his Gaelic psalm-book open in his hand, 
lad a bloody finger-mark at the ninth verse of this psalm, " But thou hast cast off, 
md put us 10 shame, and goest not forth with our armies.*' But Christ, the great 
Captain of our salvation, will not suffer the least of his soldiers thus to die, with 
uligbted hopeM and broken heart. — W. F. 

Ten. 1 — 26. — A prayer for fuilp against foreign enemia. The tndn of thought ia 
(his : " Thou hast helped us, thou must help us ; but thou hast not helped us ; yet 
hara we not by any guilt on our part cut ourselves off from thy help ; do thou there- 
tan help us." the problem of suffering, as argued in this psalm, is similar to the 
problem in the Book of Job. That Ood shovid not help them — 

L Was ksooNsiSTBNT with God'b past tbbatmknt of tebh. (Vers, 1 — 8.) Their 
others had told them what work God had done in their days — in the days of old, 
What « history of Divine work have we in the past of the Christian Ohuiohl 



350 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[pS. XLV. 1 — 17. 



IL Inconsistent with their faith in him. (Vers. 4 — 8.) Gkd was their Almighty 
King, through whom they were able to achieve all conquests. 

III. It would bring no profit or honour to God. (Ver. 12.) To leave them to 
their enemies. How could God act thus, so as to seem to dishonour himself and to 
bring no profit to his people ? 

IV. It could not be a punishment for unfaithfulness. (Vers. 17 — 22.) They 
had not forgotten God; their heart was not turned back, neither had their steps 
declined from his way. They could not explain. 

V. Did not seem consistent with God's regard to his own honour. (Vers. 15, 
16, 24.) He seemed to be taking the side of the blasphemer, and forgetting their 
fidelity. And this was the mystery of their experience. 

VI. Yet it did not uproot their faith in Divtinb help at last. For they 
continue to supplicate the redeeming interpcsitiou of God (vers. 23 — 26). Faith 
always conquers its difficulties thus, by trusting where it cannot see or explain. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XLV. 



This psalm is regarded by some as a simple 
epithalamium, or nuptial hymn, composed 
to honour a royal wedding, and sung as 
part of the wedding ceremony, at tho mar- 
riage of some king of Israel or Judah. The 
marriage of Ahab with Jezebel, and that of 
Jehoram of Judah with Athaliah, have been 
specially suggested; also Solomon's mar- 
riage with au Egyptian prineesa. But the 
imagery of the psalm is altogether too 
exalted, and its phrases too peculiar (vers. 
2, 6, 11, 16, 17), to suit any mere earthly 
marriage — not to mention that a mere 
epithalamium would never have been ad- 
mitted into the Psalter. Hence most critics 
are driven to allow, however unwillingly, 
that the psalm is in some sense Messianic. 
It is certain that such was the view of the 
Hebrew Church, of the Septuagint inter- 
preters, and of the early Christians gene- 
rally. It is placed beyond a doubt; so far 
as believers in inspiration are concerned, by 
the reference to the psalm in the Epistle to 
the Hebrews (i. 8, 9). Still, however, there 
remains the question — Is it absolutely and 
wholly Messianic, or did the author take 
some human event as the basis of his de- 
scription, and give it a Messiunio colour- 
ing? On tlie whole, we incline to the former 
view, and regard the writer as consciously 
depicting, not an actual, but an ideal, scene, 
one which floats before his mind as a thing 
to be realized at some future time, when 
Messiah shall be wedded to his bride, the 
Church, and establish his dominion nver iill 



the world, and reign oyer all the nations of 
the earth gloriously. 

The psalm consists of two main portions 
— an address to the bridegroom in eight 
verses (vers. 2 — 9), and an address to the 
bride in six (vers. 10 — 15); with an intro- 
duction and a conclusion, the latter com- 
prised in two verses, the former in one verse 
only. 

Title of the psalm. The psalm has an 
unusually long and complicated title. 
First, it is addressed, like so many others, 
to the precentor, or chief musician, the head 
of the tabernacle ohoir. Next, it is said to 
be " upon lilies," which is not very easy to 
understand. Lilies were, no doubt, viewed 
as sacred flowers, and wc-re largely used in 
the ornamentation of the temple (1 Kings 
vii. 19, 22, 26). They are also mentioned 
in the titles of three other psalms (Pss. Ix., 
Ixix., and Ixxx.), but with what intention 
is wholly uncertain, A questionable exe- 
gesis connects the " lilies " of the present 
title with the "king's daughter" and the 
" virgins " of vers. 13, 14 ; but there is no 
mention of " virgins " in the other psalms 
said to be "upon lilies." Further, tho 
psalm is assigned " to the sons of Korah," 
like Pss. xlii., xliv., and others, who may 
probably have been the writers. Fourthly, 
it is oiilled " Masohil," i.e. " an instruction." 
Fifthly, it is said to be "a song of loves," 
whioh seems to be a reference to the subjeot- 
matter. 

Ver. 1. — My heart is inditing a good 
matter; literally, bubbleth with a good 
matter — is so full of it that the matter will 



PS. XLV. 1—17.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



851 



burst forth. I speak of the things which I 
have made touching the king; or, I utter 
that which I have composed concerning the 
king. My tongue ia the pen of a ready 
■writer. It is noted that only "psalms of 
higli and solemn import" have formal 
exordia of this kind, announcing the inten- 
tion of the writer. 

Ver. 2. — Thou art fairer than the children 
of men. It lias been argued that a deaorip- 
tiou of the Messiah would not lay stress on 
his personal beauty. But in the Song of 
Songs the personal beauty of the bridegroom, 
whom so many critics regard as the Mtssiah, 
is a main point (Cant. v. 10—16). A perfect 
man, sucli as Messiah was to be, must needs 
be beautiful, at any rate with a beauty of 
expression. In calling his biidegroom " fair 
beyond the »ong of men" the writer at once 
gives us to understand that he is not a mere 
man. Grace is poured into thy lips; rather, 
grace it poured out on thy lips (Hengsten- 
berg, Oheyne, Kay). The gilt of gracious 
expression and gracious speech has been 
poured npon him from on high (oomp. Cant. 
V. 16, " His mouth is most sweet "). There- 
fore Qod hath blessed thee for ever. The 
gifts bestowed upon him show the Divine 
favour and blessing, which, once granted, 
are not capriciously withdrawn. 

Ver. 3. — Gird thy sword npon thy thigh, 
most mighty; i.e. array thyself as a 
warrior, for thou wilt have enemies to 
conquer, and wilt need a sword against them 
(see vers. 4, 5). With thy glory and thy 
majesty. There is no "with" in the 
original. Some think his sword is called 
Messiah's "glory and majesty." Otliers 
supply "put on," as implied in the "gird" 
of the first clause, and translate, "Put on 
thy glory and thy majesty ; " i.e. show thy- 
self in all the majesty and glory that 
naturally belong to thee. This is quite in 
accordance with the context. 

Ver. 4. — And in thy majesty ride pros- 
perously; literally, and in thy majesty go 
forth, ride. The riding intended is pro- 
oably riding in a chariot. Because of truth 
and meekness and righteousness; rather, 
because of truth and meek-tempered righteous- 
ness (Kay); i.e. for the purpose of vindicat- 
ing truth and righteousness in the case of 
those who outrage them. Eighteousness, 
however, to be really righteousness, must be 
combined with meekness (comp. Zeph. ii. 
3). And thy right hand shall teach thee 
terrible things. It is the right hand where- 
with the warrior strikes ; and at each blow 
it opens to the striker terrible experiences, 
and thus may be said to " teach him terrible 
things." 

Ver. 5. — Thine arrows are sharp in the 
heart of the king's enemies; whereby the 
people fall under thee. The original is 



more graphic. It runs, "Thy arrows are 
sharp— the peoples fall under thee— (they 
are) in the heart of the king's enemies." 
All the enemies of Messiah shall one day 
be chaBtieed, and fall before him. 

Ver. 6.— Thy throne, God. So tlie 
LXX., the Epistle to the Hebrews (i. 8), 
the Chaldee paraphrase, and, among critics, 
Rosenmiiller, Hengstenberg, Kay, Professor 
Alexander, and Canon Cook. The render- 
ings proposed by Gesenius, Ewald, and the 
anti-Messianio school generally are whuUy 
untenable, as Hengstenberg has clearly 
shown. The psalmist's intention is to 
address the King, wliom he has already 
deilared to be more than man (ver. 2), as 
" God." Is for ever and ever. A dominion 
to which there will never be any end. This 
is never said, and could not be truly said, 
of any earthly kingdom. When perpetuity 
is promised to the throne of David (2 Sam. 
vii. 13—16; Ps. Ixxxix. 4, 36, 37), it is to 
that throne as continued in the reign of 
David's Son, Messiah. The sceptre of thy 
kingdom ia a right sceptre; literally, a 
sceptre of rectitude (comp. Pss. Ixvii. 4; 
xcvi. 10). 

Ver. 7. — Thou lovest righteousness, and 
hatest wickedness, therefore, etc. God will 
only commit rule and authority over his 
Church to one who will rule justly — one who 
loves righteousness and hates iniquity. 
Messiah is alone perfect in righteousness, 
and therefore entitled to rule. Therefore 
God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the 
oil of gladness above thy fellows. ISome 
moderns translate, " Therefore, O God, thy 
God hath anointed thee," etc. ; but the 
rendering of the Authorized Version is 
maintained by Dr. Kay, Professor Alexander, 
and our Revisers. The anointing intended 
is that outpouring of glory and blessedness 
on Messiah which followed upon his volun- 
tary humiliation and suffering (oomp. Phil, 
ii. 9 ; Heb. ii. 9). 

Ver. 8. — All thy garments smell of myrrh, 
and aloes, and cassia; literally, myrrh and 
aloes [and] cassia are thy garments. The 
" and " before " cassia " appears in fuur 
manuscripts, and in all the ancient versions. 
The garments are so impregnated with 
spices as to seem made of them. Out of the 
ivory palaces. "Ivory palaces" are men- 
tioned in 1 Kings xxii. 39 and Amus iii. 
15. We must understand " palaces adorned 
with ivory." Whereby they have made thee 
glad. So Hengstenberg, Kay, Professor 
Alexander, and others. But most moderns 
render, "Out of the ivory palaces stringed 
instruments have made thee glad." 

Ver. 9. — King's daughters were (rather, 
are) among thy honourable women. The 
marriage scene now begins to open upon us. 
The bridegroom has been depicted in all 



352 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. XLV. 1 — 17. 



his glorious majesty. The bride has now 
to be brought forward. She comes, accom- 
panied by a train of attenrfants — " honour- 
able women," or, "noble ladies" (Kay), 
many of whom are "kings' daughters" 
(oomp. 1 Kings vii. 3). It must not be 
expected that all the details of the scene 
shall have exact equivalents in the spiritual 
marriage which it represents. Upon thy 
right hand did stand (rather, stands) the 
queen in gold of Ophir; i.e. in a vesture 
richly embroidered with gold thread (comp. 
Exod. xxviii. 5—8). "Gold of Ophir" was 
known, not merely to David (1 Chron. siiz. 
4), but even to Job (xxviii. 16). The 
" right hand " of the king was the place of 
honour. We find it a8^igned by Solomon 
to the queen-mother, Bathsheba (1 Kings 

aia> 

Ver. 10. — Hearken, daughter, and con- 
sider, and incline th^e ear. The psalmist, 
having introduced the bride to our notice 
in ver. 9, proceeds to address her, and to 
describe the glories of her person and of her 
entourage. First of all, he bids her 
"hearken," "consider," and "incline her 
ear," i.e. reflect deeply on the new relation 
in which she is about to be placed, the new 
sphere which she is entering, the new duties 
which she will have to disclmrge. She must 
give herself wholly to her Lord and Sponse ; 
■he must have no thought for any one but 
him. Forget also thine own people, and thy 
father's house. She must break with all 
associations and bonds and relationships that 
would separate between her and her King, 
forget the past in the present, cease to 
Judaize, and be wholly Christ's. 

Ver. 11. — So shall the King greatly desire 
thy beauty. Devotion to her Lord will win 
her his tender regard, and make her other 
charms and graces please and delight him. 
For he is thy Lord; i.e. thy Lord and Master, 
entitled to thy utmost love and obedience, 
nay, to thy " worship " — therefore. Worship 
thou him. Worship, in a certain sense, is 
due from every wife to every husband ; but 
the Church's worship of Christ is worship in 
the absolutely highest sense (Eev. v. 6 — 14). 

Ver. 12. — And the daughter of Tyre shall 
be there with a gift. Heathen nations 
shall be attracted to Christ and his Church, 
■hall bring their offerings, and make sub- 
mission, and humbly sue for favour. Tyre 
is taken as a type of heathen states and 
cities generally (oomp. Isa. xliz. 18 — 23; 
Ivi. 6—8 ; Ix. 3 — 14). Even the rich among 
the people shall intreat thy favour. (On 
the wealth of Tyre, see Isa. xxiii. 2-— 8; 
Ezek. xzyL 12, 16; xxviL 8—88; xxviiL 
18, ate.) 



Ver. 13. — The King's daughter is all 
glorious within. The " King's daughter " of 
this passage can be no other than the bride 
herself — the " queen " of ver. 9. As among 
her attendants some were " kings' daugh- 
ters ' (vdr. 9), so she could be no less. She 
is " glorious," not only without, in her robe 
of " gold of Ophir," but also and eapeeially 
within — in the inner chamber of the heart- 
where she is indeed " glorious," through the 
sanctifying presence of God's Holy Spirit 
(Eph. V. 26, 27). Her clothing is of wrought 
gold (comp. ver. 9, and the comment ad loc). 

Ver. 14. — She shall be brought unto the 
King in raiment of needlework; i.e. in gar- 
ments riclily embroidered. Such were known 
to the Hebrews from the time of the Exodus 
(Exod. xxviii. 4, 39), and were worn by prin- 
cesses in David's day (2 Sam. xiii. 18). 
Brides were commonly " led " into the pre- 
sence of the bridegroom. The virgins her 
companions that follow her sh^ be brought 
unto thee (comp. ver. 9). A virgin train 
follows the bride as she is led to the palace 
of the bridegroom, for a royal bride neces- 
sarily had her attendants. These symbolize 
the Gentile converts that should attach 
themselves to the original Church, and follow 
that Church into Christ's presence. 

Yer. 15. — With gladness and rejoioing 
shall they be brought. A bridal train could 
not but be a festive one. Joy and gladness 
naturally characterize the procession of the 
nations out of darkness into God's marvel- 
lous light. They shall enter into the king"! 
palace; ue. be received into the heavenly 
dwelling-place. 

Ver. 16. — Instead of thy fathers shall be 
thy children. In oonclusion, the psalmist 
once more addresses the bridegroom. " In- 
stead of thy fathers " according to the flesh 
— the princes of the royal house of David — 
" thou shalt have cbildren " sons still more 
conspicuous — apostles, martyrs, confessors — 
a glorious and goodly company. Whom ihoa 
mayest make princes; i.e. rulers and go- 
vernors of the Church — in all the earth 
(comp. 1 Pet. ii. 9; Bev. i. 6; v. 10; xx.6). 

Yer. 17. — ^I will make thy name to be re- 
membered in all generations. I, the psalmist, 
with my " pen of a ready writer," will so 
sing thy praise that thy name shall always 
be had in remembrance; and therefore — 
because of my words — shall the peoples — 
(.fl. all the nations of the earth — praise thee 
for ever and ever. There is here, mixed 
with the praise of Messiah, a certain amount 
of self-glorifloation ; but perhaps the "son 
of Korah," who bad composed so noble a 
poem, may be exoosed for somewhat " vaunt- 
ing himBelt" 



PS. XLV. 1—17.] THE BOOK OP PSALMS. US 



HOMILBTICS 

Ver. 2. — "Altogether lovely." " Thou art fairer than the children of men," Immense 
learning and ingenuity have been expended in the attempt to find some historic occasion 
for this psalm — some Jewish original of these royal portraits, the kinp; and the bride. 
Solomon has naturally been thought of, as a type, Calvin thinks, of Christ ; but the 
description does not suit him. Even Jehoram and Athaliah, Ahab and Jezebel, have 
had their advocates. The great Jewish commentators take the psalm as a prophecy 
of Messiah. Vers. 6, 7, quite inapplicable to Solomon, are in Heb. i. 8, 9 applied to 
Christ. We need not, therefore, bewilder ourselves in a fruitless quest, but may at 
once see our Saviour in these joyful and adoring words. 

L Prophecy is herb clothed in poetry, and decked with allegory. The 
question, therefore, arises — How far may this description be understood of our Baviov/r's 
personal presence, when he lived as Man among men ? The four Grospels contain no 
single descriptive trait. Some ancient Jewish writers strangely held that Messiah 
would be a leper, because Isaiah speaks of him as " smitten " (liii. 4). Some Christians 
have seemed to find pleasure in supposiug our Lord signally devoid of manly beauty. 
Calvin more reasonably explains Isa. liii. 2 of the absence of worldly pomp and regal 
state. Bacon, noting that few great men have been eminent for personal beauty — 
thousjh there are some remarkable exceptions — says, " That is the best part of bemty 
which no picture can express ; no, nor the first view of life." This kind of beauty — the 
soul speaking through the countenance — ^is what we cannot suppose absent in our Lord 
Jesus. We may gather from the Gospels that he had a more than princely nobleness, 
and a surpassing charm of graciousness. When men came into his presence they were 
impelled to fall at his feet. Yet little children ran at his call to nestle in his arms. 
Busy men, when he said, " Follow me" left all aud obeyed. The wretched and perishing 
recognized in him their Deliverer. Jesus alone among men grew from infancy to the 
prime of manhood with mind and body untainted with sin. It is not said " fairest of 
men," but " fairer than the children of men ; " he is not merely pre-eminent, but alone. 
" The temple of his body " was a fit habitation for " the fulness of the Godhead." Bred 
to active toil in the pure mountain air, he had a frame capable of immense exertion. 
He could be heard by thousands in the open ai«» After a day of toil, not only speaking 
for hours, but by his intense sympathy taking on himself the burdens of suffering and 
sorrow he lifted from others, he would climb some mountain with the firee step of a 
mountaineer, and spend the night in prayer. Even in his last inconceivably awful 
Bufferings, we see no evidence of bodily weakness. After the agony of Gethsemme, 
the sleepless night of iusult and torture, the terrible Roman scourge, aud six hours oa 
the cross, our Saviour's last words were uttered " with a loud voice," and he expired 
not from exhaustion, but from a broken heart. Add to all this that in his heart dw^t 
love, such as no other ever held ; and that behind the veil of his human nature was the 
majesty of indwelling Deity. Who can suppose that the countenance of Jesus was a 
mask to hide that grace and glory, not a mirror to reflect it ? 

II. The bbattty op which all outward qraob, majesty, loveliness, is but 

THE SHADOW, BELONGS IN TRANSCENDENT MEASURE TO THE LoRD JeSUS. The lOBt 

" image of God," defaced lineaments of which only remain in our ordinary human 
nature, reappears in him in full perfection (John xiv. 9). We read in him all that most 
concerns us to know concerning Goil — his character and heaving towards ourselves. 
The amazing claim made by the Bible (unheard of elsewhere) that man was made ia 
God's likeness, seems contradicted by the whole current of our world's history. But 
who can deny that no lower style fits the life and personal character of Jesus? (Some 
of the strongest testimonies are from professed unbelievers.) In the most admirable 
characters gieat excellence is commonly balanced by corresponding defects. But what 
excellence or virtue can you find in him, either falling short of the highest vigour on 
strong at the expense of some other? What is his chief feature ? Love ? But not at 
the cost of the severest truth, the strictest justice. Holiness ? Yet he was the Friend 
of sinners. Benevolence? But you can no more imagine him weakly iadulgent, or 
imposed upon, than deaf to any real cry of need. Would you see the glory of the 
sunbeam ? You must not gaie on the sun itself, but on the flowers, Teaves, meadows 

PSALMS. 2 A 



354 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [fs. xlv. 1—17. 



lorests, hills, clouds, ocean, which his light clothes with their eniless variety of colour 
and heauty. So the beauty of our Saviour's character is to be read in the hearts he 
drew to him, the lives he changed and hallowed, the characters he moulded, the homes 
he blessed, the love he inspired ; in the track of life he has left — he only — in our dark 
world. But you need the open eye (Isa. liii. 2 ; John i. 14 ; ix. 39). An unbeliever 
may admire his portrait in the Gospels, as he would a character in fiction. But to those 
who seek and trust him, Jesus reveals himself (John xiv, 21 — 23 ; 1 Pet. i,8; iL 7). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 17. — 77ie glories of the eternal King. This psalm is one of those which 
set forth in glowing terms the glory and majesty of the King of kings, the Anointed 
One, who should come into the world. " It is a psalm of the theocratic kingdom, the 
marriage song of the King." ' It is a song of the highest order, which, aoconiing-to its 
title, was for the chief musician; set to " Shoshanuim," a word which, we are told in 
the margin (Revised Version), means " lilies." This, however, does not throw much 
light on the matter. Fiirst* is more helpful when he tells us that Shoshannim is a 
proper name, and denotes one of the twenty-four music-choirs left by David, so called 
from a master named Shushan. The introduction to the psalm, which is found in its 
first verse, is much more striking than would appear from the translation in either the 
Authorized Version or the Revised Version. It may be rendered, " My heart ia boiling 
over* with a goodly theme : I speak : my work is for a King: may my tongue be as 
the pen of a ready writer! "* Here we have a striking illustration of the words of the 
Aposr.le Peter, "Holy men of God spake at they were moved by the Holy Ghost;" this 
fervour of spirit, urging on the worker as by a power beyond himself to write of "the 
King," is one of the ways in which the sacred writers were " moved." And there is no 
reason for refusing to acknowledge the far-reachingness of this psalm, as setting forth 
beforehand, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, the grandeur of our victorious Lord. 
To no one, indeed, but Jesus, can we apply the epithets which are herein used. That 
a King " hiLiher than the kings of the earth " is foretold in Scripture is certain (see 
2 Sam. vii. 12 — 16 ; xxiii. 2—5 ; Pss. il., Ixxii., Ixxix., ex.). So that it is no wonder 
to find that such is the case in this psalm.* The main difficulty in the psalm — in fact, 
the only serious one to believing critics — is the fact that the entire passage vers. 10 — 15 
is based on a custom which in the psalmist's time was not only familiar to Orientals, 
but was even honourable in their eyes, though it would not be deemed so in ours. It 
would be a coveted honour among maidens to be among the well-beloved ones of an 
honourable king ; for though the queen-consort was the principnl wife, yet she was by 
no means the only one on whom the king bestowed his affection. Even David had six 
wives. He was not thought the worse of for this. The Law of God did not sanction 
it, but society did. Hence, though this psalm shoots far ahead to a beauty, a glory, 
and a majesty beyond the sons of men, yet the ground-plan of its symbolism is found 
in the usages of Oriental courts at their hesi.' If it was then deemed a high honour 
for maidens to be among the beloved of a king, how much greater would be the honour 
of those who should he brought in the far-off times to place their whole selves, body, 
soul, and spirit, at the absolute disposal of him who would be " King of kings, and 
Lord of lords " 1 We may gather up under four heads the main features of this 

' Bishop Westcott, 'Commentary ' on Heb. i. 7. 

' See Lexicon, sub verb. 

' Tlie word B^rii, " to boil," is used but once. But the ordinary word for a prophet, H'3J, 
is from N3:, which means "to bubble up," "to stream forth" (see Dr. Payne Smith's 
'Bampton Lectures for 1869,' lect. ii.). 

■* St e Revised Version margin, and the version of Dr. Louis Segond. 

' Whether or no the immediate occasion of the writing of this psaim was any specific 
loyal weilding, is an intere-sting question, but by no means an important one practically. 

" For this reason it would not be appropriate to press every phrase to a Messitinio 
application (see Calvin and Perowne hereon). 



PS. XLV. 1— 17.] THK BOOK OP PSALMS. 355 

sublime prophciio forecast.* In doing so, however, it behoves us to take the Chrisfiai. 
expositor's standpoint, and to carry lorward the dim and suggestive words here given 
us, to the fuller and clearer setting of New Testament unfoldings, 

I. Herb is a King foeksebn, unique in honour and renown. That the sacicd 
writers were familiar with the thought of a King who should come into the world, 
surpassing all others, we have seen above ; this is shown in the passages to which 
reference has already been made. But even if such passages were fewer and less clear 
than they are, the amazing combination of expressions in the psalm before us is 
such, that to none other than the Son of God can they possibly be applied with any 
semblance of reason. But as we think of him, every term falls in place. Let us take 
each expression in order. There are no fewer than twelve of them. 1. There is 
beauty. (Ver. 2.) A beauty beyond that of the sone of men. This points to one who 
is above the race. And verily the beauty of the Lord Jesus is one of his unnumbered 
charms. He is the " chief among ten thousand, the altogether lovely." 2. Orace is 
poured into his lips (ver. 2). How true was this of Jesus (Luke iv. 22; John i. 14)1 
Grace was also ever pouring out/roj» his lips. 3. The fullest blessings descend con- 
tinually upon him (ver. 2; cf. John iii. 34). 4. There are the glory and majesty 
ol' royal state (ver. 3). For " with " read " even " (' Variorum Bible '). The sword 
to be girded on his thigh as for war (see Delitzsch) is his glory and his majestic state. 
With these he will go forth, conquering and to conquer. 5. His cause is that of truth, 
meekness, and righteousness. (Ver. 4.) No other king ever combined these in perfection, 
nor even at all. " Meekness" is about the very last thought associated with earthly 
kings (but see Matt. xi. 29). 6. His progress would be marked by terror as well as 
by meekness (ver. 4; Ps. Ixv. 5; Rom. xi. 22; 2 Cor. v. H; Rev. i. 7). 7. His 
arrows would be sharp in the hearts of his enemies (ver. 5), and the peoples (plural. 
Revised Version) would fall beneath him. He should have universal sway, and not 
over Israel only. 8. He should fee Ood, and yet be anointed by Qod. (Vera, p, 7.) 
How enigmatical before fulfilment ! How fully realized in our Immanuel, in him who 
is at once God and man, David's Son, yet David's Lord I 9. His throne should be 
eternal. (Ver. 6.) " Thy throne,' God, is for ever and ever " (cf. Heb. i. 8, 9). 
10. His sceptre should be a sceptre of righteousness. (Vers. 6, 7.) This is pre- 
eminently true; so much so that even those who acknowledge him as Lord, and who 
have yet been destitute of righteousness, will be rejected (Matt. vii. 22, 23). 11. He 
would receive a higher anointing than that of others (ver. 7 ; Acts iv. 27 ; x. 38 ; 
Luke iv. 18). 12. Associated with his coming would be fragrance, music, and Joy 
(ver. 8, Revised Version). Surely the gladness and song that gather round this King 
surpass all other gladness and all other songs that earth has ever known. No widow's 
wail, no orphan's sigh, attend on the conquests of this King. He conquers but to 
save. And the joy! oh, how great! Joy among the saved (1 Pet. i. 8). Joy among 
the saints (1 John i. 4). Joy among the angels (Luke xx. 10). Joy in the heart of 
the Father and the Son (Luke xv. 32). Joy for ever and ever (Isa. xxxv. 10). 
What a magnificent forecast, hundreds of years beforehand ! Who dares to deny the 
supernatural with such a fact before him ?' 

II. Herb is the King's bride. (Ver. 9.) What can the psalmist mean by the 
bride of such a King, but the Church of his love (see Bph. v. 23 — 32)? The following 
features, if worked out, would greatly exceed the space at our command. 1. She forsakes 
her Father's house, to be joined to this King, and leaves all her old associates behind 
her (ver. 10). 2. She is wedded to him (ver. 11, "He is thy Lord"). 3. She is 
devoted to him (ver. 11). 4. She is decorated with finest gold (ver. 9), and is at the 

• On the prophetic character of this psalm, the words of Dr. J. Pye Smith, ' Scripture 
Testimony to the Messiah,' vol. 1. p. 209, are invaluable. Perowne's, Walford's, Hengsten- 
berg's, and Delitzsoh's words may also be studied with great advantage. David Dickson's 
remarks are very sensible throughout, specially his six reasons for regarding the psalm an 
Messianic. 

' See Dr. J. Pye Smith's note hereon ; and a magnificent passage on the Messianio psalms 
in Canon Liddon's 'Bampton Lectures,' ii. p. 121 (best edition); also his notes from 
Keniiicott, the Targum, and Dr. Pnsey, pp. 122—124. 

' Probably Glieyne would have his answer rtady, and say, " Psychology wiU not alloTf 
of any such thmg I " No, but an inspired pneumatology will 1 



856 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlv. 1— 17. 

place of honour by his side. 5. Her . attendants should come from the nations, wAh 
their offerings of devotion (ver. 12). 

III. Hbeb IB THE King's offspeing. (Ver. 16.) The sacrifice which the bride 
had made for the sake of the King shall be more than recompensed by her having 
children, who should gather round her, and who should become " princes in the earth 
(1 Pet. il 9; Eev. L 6; v. 10; xx. 6). 

lY. Hebe is roBETOLD the Kma's unitebbal and endless pbaisb. (Ver. 17.) 
Though the lerse seems to be addressed immediately to the bride, evidently the carry- 
ing forward of the name to generation after generation is an honour chiefly of the King, 
and results from the bridal union. And the praise which shall accrue wUl be from the 
peoples (Revised Version), from all the nations; and this praise will be for ever and 
ever (Fs. Ixxii. 17). " Christ's espousing unto himself a Church, and gathering more 
and more from aj^e to age by his Word and Spirit unto it, his converting of souls, and 
bringing them into the fellowship of his family, and giving unto them princely minds 
and affections wherever they live, are large matters of growing and everlasting glory " 
(Dickson). " Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, ba unto him that sitteth 
upon the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever." — C. 

Vers. 1 — 6. — The Kingship of Christ. The unerring instinct of the Church has 
interpreted this psalm of the Messiah. Each Jewish king, in a sense, foreshadowed the 
true King. Of Solomon it might be said, in a spcial manner, that he was a type of 
the true King; but take him "in all his glory, and he was only a type dim and 
imperfect. " A greater than Solomon is here." Mark — 

I. The pebfeotness of his ohabacteb. Christ's excellence is morah All that 
was " fair " in others was but the broken fragments of the mirror. In him we see the 
perfection of beauty. Others might be " fair " in some things, and not in others, but 
in him all that is true and beautiful and good shines forth in harmony and fulness. 
" He is altogether lovely." And the excellence of Christ is not only human, but Divine. 
The glory of God shines in him. He is the perfect King, because he is the perfect Man ; 
and he is the perfect Man, because " in him dwelt all the fulness of the Qodhead bodily." 
His perfections, therefore, not only command the homage of all hearts, but they are 
unchanging and uuchangeable as the glory of Ood. 

II. Tee bplendoub of his achievements. In the ancient monnmenta of Egypt 
and Assyria we see kings represented as going forth to conquer, and their enemies 
falling before their arrows. Such is the picture here. But the picture is relieved firom 
all terrors and gloom. The King who conquers here conquers because he is also a 
Prophet, and because his cause is the cause of right and truth. His sword is " the Word 
of God." His arrows are the arrows of righteousness. His victory is the victory of 
love. "Grace" is in his lips. "Truth and meekness" mark his progress. "The 
people fall under " him — fall to rise again in dignity and strength. 

III. The blessedness op his eeion. (Vers. 6 — 9.) 1. The righteousness of his 
administration. 2. The happiness of his subjects. 3. The perpetuity of his kingdom. 
The kingdoms of this world have no permanence. They contain within themselTes ihe 
elements of decay. Kings and kingdoms pass away. 

" Sceptre and crown mnst tumble down. 
And in the grave be equal made 
With the poor crooked scythe and spade." 

But it is otherwise with the kingdom of Christ. It is « for ever and ever."— W. F. 

Ver. 16. — FatJiers and children. We may consider three things. 

L The chanqes of life. The fatliers come first, then the children. There ia t 
constant succession. We see the same on the earth. The sun and moon and stars are 
the same that have been from the beginning, but the scarred face of the earth indicate* 
change. The year has its seasons. Fiel(£ white unto harvest to-day will be bare 
to-morrow. The leaves fade, and others come in their places. So it is in life. Go 
where you will, the cry is, " Your fathers, where are they?" (Zeeh. L 6). This throw! 
great responsibility upon the living. They stand between the past and the future. 
Prom the fathers they have received much, and of them the children require muoh. 



P8. XL VI. 1 — 11.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



86^ 



They are the " heirs of all the ages," and they are hound to hand down, pure and entire, 
to those who come after, the glorious inheritance they have possessed. 

II. 'iHE COMPENSATIONS OF LIFE. When the fathers are taken, wo are ready to 
regard it as a calamity. If one falls who stood high in Church or state, we cry in our 
grief like David when Ahner was slain, " Know ye not that there is a prince and a 
great man fallen this day in Israel ? " (2 Sam. iii. 38). But God's hand is in these things. 
There is compensation. If the fathers go, it is that the children may take their places. 
The line is never broken. The order which God has fixed continues. If Moses dies, 
Joshua takes his place. If Elijah is carried into heaven, his mantle falls upon Elisha. 
If Stephen is martyred in the midst of his labours, God has a chosen vessel in pre- 
paration, to take up his work, and carry it out in nobler ways than he could have done. 
So it is slill. Though there be breaks and interruptions and intervals when things 
were dark, yet the law holds good. Let us take heed. The future is the outcome of 
the present. We are sowing in the hearts of our children the harvests that are to be. 
Let ns do our duty towards those who are to come in our place, and leave results to 
Gtod. "0 Church of God," said Augustine, " think not thyself abandoned, because 
thou seest not Peter, nor seest Paul. Seest not thou through whom thou wast born ; 
out of thine own offspring has a body of ' fathers ' been raised up to thee." 

m. The distinctions of life. 1. Their source is Divine. We say the sovereign 
is the source of honour. So it is in the higher tilings. True honour is from God only, 
and he gives it to those alone whom he has " made " to be worthy (John i. 12). 2. Th»ir 
eharactar is princely. When God makes princes, he makes princes in reality. He gives 
not only place, but power; and not only power, but the highest honours (Gen. xxxiL 
28 ; 2 Tim. i. 7 ; Eev. i. 5). What Gideon's brethren were in appearance they are in 
reality (Judg. viii. 18). 3. Their influence is world-wide. Wherever they are known, 
they are honoured. What was true of the twelve is true in a measure of all Christ's 
servants (Matt. xix. 28). As Samuel Rutherford said with his last breath, " Glory 
dwelleth in Immanuelfs land." — W. F. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM XL VI. 



Tns la a psalm of consolation. Israel, in 
great peril (vers. 1 — 3, 6, 8, 9), consoles 
herself with the thoaght of Ood's might, 
his protecting care, and his ability to shatter 
all the combinations that her enemies may 
form against her. There is nothing to 
determine absolutely what particular peril 
is spoken of; but, on the whole, the allu- 
■ions seem to point to the invasion by 
Sennaoherib, rather than to any other event 
in Hebrew history. Critics of such diverse 
schools as Hengatenberg and Professor 
Cheyne unite in this conclusion. 

The metrical construction is very simple 
and regular, if, with several eminent critics, 
we restore, after ver. 3, the refrain of vera. 
7 and 11, which seems to have accidentally 
fallen out. We then have three stanzas of 
four verses each, each stanza terminating 
with the same refrain. 

" Upon Alamoth " in the title is best 
explained as a musical direction — to be 
Buug upon high notes, with voices shrill 
and clear, like tliose of " virgins." 



Ver. 1. — Qod is onr Befnga and Strength 
(oomp. Pas. xviii. 2 ; xciv. 22, etc.). A very 
present Help in trouble; literally, a very 
acaessible Help — one easy to be fonnd (oomp. 
2 Ohron. xv. 4). 

Ver. 2.— Therefore will not we fear, 
thongh the earth be removed ; or, though the 
earth change — a somewhat vague expression, 
probably to be understood of political 
changes and revolutions (see ver. 6). And 
thongh the monntaius be carried Into the 
midst of the sea; rather, and though the 
mountaine be hurled into the heart of the aeaa. 
A metaphor for still more strange and 
violent disturbauoes and commotions. The 
revolutions and disturbances intended are 
probably those caused by the Assyrian 
career of conquest briefly described in Isa. 
X. 5—14; xxxvii. 18—27, and fully set 
forth in the aunals of the Assyrian kings 
(see G. Smith's 'Eponym Canon,' pp. 
106 — 149; and the author's 'Ancient 
Monarchies,' vol. ii. pp. 83—210). 

Ver. 3. — Though the waters thereof roar 
and be troubled ; or, roar and foam (Heng- 
stenberg, Kay, Cheyne). Though the 
monntains shake with the swelling thereof 
(corap. Pa. xoiii. .S, 4; Jer. xlvi 8, 9; 
xlvii. 2). 

Ver. 4. — There is a river, the streams 
whereof shall make glad the oity of &od 



358 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[rs. XL VI. 1 — 11. 



In contrast with the scene of tumult and 
disturbance in the world at large, which the 
writer has presented to us in vera. 2, 3, he 
now shows us, resting in perfect peace and 
tranquillity, " the city of God," threatened, 
indeed, by the nations, but undismayed by 
them, and calmly trusting in the protection 
of the God who is " in the midst of her," 
To this city he assigns a "river, the 
streams whereof make her glad ; " imagery 
in which we may recognize the perennial 
fountain of God's grace — that " pure river 
of water of life," which, welling forth from 
the throne of God and of the Lamb, con- 
tinually refreshes and gladdens the Church 
of Clirist (Rev. xxii 1), whether her dwell- 
ing-place be the earthly or the heavenly 
Jerusalem. The holy place of the tabernacles 
of the Most High (comp. Ps. xliii. 3). The 
direct application is, of course, to the 
earthly Jerusalem, which the armies of 
Sennacherib were threatening. 

Yer. 5. — God is in the midst of her ; she 
shall not be moved. While the world is 
being turned upside down (vers. 2, 3, 6), 
the Church is unmoved — since " God is in 
the midst of her." 6od shall help her, and 
that right early ; literally, at the turning of 
the morning, or, in other words, " at the 
break of day " (comp. Pss. xxx. 6 ; xlix. 
14 ; lea. xvii. 14). The deliverance of 
Israel from Sennacherib cnme, it is to be 
remembered, when it was discovered " early 
in thi^ morning " that in the camp of the 
Assyrians were 185,000 " dead corpses " (2 
Kings xlx. 35). 

Yer. 6. — i he heathen raged, the kingdoms 
were moved : he uttered his voice, the earth 
melted (comp. vers. 2 and 3). The past 
tenses are probably the " preterite of pro- 
phetic certainty." The writer foresees and 
announces tlie destruction of Israel's enemies. 

Yer. 7. — The Lord of hosts is with us 
(oorijp. 2 Chron. xv. 2 ; xx. 17 ; Isa. viii. 
8, 10). This is the ground of assurance. 
Our God, Jehovah, is " the Lord of hosts " 
— one who has countless ang'ls at his com- 
mKud (2 Kings vi. Iti, 17; Ps. Ixviii. 17; 
Matt. xxvi. 53). And he is " with us " — 
on our side, ready to help. The God of 
Jacob is our Eefuge ; i.e. our covenant God, 
the Goil who entered into covenant with 
our fullers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 

Yer. 8. — Come, behold the works of the 
Lord, what desolations he hath made in 



the earth. The deliverance of Israel from 
its peril is effected by " desolations " or 
" devastations," which God accomplishes 
among the nations. The announcement 
is very vague and general, so that it would 
apply to almost any occasion when the 
people of God were delivered from » 
pressing peril. 

Yer. 9. — He maketh wars to cease unto 
the end of the earth (comp. Isa. ii. 4 ; xi. 
9 ; Ixv. 25). Each great deliverance effected 
by God is followed naturally by a term of 
peace (comp. Judg. iii. 11, 30; v. 31; viii. 
28 ; " and the land had rest twenty, forty, 
eighty years"), each such term being 
typical of the final peace, when God shall 
have put down all enemies under Messiah's 
feet. He breaketh the bow, and cntteth 
the spear in sunder; i.e he destroys all 
offensive weapons, so that none may " hurt 
or destroy in all his holy mountain " (Isa. 
xi. 9). He burneth the chariot in the fire. 
War-chariots were largely employed by the 
Assyrians, and formed the main strength of 
the army of Sennacherib (2 Kings xix. 23). 

Yer. 10. — ^Be still, and know that I am 
God (comp. Exod. xiv. 13, 14 ; 2 Chion. xx. 
17; Isa. XXX. 15). As a general rule, God' 
requires man to co-operate with him. " We 
are fellow-workers with God." "Aide-toi, 
le ciel t'aidera." But there are occasions 
when man must stand aloof, and all must 
be left to the almighty Disposer of all 
things. The invasion of Sennacherib was 
such an occasion. Human effort could not 
but be futile ; and unless God gave deliver- 
ance in some strange and extraordinary way, 
there was no hope of escape : Judeea must 
cease to exist as an independent country. 
I will be exalted among the heathen. When 
a deliverance was plainly miraculous, the 
God of Israel got him special honour among 
the neighbouring heathen nations, who 
could not gainsay the fact that there had 
been a supernatural interposition (comp. 
Exod. xiv. 4, 17, 18) I will be exalted in 
theearth. Exaltation amongthe neighbour- 
ing heathen had an effect upon a still wider 
circle (comp. 2 Chron. xxxii. 23, " And 
many brought gifts tu Hezekiah, King of 
Judah, and he was magnified in the eyes of 
all heathen henceforth "). 

Yer. 11. — The lord of hosts is with us; 
the God of Jacob is onr Befnge Tsee the 
comment on ver. 7). 



HOMTLETICS. 

Vers. 1, 2.-'— The unchangeaNeness of Ood. " God is our Eefnge," etc. Mountains 
are the grandest of God's earthly works ; natural images of majesty, strength, durable- 
ness. Rearing their peaks above the clouds, they gather the airy treasures of snow 
and rain •, and pour from never-failing fountains the stieams that water the valleyl 



PS. XLvi. 1—11.] THK BOOK OF PSALMS. 359 



and feed the plains. Natural fortresses, where liberty has often found an impreonalile 
asylum. Yet they are perishable. Waters wear their rocky sides. Earthquakes and 
landslips topple their crags into the valleys. Volcanic fires sometimes, as in our own 
day, tear them from their ancient foundations, and hurl their ruins into the sea 
(Krakatoa, 1883). Such an overthrow of what seems stronsett and most stable in 
outward nature, is in the text the image of the possible failure of ali earthly support, 
defence, comfort, hope. But he who built the mountains and gave ocean its bounds, 
fails not, changes not. " God is our Refuge aud Strength : therefore will we not fear." 
Theseare the two contrasted thoughts of our text. 

I. The insbcueity of evert earthly refuge ; the instability of all human 
strength. This may be realized : 1. In public calamity ; national disasiers. Depression 
of trade may carry discomfort, even ruin, into hundreds of thousands of homes. Our 
commercial system is so complicated and nicely balanced that one giiiantic failure may 
give a shock to the whole fabric. The tremendous possibilities of war have to be 
reckoned ; clear though the sky may be, the war-clouds may at any time gather and 
burst; perhaps with destructive fury surpassing all example. Even if our own shores 
still escape, war expenditure may drain our resources, and the destruction of our 
commerce entail scarcity — even famine. Some new form of pestilence may dely healing 
skill. The pride of the nations may be broken, their wealth wasted, their science 
proved unavailing. 2. In personal and family trovMe. It has happened sometimes — 
travellers well know the spots — that when sky and sea were calm, and no earthquake 
shook the land, a whole hillside has slid down without warning, carrying down and 
wrecking peaceful homehteads, even overwhelming whole villages. Even so, when 
public prosperity is untroubled; the private foundations of your health, fortune, 
happiness, hope, may fail, and with brief or no warning, and all your earthly welfare 
be laid in ruins (Ps. xxx. 6, 7). 3. In preva'ling wnsettlement of thought and belief. 
When old forms go out of fashion ; traditional beliefs are discredited ; trusted leaders 
fail; men seem to hold nothing firm or settled. Worst of all, when this agitated 
atmosphere infects our inward life ; doubt surges in, and threatens to overwhelm faith 
and conviction ; the ground seems to quake under our feet, and darkness to beset and 
bewilder our soul. 

II. The nbvbk-failing Eefuqe. God's children, in these and all other calamities, 
find a " very present Help" in him. 1. His povjer to save is all-sufficient. All hearts 
aud events are in his hand (2 Chron. xiv. 11; xvi. 9). 2. His wisdom is infinite. 
All that can happen is known — has always been known to him. He can never be at 
a loss to answer prayer. 3. His promises meet every emergency (Heb. xiii. 5, 6). 
4. B.\s faithfulness is the immovable foundation on which we may build absolute trust 
(Heb. vi. 18, 19). All the experience of the past, all the hope of the future, sheds its 
light on the dark present, because he changes not. Ii there be any truth, God must 
be true. And if anything be certain, it is that Jesus Christ, " the true and faithful " 
Witness, speaks God's truth to us (John xiv. 6, 10, 27 ; xix. 37 ; Heb. xiii. 8). 

Vers. 1, 7, 11. — " Our Refuge." The whole spirit of this noble psalm is condensed 
in this one jihiase — "Go.l is our Refuge." The Hebrew, as the margin of our Bibles 
shows, has a different word in vers. 7, 11 from ver. 1, signifying " a high place " (Revised 
Version, " or a high tower ") — a retreat beyond reach of Iocs. The word in ver. 1 means 
" somewhere [or, ' some one 'J to trust in." These two thoughts — trust and saftty — are 
well expressed in our word " Refuge." Take the whole psalm as embodying and 
enforcing this sentiment. 

I. In trouble we need a refuge. In bodily sickness and weakness, healing 
ministry, careful watching, an arm to lean on. In perplexity, a wise counsellor. In 
want, danger, or misfortune, timely succour. In sorrow, sympathy and comfort. 
Under sense of sin, a voice of forgiveness. To lean helplessly on others when we ou^ht 
to put our own slaoulder to the wheel, is unmanly and shameful. But the pride of 
independence is an illusion when it makes us forget how constantly and how much we 
depend on one another. None is self-sufficient. 

TI. God is the all-sufficient, nevbr-failino Refuge of his children. The 
Hebrew for "very present" means literally " greatly found ; " not far to seek, but 
nigh at hand; not difficult to find, l>ut offering himself; found by experience to b« 



360 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xlvi. 1— H. 

all that he promises, all that we need. Human ministry can do much in the lesser 
tioubleB of life ; it is God's appointed way of help. But when " the mountains " are 
removed — ^in the great crises and overwhelming sorrows, dangers, burdens of life 
nothing will serve short of this — "underneath are the everlasting arms." Above all, 
in spiritual troubles. "Who can forgive sin but God alone?" Who but Jesus can 
.shepherd us through the dark valley ? 

III. When trouble deivbs us to cub Befugb, it fitlfils its mission. The 
curse becomes a blessing, and sorrow bears fruit in joy. In fair weather the ships pass 
gaily by the harbour of refuge ; in the storm they make for it. It is easy to stand at 
the helm with a fair breeze and smooth sea. Easy to stand sentry in time of peace. 
Easy to trust God with a well-spread table and home bright with blooming faces. In 
the tempest ; In war, when the bullet sings through the dark night, and the blast is 
ireezing to the bone ; or by the bed of sick, perhaps dying child, — not so easy 1 But 
then it is that God's help is "found" by those who trust him (Gen. xxii. 14; Joltn 
vi. 18—20). 

Remark : 1. This is the testimony of experience. God it fmmd to be such a Help 
and Befuge. All the conclusions of science do not rest on a broader basis of induction, 
a surer witness of experience, than the faith of God's Church. 2. Trouble is not 
necessa/rUy a means of grace or blessing ; has no natural power to drive or lead men 
to Gbd. We must hear God's voice in it ; feel his hand ; be led by his Spirit (2 Cor. 
xii. 8 — ^10). Sad, indeed, if our troubles be wasted, — all misery and no blessing I 

Ver. 4. — The river of God. " There is a river," etc. How is it that when we read 
or chant this psalm, it never seems to us that it was written in an ancient foreign 
tongue, nigh three thousand years ago? It is as much a living voice, comes as home 
to our hearts, as though written in our mother tongue and our own generation. So it 
is with other psalms, however local in imagery, Jewish in application. Bible poetry 
is unlike any other, in its capacity of translation into all languages. Usually, the finer 
poetry is, the more it suffers in translation ; the less can it make a home for itself any* 
trhere but in its native land. Why is the case so different with the poetry of the Bible ? 
The reacon lies deeper than any poetic beauty, than human patriotism, than human 
sympathy. It is spiritual force. These songs of Zion utter the experience of loula 
quickened and breathed through — ^inspired by God's own Spirit. Therefore their interest 
is universal, their charm undying, their force inexhaustible. The living stream at which 
those ancient believers drank flows fuller, deeper, broader, with the lapse of ages; and 
still makes glad the city of God. This beautiful image, in its broadest application, is 
to be taken of the xmfailing care, gracious presence, overflowing loving-kindness, of our 
God, with whom is "the fountain of life." More especially we may apply it to (1) iht 
written Word; and (2) tlie indwelling Spirit of God. These are the two main 
streams — one outward, one inward — by which we drink of the Divine fulness. 

L The written Word. The full, deep, sweet stream of truth in the promises, pre- 
cepts, prayers, revelations, histories, and examples of Old and New Testament Scriptures. 
Amazing effort is put forth in our day to prove that this stream is neither clear nor 
pure ; that it flows from no certain fountain ; in fact, to dry it up altogether. Modem 
science has taught us, what no one dreamed of at the middle of last century, that 
water is made up of two kinds of air, and can be decomposed by electricity. What 
then? Does this make any difference in the need and power of water to quench our 
thirst, make our fields fruitful, keep our skin and raiment and all we have clean ? AU 
this is the same now as in David's days. In like manner, the immense learnuig and 
criticism bestowed on Scripture, partly instructive, throwing a flood of light on it* 
structure, its language and literary character; partly destructive, endeavouring to 
destroy its authority, page by page, and decompose it into fragments — has not in 
the least altered its living power or our need of its teaching. It still gives us troth, 
never taught or dreamed of by other religious teachers ; promises of God, which ue 
nowhere, if not in the Bible ; laws which embrace and explain the whole of human duty; 
examples for daily guidance ; a history, in which God is seen dealing with men and 
manifesting himself to them along one unbroken line, from the birth of our race t« 
the end of our present world ; above all, in our Lord Jesus, a personal manifestation 
of God, a full deliverance from all the ruin and misery of forsaking, forgetting, 



P8. XLVL 1—11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS, 361 

disobeying Gbd, and warrant for coming to him in absolute trust and perfect love ; and 
a glorious certainty of a life which death cannot touch— eternal life in Jesus Christ 
our Lord. All this, and more, is in the Bible. Unbelief may rob the unbeliever of hia 
portion, but cannot impoverish the Bible. "The Word of God liveth and abideth." 
What joy, comfort, strength, light, purity, is it at this moment diffusing through 
myriads untold of Christian hearts and lives! It makes glad the city of Grod. 
A single promise may be the stay of a sinking heart; a single text the hinge of a 
new life. 

II. The inwabd gbacb op the Holt Spirit. Whence this wonderful power of the 
Scriptures to quicken, nourish, guide, bless, the higher life of man, as no other writings 
can? From God's Spirit in the men who wrote them. Only life feeds life. The 
devout reader need not per[)lex himself with any questions about the inspiration of the 
Bible, as long as he hears in it God's voice, reals in it God's thoughts, feels in it God's 
love, beholds in it " the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus." But for all this, 
inspiration — q.d. the living breath and life-giving presence of God's Spirit — is as 
needful for the readers as it was for the writers. Of the same sort ? Certainly not. 
But as real (1 Cor. ii. 10 — 15 ; 1 John iii. 27 ; John vi. 44, 45). If there be one truth 
to which the Scriptures bear clear witness, it is the need of Divine teaching (compare 
with 2 Tim. iii. 15, 16; Acts xvi. 14; John iv. U; vii. 37—39). 

III. This DivniE fulness is thk soueoe op the Cuurch's peace and jot. It 
"maketh glad the city of God" — ^the communion of saints; the true Israel. Ancient 
Jerusalem was so well supplied with water as never to fear drought. When besieged 
by the Crusaders, it was the besiegers who suffered thirst, not those within the walls. 
But one perennial spring is known to exist at Jerusalem (" Bn-rogel," 1 Kings i. 9, 
which feeds, through a tunnel, the pool of Siloam ; see ' Biblical Handbook,' p. 334). 
But beneath the temple were vast reservoirs, by some supposed supplied from a spring, 
but by explorers said to be fed by the rain — "the rivers of God" (Ps. Ixv. 9). So, in 
the common treasure of God's Word, the common possession of God s Spirit (Bom. viii. 
9), the Church of Christ has a never-failing fountain and unfathomable reservoir oi 
joy, strength, peace, for evermore. (N.B. — This third head might supply a sermon by 
itgelf.) 

Ver. 9. — War. " He maketh wars to cease." If we were asked to give in one short 
word the most prevailing character, the most striking feature, of human history — the 
history of all nations, civilized or savage, ancient or modern — we must reply, " War." 
If we were asked — ^What has been the severest scourge under which human life and 
happiness have suffered? we must again say, "War." If we were asked to furnish 
in one word the proof that human nature is sinful, q.d. that its passions are not 
bridled by justice or ruled by love, we must again answer, " War." Is this to be the 
case always ? Will the time come when nations " shall learn war no more " ? 

I. God alone can make waeb to cease. Science cannot do it. It can teach 
men how more skilfully to destroy each other, but not to love one another. Commerce 
cannot do it. Some of the cruelest and wickedest wars have been waged for the sake 
of trade and revenue. Education cannot do it. The most highly educated nations of 
the world are the most military. Progress and civilization cannot; for they do not 
make men unselfish. The source of war is not in outward circumstances, but in 
human nature ; in the lust of gain, of power, of glory, of vengeance (Jas. iv. 1). No 
power can subdue these but hia who could say to the winds and waves, " Peace, be 
still I" 

II. God cau do it. By miracle, if he sees fit; sink every war-ship, paralyze every 
soldier's arm or eye. But that is not God's way of ruling the world. He will not 
make wars to cease unless the roots out of which they grow be plucked up. While 
sin reigns, strife will reign. Only let justice and benevolence become universally 
recognized and obeyed, and war must die out. For, allowing that war may be just 
and even (in the long run) benevolent on one side, there never was and never can 
be a war tnat was just on loth sides. How, then, can God make war to cease ? By 
making all men loving and righteous, wise and unselfish. This does not imply any 
imaginary impossible perfection. There are tens of thousands who make no pretence 
to perfection, yet are so governed by justice and inspired by kindness, that if all were 



362 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xlvi, 1—11. 

like them, war would be impossible. The love of God, the Spirit of God, and the truth 
of God, can do this, and are doing it daily. What God does in the.se cases he can do 
ia others. Things impossible with men are possible with God. 

III. God has peomisbd to do this. (Isa. ii. 4; .J as. iii. 18.) No nobler title 
belongs to our Saviour than "Prince of Peace" (see Eph. ii. 14; Col. i. 20; Rom. v. 
1). If we are tempted to ask, " If God cam. make wars to cease, and has promised, 
lohy does war continue tc scourge mankind ? " the answer must be, " Because men will 
not have God's remedy." As long as they are not at peace with God, so long they 
cannot, shall not, be at peace among themselves. Do not think that God looks down 
on human suffering with indifference. The whole Bible is in contradiction U\ such a 
thought ; but, above all, the fact that his beloved Son has taken our suffering flesh on 
him. God is the " Author of peace, and Lover of concord." But he will have no 
remedy which does not go to the root. Righteousness must go first ; peace follows (Isa. 
xxxii. 17; Jas. iii. 18). Meanwhile let us rejoice in the promise and prospect (Ps. 
Ixxii. 7). Every triumph of the gospel, every heart yielded, every life consecrated 
to Christ, is a step towards the blessed reign of universal peace (Matt. t. 9). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — The saint's stronghold. This psalm is one of those "for the sons of 
Korah," on which see our remarks on Ps. xlii. It is " a song upon Alamoth," which, 
according to Fiirst,* is the proper name of a musical choir. As the word " Alamoth " 
means "virgins," it is supposed that the song was for soprano voices. We have, however, 
to deal with the contents of the song itself. It has long been a favourite with the people 
of God. "This is my psalm," said Luther. To this we owe his "Bin feste Burg ist 
unser Gott," and many other songs of the sanctuary. It would seem to have been 
suggested by some one of the many deliverances which the Hebrews had from the 
onsets of their foes ; but to which of those it specially refers, is and must be left an 
open question. There are phrases in it which remind us of the redemption from 
Egypt (cf. ver. 5 with Bxod. xiv. 27, Hebrew). There are others which recall the 
deliverance for which Jehoshaphat prayed (cf. vers. 10, 11 with 2 Chron. xx. 17, 22, 
23). Other words vividly set forth the boasting of Sennacherib and the destruction 
of his army (cf. vers. 3, 6 with 2 Kings xviii. 29—35 ; xix. 6, 7, 15—19, 28, 35). At 
each of these crises the four points of this psalm would be (1) a raging storm ; (2) a 
commanding voice; (3) a humbled foe ; (4) a jubilant song. And how many times this 
song has bien sung by individuals, by families, by Churches, by nations,* the closest 
students of history best can tell. And in setting forth this song for homiletic use, we 
might show that it records the repeated experience of the Church ; that it becomes 
the grateful song of the family ; that it fits the lips of the believer in recounting 
providential mercy ; that it is the constant song of the saints in rehearsing redemp- 
tion's story. To deal with all these lines of thought would far exceed our space. We 
will confine ourselves to the last-named use of the words before us, showing that this 
forty-sixth psalm means far more on the lips of the Christian than it did on the lips of 
Old Testament believers. It is not the song itself that is our chief joy, but that revela- 
tion of God which has made such a song possible for believers — first under the Old 
Testament, and specially, in Christ, under the New Testament. 

I. The saints kow have a clearer view of God. (Heb. i. 1, 2.) Of old, God 
spake through prophets ; now he speaks in his Son. And when we hear our Lord say, 
" He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father," we know at once to whom to turn for 
the interpretation of that greatest of all words, " God." To the Hebrews, their 
covenant God was revealed in words (Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7) ; but to us he is revealed in 
the living Word, in the Person of the incarnate Son of God. " In him dwelleth all the 
fulness of the Godhead bodily." 

II. The saints now can record a greater deliverance than Israel of old 

' See his ' Lexicon,' sub verb. ; of. 1 Chron. xv. 20 and ' Variorum Bible.' 
' As in the great evi-nt which called forth the immortal words, " Dens efflavit, et 
dissipantur." 



PS. XLVi, 1— 11.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 863 

could boast — an infinitely greater one. Not only was there all the difference between 
rescues that were local, temporary, national, and one that is for the race for all time, 
but also the difference between a deliverance from Egypt, Ammou, Moab, and Assyria, 
and one that is from Satan and from sin ; from the curse of a broken Law, and from 
the wrath to come. The song of Miriam is infinitely outdone by the new song, even 
the song of Moses and the Lamb. 

III. The saints can now kejoiob in a better covenant. At the back, so to 
speak, of the psalm before us there was a recognizeii covenant between God and the 
people (Exod. xix. 5, 6 ; Ps. xlvi. 7, 11). In the later days of David " the everlasting 
covenant" was the aged monarch's hope aud rest. But now, ia Christ, we have the 
" better covenant," " the everlasting covenant," sealed and ratified with blond (Heb. viii. 
6 ; xiii. 20 ; Matt. xxvi. 28). This covenant assures to the penitent, forgiveness of 
sins and an inheritance among them that are sanctified. It includes all that Christ is 
and has, as made over to those who rely on him, for ever and for ever. It is not 
dependent on the accidents of time or sense. No duration can weaken it ; no ill 
de.sigas can mar it ; not all the force of earth or hell can touch those who look to " the 
sure uiercies of David." 

IV. The saints now make up a mdee peivileged city. (Ver. 4.) While 
nations were proudly and angrily raging like the wild waves of the tossing sea, there 
was a calm, peaceful river, whose branches peacefully flowed through the city of God. 
Thus beautifully does the psalmist indicate the calm which took possession of believers 
then, while the nations roared around them. And in " the new Jerusalem," the present 
" city of God," which Divine love founded, and which Divine power is building up, 
there still flows the deep, still, calm river of Divine peace and joy and love. Or, if it 
be preferred, let Dr. Watts tell — 

" That sacred stream, thine Holy Word, 
That all our raging fear controls ; 
Sweet peace thy promises afford, 

And give new strength to fainting souls." 

Through the new city of God, the Holy Catholic Church, made up of all believers, this 
(leaceful stream ever runs, refreshing and fertilizing wherever it flows. No frost 
congeals it ; no heat can dry it up ; it will eternally make glad the city of God. 
Hence — 

V. The saints now peal forth a mdeb jubilant sons. We can sing this 
psalm, especially its first verse, with wider intelligence, larger meaning, deeper peace, 
and more expansive joy, than were possible to the Hebrews of old. As revelation has 
advanced, the believer's joy in God has grown likewise. Faith becomes larger as 
faiih's Object becomes clearer. And no Hebrew could sing of the deliverance of his 
fathers so joyously as we can sing of the redemption of a world — a redemption in which 
we can rejoice, not only in our days of sadness, but in our days of gladness too. And 
as the psalmist could think of God as the Lord of hosts, and yet the God of Jacob ; as 
the Leader of the armies of heaven, and yet the Helper of the lonely, wayworn traveller ; 
so the believer, in thinking of the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, can say, " He 
died lor all," and also, " He loved me, and gave himself for me." 

VI. The sono is grandest wheke trouble has been the greatest. " He 
has been found a Help in trouble exceedingly " — the adverb expressive of intensity 
may refer to the greatness of the trouble. But however this may be, certain it is that 
it is in the troubles of life that the believer finds out all that Ood is to him. And the 
man who can sing this psalm most jubilantly is the one who has been weighted with 
care most heavily. This is the glory of our great redeeming God. He is a Friend for 
life's dark days, as well as for the bright ones. Note : 1. The troubles of life often 
bring out to us our need of God. It is easy to be serene when trouble is far from us, and 
to spin fine philosophic webs ; but let trouble come upon us, — that will make all the 
difference. The late beloved Princess Alice was almost led to the dark negations of 
Straussianism ; but when she lost her child, her trouble led her to feel her need of a 
Befuge, and then she sought and found the Lord. Ellen Watson, the accomjilished 
matliematioian, revelled in exact science, and " wanted nothing more" till the death of 
a friend broke in on her exact science, rent her heart, opened her eyes, and was tlie 



364 THE BOOK OF 2SALMS. [ps. xlvi. 1— 11. 

means of leading her to Jesus. The experience of a young civil eng^eer, whom the 
writer Tisited in his last illness, was precisely the same. 2. Those who can give us no 
comfort or rest in the troubles of life are of little use in such a world as thig. In a 
letter of an aged Unitarian minister to a friend of the writer, the expression is used, 
" I am just battling with the inevitable." " Battling with the inevitable/ " So it must 
be, if men turn away from our G-od as the Eedeemer from sin, the Saviour of the lost. 
3. It is the glory of Christ as our Refuge that he can hide us securely in the fiercest 
troubles of life. 

" Should storms of sevenfold thunder roll, 
And shake the globe frum pole to pole, 
No flaming bolt shall daunt my face. 
For Jesus is my Hidiag-place." 

a 

Vers. 1 — 11. — Hope/or the troubled. Faith in God assures— 

I. Help in trouble. It may be some storm of outward or of inward trial comes, 
or both may be combined. Enemies may rage without, and sin may rouse tumults 
and fears within. But " God is our Refuge ; " he is always near, always sufBcient. The 
manslayer might fail to reach the place of safety ; but God is at our right hand, and 
it needs but a cry from our hearts to secure his help. The Israelite might perish, 
though he had his hand on the horn of the altar (1 Kings ii. 25) ; but if we " flee for 
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us," we are safe (Heb. vi. 18). It is this 
faith in God that gives true fearlessness. Trusting in God and doing good, who can 
harm us (1 Pet. iii. 13)? 

n. CoMFOET IN TEGUBLK. (Vers. 4, 5.) There is an advance here to what is more 
inward and spiritual — to the Divine consolations of the good. The " river," with its 
several " streams," typifies those consolations as they are to be found in the Word and 
ordinances of the gospel and the love of God in Christ Jesus. They are free, affluent, 
abiding. Other waters may fail (Isa. xix. 5), but they " go on for ever." Like the 
waters from the rock that followed Israel through all their wanderings, so they are 
ever beside us and open to us, so that whosoever will may drink and be refreshed. 
" God is in the midst of her." This is the secret of the whole. 

III. Dbliveeanoe from teoublb. Trials are needful; they have their purpose, 
and when it is accomplished they cease. As with the wars that desolate the earth, 
they are under the control of God. It is for us to be patient and trust. God's time is 
the best time. It may be dark now, but the dawn of a brighter day is near (ver. 5). 
There may be conflict and strife now, and as good soldiers of Jesus Christ we must 
endure hardness ; but victory is sure. We are not only to learn patience from what 
we "behold" of the works of the Lord, but from what we "know" in the secrets of 
our own experience (vers. 8 — 10) ; besides, we have the sure word of prophecy and of 
promise. " The Lord of hosts is with us ; " and if so, greater is he that is for us than 
all they that can be against us. " The. God of Jacob is our Refuge ; " and if so, we 
may be confident that God will keep us in all places whither we go, and will not only 
sanctify unto us all our trials, but bring us in the and into the land of everlasting 
peace. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — A Divine Rrfuge and Strength. The ground-thought is, " God is our 
Refuge and Strength," and it returns with only a slight change of form at the end of 
the second and third strophes. The strophes are : vers. 1 — 3 ; vers. 4 — 7 ; vers. 8 — 11. 

I. Gods eblation to us. 1. A relation of strength. (Vers. 6, 7, 9.) 2. 0/ 
intimate nearness. (Vers. 5, 7.) " In the midst of her." " With us." Immanuel. 
How near God is to us in Christ I 3. 0/ parental tenderness. " The Ocoi of Jacob is 
our Refuge." Christ calls us " little children," denoting how Gk)d feels toward us. 

II. What we should be in consequence of suoh a relation. 1. Fearless 
amid the greatest changes. (Vers. 2, 3.) But evil men have much to fear from God. 

2. Glad or joyful. (Ver. 4.) God will help " right early," or " in the morning." 

3. Obedient to the omnipotent Oud. "Be still "is equivalent to "know what I am, 
and cease from wars against my people." " He breaketh the bow of the strongest, and 
cutteth the spear in sunder ; be burneth the chariot in the fire." — S. 



W. XLVII. 1 9.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



365 



EXPOSITION, 



PSALM XLVII. 

This is a eoiig <if praise to God, as the King 
of the vvliole eartli. It has been called " one 
of the accession psalms," because it depicts 
Crod as assuming his kingdom, and taking 
his Beat upon his throne (vers. 5 — 8). There 
is nothing in the psalm that verj definitely 
marks the time of the composition; but it 
may well be, as Dr. Kay suggests, » psalm 
in which " Israel collectively acknowledges 
what David had been allowed to accom- 
plish." The title assigns it to "the sons 
of Korah," who were among David's chief 
musicians. 

Ver. 1. — clap your hands, all ye people ; 
rather, all ye peoples. The nations of the 
earth generally — ^not Israel only — are ad- 
dressed. The events which have taken place 
— the great extension of God's kingdom, 
by David's conquests, are for tlie advantage 
of all, and all ought to be thankful for 
them. Shont nnto God with the voice of 
triomph ; or, with a voice of joy. Professor 
Oheyne renders, " in ringing tones." 

Ver. 2. — For the Lord Most High isterrible 
(oomp. Dent. vii. 21 ; and see also Pss. Ixv. 5 ; 
Ixviii. 35 ; Ixxvi. 7—9). God is "terrible " 
— (.e. awful to contemplate — on account of 
his vast power and his absolute holiness. 
He is a great King over all the earth, Not 
only over Israel, or over the nations which 
David hsks conquered, but over every nation 
on the face of the earth (comp. Pss. xcv. 3, 
4 ; xcvi. 10 ; xcvii. 1, etc.). 

Ver. 3. — He shall subdue the people under 
ns; rather, he subdues, or hath subdued, 
peoples under us. Tlie reference is to recent 
victories (comp, Ps. xviii. 47). And the 
nations (rather, and nations} under our feet. 
David subdued all the nations between the 
river of Egypt and the Euphrates, and left 
the inheritance of this kingdom, or rather 
empire, to Solomon (1 Kings iv. 21). 

Ver. 4. — He shall choose onr inheritance 
for us ; rather, he ehooseth, or hath chosen, 
our inheritance for us. God originally chose 
Canaan as the inheritance of his people 
(Gen. xii. 1 — 7), and gave it to Abraham. 
Later on, he enlarged the gift, making the 
boundaries such as they became under 
David and Solomon (Gen. xv. 18). The 
excellency of Jacob whom he loved. The 
Holy Land is called "the excellency of 
Jacob," or "the pride of Jacob," on ac- 
eount of its beauty, and the excellence and 
variety of its productions (see Deut. viii. 
7—9 ; 2 Kings xviii. 22). 



Ver. 5.— God is gone up with a shout ; 
the Lord with the sound of a trumpet. As 
God " comes down " when he interposes for 
the relief or deliverance of his people (Ps. 
cxliv. 5), so after the relief or deliverance is 
effected, he is viewed as " going up " — re- 
turning to his glorious abode, reocoupying 
his seat in the heaven of heavens, and there 
remaining until some fresh call is made 
upon him. If the interposition has been 
one of a striking and unusual character, if 
the relief has been great, the deliverance 
signal, the triumph accorded to bis people 
extraordinary, tlien he "goes np with a 
shout" — amid the exulting cries and loud 
jubilations of rescued Israel. When the 
occasion is such as to call for a public mani- 
festation of thanksgiving at tlie house of 
God (2 Chron. xx. 28), then he " goes up " 
also " with tlie sound of the trumpet," which 
was always sounded by the priests on great 
occasions of festal joy and gladness (see 2 
Sam. vi. 15; 2 Kings xi. 14; 1 Chron. xiii. 
8 ; xvi. 42 ; 2 Chron. v. 12 ; vii. 6 ; xxix. 
27 ; Ezra iii. 10 ; Neh. xii. 35). 

Ver. 6. — Sing praises to God, sing praises ; 
sing praises unto oar King, sing praises. 
Praise him, i.e., both as God and King — 
especially as "our King" — that is, as 
Israel's King. 

Ver. 7.— For Ood is the King of all the 
earth (comp, ver. 2). Sing ye praises with 
understanding; literally, sing a psalm of 
instruction. As Hengstenberg remarks, 
" Every song in praise of God, on account 
of God, on account of his glorious deeds, 
contains a rich treasme of instruction and 
improvement." Here the special instruction 
is that God is King over the whole earth, 
that he reigns over the heathen, and that 
the heathen shall also some time or other 
own his sovereignty. 

Ver. 8. — God reigneth over the heathen. 
God had manifested his kingly power over 
the heathen by subduing great numbers of 
them, and making them subject to Israel. 
He would one day manifest it still more by 
bringing all nations into his Church. God 
sitteth upon the throne of his holiness. 
The throne from which he exercises a just, 
a righteous, and a holy rule. 

Ver. 9.— The princes of the people (lite- 
rally, princes of peoples) are gathered to- 
gether, even the people of the Ood of 
Abraham ; rather, to be the people of the God 
of Abraham (Revised Version)— j.«. to form, 
together with Israel, the one people, or 
Church, of God (comp. Isa. xlix. 18 — 23). 
For the shields of the earth belong onto God, 
The "shields" are the "princes" of the 
first clause, those whose business it is to 



366 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. XLVII. 1—-S 



protect and defend their subjects (comp. 
Hob. iv. 18). The princes of the earth 
belong especially to God, since "by him 
kings reign, and princes decree justice" 
(Prov. viii. 15). At tlie great ingathering 
of the Gentiles into the Church, they would 
belong to him still more, since they would 
voluntarily place themselves under his rule 
(Isa. xlix. 23 ; Ix. 3, 11, 16). He is greatly 



exalted. The perfect submission to God ol 
all his rational creatures is liis highest 
exaltation and glory. When " all pt-vple 
bow down before him," and " all nations do 
him service," when rebellion and resistance 
to his will are at an end, then will he be 
establislied in his rightful position, and his 
exaltation will be complete 



HOMILBTICS. 

Vers. 6, 7. — The faculty and duty of praise. " Sing praises." Every command oi 
God implies power to obey. True, God often tells us to do what we have no power of 
ourselves to do; but then he gives power. When Jesus bade the lame walk, the 
blind see, the paralytic to take up the bed he lay on, and the very dead to come out 
of the grave, power went with his word. On the other hand, every faculty or power 
with which God has endowed us implies some duty in which we are to glorify him. 
Thus the faculty of praisias God in song, and the duty of singing praises with under- 
standing, imply one another. 

I. The faodltt op praisino God in sons. God might have given speech without 
song ; all the whole world of sound without music. Not a few persons whose sense 
of hearing is quick and perfect, have no ear for music ; they perceive neither melody 
nor harmony. For them, therefore, it is neither a pleasure nor a duty to sing praises. 
What is the case with some might have been with all. Music would then have had 
no existence in our world or in our conceptions. Further, if God had given no more 
than the ordinary average musical faculty, the wonder and power of music would have 
remained comparatively unknown. Multitudes can enjoy music, and play or sing, 
who never could compose a tune. A chosen few must be endowed with that special 
gift which we call " genius," making them as it were God's prophets to untold the 
secret treasure of music he has stored up in nature, above all, in the human voice. 
Manifestly it was God's purpose in this to give delight.' Music furnishes one of the 
most exquisite, elevating, unwearying pleasures of which our nature is capable. But it 
does much more. Song and music are a language distinct from speech — the language 
oi feeling. This language supplies the means by which multitudes may express their 
thoughts as well as their feelings as with one voice. Let a thousand people speak at 
once; all thought and feeling are drowned in hubbub. But let them sing together in 
perfect time and tune ; both thought and feeling are raised to a pitch of energy else 
inconceivable. 

II. The duty. " Sing ye praises." This duty has an inner spirit as well as an 
outer embodiment. There is, after all, no melody like "melody in your heart" (Eph. 
V. 19). In the service of God's Church, music without devoiion, a lovely sound void 
of heartfelt meaning, is not praise, but profanation. Better omit singing fram our 
service altogether, than have the finest music to the praise and glory, not of God, but 
of the performers. But when the spirit of praise, the heart and soul of worship, 
inspires our sonj:, can we be too careful in perfecting its form? There is no spiritu- 
ality in bad music; no piety in singing praises ignorantly, slovenly, untunefuUy. 
" Sing ye praises with understanding." If Timothy was " not to neglect the gift," but 
to " stir up the gift that was in him," the like exhortation applies to whatever gift 
God has' given us for his service. If only the few can lead, most can follow. The 
attainment of the art of singing by note, and culture of the voice so as to take part in 
this delightful part of Christian worship with pleasure to ourselves and profit to 
others, should be regarded as a far more serious duty than commonly it is. Psalmody 
is capable of being a most powerful means of religious iippression and edification (Col. 
lii. 16). Above all, let us cultivate the spirit nf praise; the joyful, thankful, trustful, 
adoring piety, which finds its natural utterance in song, li prayer claims the principal 
place in our worship on earth, by reason of sin, weakness, need, sorrow, —praise bringi 
us nearest to the worship of heaven (Eev. v. 9 — 13). 



PS. XLTii. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. «d7 

Ver. 7. — Universal dominion. " God is King of all the earth." We must beware 
of making too wide a chasm between our sabbath rest and our daily work ; devotion 
and daily duty. The risk is double — of making our religion unreal, and our daily 
work irreligious. A devout Christian may be tempted to say, " Do not talk to me 
from the pulpit about earth ; tulk about hi-aven! 1 must launch out again into the 
rough sea of business and politics to-morrow; let not even the ground-swell disturb 
the peaceful haven." This is natural enough, but not always well. Our treasure is 
not on earth, but our work is. The tempter told our Saviour that the kingdoms of 
this world are delivered to him ; but he was sternly rebuked. If he is called " the 
prince," even " tne god of this world," it is a usurped dominion, which it is our 
business to protest and fight against. " The earth is the Lord's," etc. (Ps. xxiv. 1) ; 
"The kingdom is the Lord's" (Ps. xxii. 28). 

I. ttoD IS THE ABSOLUTE SoVBBEIGN OF MANKIND, A3 OF THE WHOLE UNIVEESB. 

Supreme authority and almighty power are his — his only. Sin cannot change this. 
The most absolute and mighty despot on earth would become a helpless captive if his 
troops and people were unanimous in deposing him. But God's power and authority 
would be exactly the same if every human being defied it. Disobedience could not 
last an hour if he saw fit to crush it. But he wills to rule, not by mere power, but by 
wisdom, righteousness, and love — ^his own eternal law of being and working. 

n. God's eegal bounty, his fatheblt care and goodness, abb exercised 
TOWARDS ALL MEN. (Matt. V. 45 ; Acts xiv. 17 ; xvii. 25.) The Laplander in his 
■now hut, no less than the most cultured child of civilization. If he knows every wild 
bird and beast (Ps. 1. 10 — 12), and not a sparrow falls unnoticed by him, how much 
less can one human being, even the guiltiest and most debased, be outside his care ! 

III. God's imperial providence controls all human action. Men rebel against 
his will, yet his purpose is accomplished (Ps. xxx. 10, 11; Acts iii. 17, 18; 2 Chron. 
X. 15). Our inability to explain how this is possible does not affect the fact. Were 
it otherwise, God could not govern the world. Conscience and Scripture alike tell us 
that freedom and responsibility are not interfered with. 

IV. God bules and cares fob nations as such ; not individuals mebblt. For 
human history is the history of nations. The nation of Israel, constructed (so to 
speak), educated, governed, blessed, and chastened, as no other has been, holds a 
unique place in the providence of God and in the religious history of mankind. The 
full prophetic testimony of this fact is one of the strongest evidences of Old Testament 
inspiration. In this psalm, e.g., full of national sentiment and triumph, the heathen 
are regarded, not as conquered foes, but fellow-subjects. 

V. This regal, impeeial rule is committed to the Lord Jesus. (Mntt. xiviii. 
18.) The hands nailed to the cross hold the sceptre of the world (Bev. ii. 26, 27). 
Not for worldly ends ; but for the sake of that higher kingdom, specially called in the 
New Testament " the kingdom of God ; " the rule, namely, of righteousness, truth, 
and love, for which we pray, " Thy kingdom come." 

Conclusion. To which kingdom do you belong — does each one of us? only to 
that to which even the most ignorant belongs, without knowing it ; the most wicked, 
against his will ? or that which the Son of God and Son of man lived, died, and rose 
again to found and to make triumphant, and in whose triumph we may share ? 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOES. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — A song for all the peoples! That it is possible this psalm may have 
been penned immediately after some specific victory, such as that of Jehoshaphat over 
the formidable combination of peoples that came up against him (2 Chron. xx.), we 
may admit ; but we can scarcely understand how the peoples should have been invited 
to clap their hands at their own humiliating defeat. And it seems to us altogethei 
unworthy of the sublime elevation of this psalm to look at it solely, or even mainly, 
from a military point of view, as if all the nations were invited to a song of triumph 
over their utter powerlessness to prevail against the chosen people of God. Delitzsch 
remarks, " In the mirror of the present event, the poet reads the great fact of the 



S63 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlvii. 1— 9. 

conversion of all peoples to Jehovah, which closes the history of the world."' 
Perowne writes, " This is a hymn of triumph, in which the singer calls upon all the 
nations to praise Jehovah as their King, and joyfully anticipates the time when they 
shall all become one body with the people of the God of Abraham."* Canon Cook 
says, "While celebrating a transaction of immediate interest to God's people, the 
psalmist uses expressions throughout which have their adequate fulfilment in the 
Person and work of the Messiah."' And Dr. Binnie wisely remarks that the invita- 
tion to the nations, in the first verse, plainly implies that the subjugation is not a 
carnal one, but " the yearning of men's minds and hearts for God." * We are not called 
on to decide, nor even to ask the question — How much did the human penman of this 
psalm tinderstand by it? Nor are we to perplex ourselves by asking — How could any 
human mind forecast all this? For it is not by any law of naturalistic psychology 
that such a psalm as this is to be tested. The Apostle Peter tells us that " no 
prophecy of the Scripture comes out of any private interpretation " of the will of 
God. Nay, further, that the will of man was not the origin of prophecy (2 Pet. i. 
21), but that holy men of God spake as they were borne on by the Holy Ghost. He 
tells us, too (1 Pet. i. 10 — 12), that they did not comprehend the full significance of the 
words which came from their lips ; that they diligently inquired into their meaning ; 
that they uttered them, not for themselves, but for us; that their theme was "the 
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow." So that, having this key to 
the interpretation of the prophetic songs of Scripture, we see that such remarks as 
those of Cheyne concerning prophecy and psychology ' are utterly wide of the mark, 
and that the sole question before us is — What do the words of this psalm declare, when 
dealt with axeording to the analogy of faith, concerning the prophetic forecast of the 
kingdom of the Messiah f 

L The woKna of this psalm disclose a great theme fob boko. A theme 
evidently much vaster and more far-reaching than the results of any material, local, 
or national triumph could possibly be ; for it is one which is calculated to make all 
peoples * clap their hands with joy, which could not possibly be true of any victory on 
SB earthly Imttle-field. We feel increasingly that the terms of this psalm are intelli- 
gible only as referred immediately to the conflict and victory of the great Captain of 
salvation in undertaking to "save" his people from their sins. As Matthew Poole 
admirably remarks, "In Psalmo 45 actum eat de Rege; in Psalmo 46 de civitate Dei; 
hie, de Gentium adjunctione ad populum Dei, quam per Christum impletam vide- 
mus."' And thus we see how far ahead the expansiveness of the Old Testament 
predictions was of the narrow exolusiveness of the average Jew. Here there is a 
celebration of God's work which brings out expressions of greatest delight. The 
delight is in a triumphant achievement that will link all nations in one ; and the 
cause of the delight is not their work, but God's work for them. To nothing but the 
redemption which is in Christ Jesus could all this possibly apply. Here is a fourfold 
work of God. 1. ITie descent of the King to earth. In ver. 5 we read, "God is gone 
up with a shout." So in Ps. Ixviii. 18, " Thou hast ascended up on high," etc. In 
quoting this last-named verse, the Apostle Paul argues (Bph. iv. 9), " Now that he 
ascended, what is it but that he descended first into the lower parts of the earth ? " 
The ascension implies that he descended. How can it be otherwise here ? That God 
has gone up from earth involves the truth that he was here ; and that means that he 
came down fi:om heaven (so John iii. 13; xvi. 28; xvii. 5, 24; Luke xix. 10; 2 Cor. 
Tiii 9 ; Phil. ii. 6, 7 ; 1 Tim. i. 15). The coming of the Son Incarnate into the world 
ii the fact announced in the New Testamentt and many times predicted in the Old 

• • Commentary on the Psalms,' in toe. 

' Introduction to his notes on this psalm. 

• • Speaker's Commentary,' vol. iv. p. 280. 

* ' The Psalms,' by William Binnie, D.D., oH. Ix., "The Future GHories of the Church," 
■peoially § 8. 

' Contemporary Bevieui, August, 1889, article ; also in Contemporary Beview, April, 1890, 
■ee a masterly article by Professor Cave, in re|ily to Cheyne and Driver on tiia Old Testa- 
ment and its critics. 

* Note the plural form as indicated in oar fierised Veisioa. 
' *FoU Synopsis Criticorum,' in loo. 



pa. xLVii. 1— 9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 369 

Testament (Isa. Ix. 6 ; Gen. xlix. 10 ; Luke xxiv. 44 ; Matt. v. 17 ; John t. 46). How 
far the psalmist understood the meaning of his own words, we are not called on to say ; 
but the meaning of the Holy Ghost in inspiring them is perfectly clear.^ 2. The 
ascent of the King is also foretold. (Ver. 5.) The descent, implicitly ; the ascent, 
explicitly. And in this doctrine many of the Old Testament writers blend their words 
(Pss. Ixviii. 18 ; ex. 11). The King was to be exalted on high. He is (of. Acts i. 9 ; 
ii. 33; Eph. Iv. 10; i. 20; Heb. iv. 14; vi. 20; ix. 24; x. 12). 3. The exalted King is 
Sovereign over all the nations. (Ver. 8.) " The heathen " (Authorized Version) is 
equivalent to " the nations " (Bevised Version). All the nations are under Immanuel's 
sceptre. Through his death Satan is dethroned, and the Christ enthroned, and eveiy 
child of man is now under his mediatorial sway. So we are taught in John xii. 31, 32 ; 
Acts X. 34, 35. He is now enthroned at the right hand of God ; and those hands that 
were pierced with nails now sway the sceptre of universal power. Yea, and he must 
reigu till he hath put all enemies under his feet (Ps. ex.). The mediatorial throne il 
" the throne of his holiness " (ver. 8). In the life of Christ holiness was manifested ; 
in his death, whereby he condemned sin, holiness was vindicated. From his seat above, 
holiness sways the sceptre ; by the power of his Spirit, holiness is created in human 
spirits. And under the sway of this throne all nations are embraced. " Earth's poor 
distinctions vanish here." "In Christ there is neither Greek, nor Jew, barbarian, 
Scythian, bond, nor free ; but Christ is all, and in all." And in him all the peoples of the 
earth may find their home in Abraham's God (ver. 9). The shields, i.e. the princes, 
of the earth belong unto God. 4. The King governs the world for the sake of the 
Church. (Ver. 3.) So the third verse indicates. The thought is expressed with gospel 
clearness in Eph. i. 22 and Bom. viii. 28, that out of a sinful world God may call a 
living Church, to be presented to himself, without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. 
This is the Divine subjugation of his foes, which the mediatorial sovereignty of Christ 
ensures. 

II. HbBB 18 A CALL FOB SONS ON THIS &BBAT THEME, PEOM ALL PEOPLES. Man's sin 

makes us weep. God's mercy makes us sing ; and no aspect thereof makes us gladder 
than that of the triumph of redeeming grace and dying love. And well may the 
psalmist, thug forecasting redemption's story through the inspiration of the Holy 
Ghost, call for universal song. Well may we sing ; for : 1. TJie great conflict is past. 
" The voice of triumph " may therefore be ours (of. Col. ii. 15). 2. The sceptre of the 
world is in the hands of One, and of One only. There is no division of power (ver. 7). 
3. The sceptre of the world is in the hands of the Supreme (ver. 2).' And where else 
could we desire all power to be lodged (cf. Matt, xxviii. 18 ; John xvii. 2 ; Bev. L 
18 ; Ps. ii. 12) ? 4. There is a rich inheritance in store for the loyal ones. The Jew 
expected an earthly inheritance by virtue of his descent from Abraham; but all 
believers will have an infinitely greater inheritance by virtue of their union with 
Christ. God chooses it for us ; and with his choice we may be well content. He will 
deal right royally with his own, and will act worthily of a God. For this inheritance 
we can wait (Rom. viii. 17, 18). 5. In the advance of the Divine plans all barriers 
between race and race are destined to fall : All kindreds of the earth are to rally to th» 
ttartdard of Abraham's Ood! Nowhere is this breaking down of boundaries mora 
strikingly set forth than in Eph. ii. 12 — 22, which is an exposition of the basis and 
structural plan of the Christian commonwealth. This the aged Jacob foretold when 
he said, " To him shall the gathering of the people be." To this psalmists and seers 
point. For this the Saviour prayed : " That they all may be one." He died to " rather 
together in one the children of God which are scattered abroad " (John xi. 52 : x. 16 ; 
Iss. xliL 4). At such a thought, " Clap your hands, all ye peoples ! " — 0. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — The universal King. The Lord is here set forth as " King over all the 
earth." His government commands — 

• "David's prophecies of the Messiah which are personal, arose by suggestion of tha 
Spirit from his own personal experience, and include it. His prophecies of Messiah which 
are royal and Mngly, arose out of his kingly experience, and the two persons are inter- 
woven with one another in such a manner as not to be separable " (Edward Irving). 

' Tlie word " terrible " gives a wrong impression. The word does not mean that God 
inspires terror, but that he is to be reverenced for his greatness. 

PSALMS. 2 B 



370 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlvii. 1— 9. 

I. The homage of the intellect. " The Most High '' is the Maker of heaven 
and earth. He is iniinitely wise and holy and powerful. Not dependent upon other 
beings, he rules singly and alone, in supreme majesty. Eeason, therefore, not only 
confesses his right', but his fitness. Here is the repose of the mind in a perfect King. 

II. The aoquiescenoe op the conscience. The Lord Most High is " terrible.'' 
This does not mean that he Is an object of terror, but of reverence. What God does 
in dealing with the nations is ever the expression of judgment and righteousness. 
Whether it be in the temple or in the world, in manifesting himself in love to his 
people or in ruling over the heathen, he is ever just. His government, in its laws and 
administration, is absolutely pure. The throne on whiohi he is seated is the throne of 
his holiness. Conscience, where it is free, cries, " Amen." 

III. The adoration of the heart. " Sing praises." Four times this call is 
given. This shows both its justice and its universality. To this call, all hearts, 
"honest and good,'' respond with joy. The more we study, the better we understand, 
the character and the rule of Gror), the more fervently shall we join in the anthem of 
praise. " Sing praises to God." This is no mere form, no senseless outburst, like that 
of the men of Ephesus, who for two whole hours cried out, " Great is Diana of the 
Ephesians ! " (Acts xix. 34). Looking to the past, contemplating the present, imaging 
the future, we see that, under God, all things are tending towards one great end, and 
therefore we can sing praises " with understanding." It has been said that •' a people's 
voice is the proof and echo of all human fame." So as truth prevails, and men every- 
where are brought under the benign and holy sway of Christ, shall they with glad 
enthusiasm proclaim the Name and glory of God. Learn, therefore, the evil and the 
folly of sia. It is rebellion against the Lord Most High ! Learn also the real unity 
of believers. Whatever differences there may be amongst them as regards lesser things, 
when they utter their hearts in prayer and praise, we find that they are one. The hymns 
of the Church for ever witness to the unity of the Church. Learn also how all the 
prophets speak of Christ and his kingdom. Their words had higher meanings than 
they knew of. Consciously or unconsciously, but moved by the Holy Ghost, they 
spake of the glories of the latter day. 

" Come then, and, added to thy many crowns, 
Eeoeive yet one, the crown of all the earth, 
Thou who alone art worthy," 

W.F. 

Ver. 7. — Christianity the faith of all nations. Judaism was not fitted for univer- 
sality. Its rites, its laws as to meats and d links, its localization of worship, gave it 
the character of a national rather than a universal religion. Yet it was by Hebrew 
prophets that the idea of a universal religion was propounded. Taught of God, they 
were able to rise above what was local and exclusive, and to rejoice in foresight of the 
latter-day glory, when Jehovah should be " King of all the earth." The fulfilment is 
in Christ, whose coming was hailed, not only as " King of the Jews," but as the 
" Light of the Gentiles," and the Saviour of the world. Christianity, not the Christi- 
anity of the Creeds or of any particular Church, but the Christianity of Christ, is the 
faith for all nations. The fact that the Bible is so fitted lor translation into all 
languiiges; that the rites of the gospel are so simple and so adapted to all countries; 
that the laws as to Church government are so few, and so capable of being worked out 
according to the needs of different peoples, might be urged as arguments for universality. 
But there are other and stronger reasons. Christianity is fitted to be the faith of all 
nations, because of — 

I. Its representation of God. It has been truly said that " Christianity alone 
of religions gives a clear, self-consistent, adequate view of God. It alone discloses and 
promises to man a complete communion with God." The cry of Philip, " Show us the 
Father," finds in Christ a full response (John xiv. 9). " In creation God is a God above 
us ; in the Law he is a God agaitist us ; but in the gospel, he is Immanuel, a God with 
us, a God like us, a God for us." 

II. Its doctrine of salvation. The evil that presses upon men everywhere is 
sin. How can it be taken away ? The answer is, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ." 
Our character and life depend upon our beliefs. Belief in Christ not only secures 



PS. XLvn. 1— 14.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 871 



pardon and reconciliation with God, but restoration of purity. In the Gospels we have 
not only the doctrine, but facts that authenticate the doctrine. The great conversion! 
of St. Luke (Luke vii. 48 ; xix. 9, 10 ; xxiii. 43) are samples of what Christ has done 
and is doing (1 Tim. i. 15 — 17), and what he begins he will perfect. 

IlL Its ideal op humanity. We have not only the Law, but the life (Matt. v. 
1 — 11 ; 1 Pet. ii. 21). Christ not only gives us the ideal, but shows us how that ideal 
may be realized (Matt. xv. 24 — 27 ; Titus ii. 11 — 13). Thus in Christ God comes down 
to man, and man is raised np to God. The promise is unto all, without respect of persons. 

IV. Its bond of bkothbbhood. What force, and commerce, and ecclesiasticism, and 
all human devices failed to do, Christ has done. He treats men simply as men, and 
by his Spirit hinds them together as brethren. The wall of partition is broken down. 
The divisions formed by pride and selfishness are abolished, and all the world over 
" there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free," but all are one iu 
Christ Jesus (Gal. iii. 28). 

V. Its consolations and hopes. Here there is comfort for every troubled heart. 
Christ is our Hope. To use the words of Arthur Hallam, " I see that the Bible fits into 
every fold of the human heart. I am a man, and I believe it to be God's book, because 
it is man's book." 

VI. Its pkomisb of immoktalitt. This is the climax. Godliness has the promise 
not only of the life that now is, but of that which is to come. The vision rises bright 
before every Christian. " Days without night ; joys without sorrow ; sanctity without 
sin ; charity without stain ; possession without fear ; society without envying ; com- 
munication of joys without lessening; and they shall dwell in a blessed country where 
an enemy never entered, and from which a friend never went away." Therefore we 
pray with increasing fervour, " Thy kingdom come." — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — The universal sovereignty of God. The occasion of the psalm was, 
according to ver. 3, an overthrow of manv heathen peoples by the visible interposition 
of God, who had leagued themselves aaainst Israel, and who, according to ver. 4, had 
set out with the purpose of expelling Israel from her land. Another interpretation is 
that the psalm was composed for the dedication of the temple on the return from 
captivity. The main thought is the universal sovereignty of Qod. " God is the Kina of 
all the earth." Three thoughts are suggested, 

I. God constbains his enemies to fulfil his purpose. (Vers. 3 — 8.) 1. The 
almighty wisdom and goodness of Ood hring good out of evil. " Maketh the wrath of 
man to praise him, and the remainder of wrath he restrains." 2. This should he a groimd 
of truth and joy to the whole world. (Vers. 6, 7.) Evil, therefore, is not absolute and 
eternal, and cannot be finally victorious over him to whom " the shields of the earth 
belong." This is the psalmist's thought. 

II. God has chosen and seoubed the inheritance of his people. (Ver. 4.) 
The reference here is to the Holy Land. God would not allow the heathen to wrest it 
from them, 1. Generally, Ood has given- us a gra/nd destiny in Christ and heaven. 
Rest is our inheritance. 2. He will secure this to all who accept his promises, and faith- 
fully seek for it. He restored the Jews, who for a time had been disinherited, when they 
became penitent and forsook their idolatry. " If God be for us, who can be against us ? " 

III. The greatest men, kinos and leaders, shall at length yield them- 
selves TO God. (Ver. 9.) 1. The kings of thought shall nt length hnw to Christ as 
the highest Wisdom. 2. The kings of action will acknowledge him as the inspiration 
of the grandest conduct. He is the King of kings and the Lord of lords, to whom every 
knee shall bow. — S. 

EXPOSITION. 



PSAXM xLvra. 

Hebe we have another psalm of thanksgiving 
for a deliverance, but not apparently for the 
same deliverance as gave occasion for either 
of the two preceding psalms. Israel had 



now been delivered from a confederacy of 
kings (ver. 4), who had come within sight 
of the city, but had then been seized with 
panic, and retreated, without making an 
attack (ver. 5). After this, pain had come 
upou theiu, and they had been "broken," 



872 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[ps. xiivm. 1 — ^14 



like "ships of Tarshish with an east wind " 
(vers. 6, 7). The deliverance had been 
celebrated by a thanksgiving service held 
in the temple (ver, 9). These details 
accord remarkably with the account given 
in 2 Chron. xi. 1 — 28 of an expedition 
against Jerusalem, made by the Moabites, 
Ammonites, and children of Seir, in the reign 
of Jehoshaphat, who advanced as far as Tekoa, 
whence Jerusalem Is visible (Delitzech), 
bnt there qnarrelled among themselTes, and 
began a retreat, in the course of which th,ey 
oame to blows, and destroyed one another. 
The imagery of " ships of Tarshish broken 
by the east wind " is naturally used at this 
period, when Jebosbaphat's fleet of " ships 
of Tarshish " (2 Kings xiii. 48) was, by a 
Divine judgment, " broken at Ezion-geber." 
The psalm consists of two strophes, nearly 
of equal length, divided at the end of ver. 8 
by the pause-mark, " Selah." 

Yer. 1. — Oreat is the Lord, and greatly to 
be praised; rather, great is the Lord, and 
greatly is he praised. The psalmist speaks 
of what is, not of what ought to be. Je- 
hoshaphat had solemnly praised God for the 
deliverance from the Moabites and Ammon- 
ites, both in the valley of Berachah, when 
he came upon the bodies of the slain (2 
Ohron. xx. 26), and in the temple after his 
return to Jerusalem (2 Chron. xx. 28). In 
the city of oar Ood (oomp. Fss. xlvi. 4 ; ci. 
8). In the mountain of Ms holiness. The 
*• holy hill of Zion " (Ps. ii. 6), on which the 
temple and a great part of the city stood. 

Ver. 2. — Beautifnl for situation; literally, 
for elevation; i.e. in respect of its lofty 
position. " Jerusalem, above all otlier great 
capitals," says Professor Cheyne, "is a 
mountain city." "It is a glorious burst," 
says Canon Tristram, "as the traveller 
rounds the shoulder of Mount Olivet, and 
the Haram wall starts up before him fi:om 
the deep gorge of the Kedron, with its domes 
and crescents sparkling in the sunlight — a 
royal city " (' Land of Israel,' pp. Ill, 112). 
The joy of the whole earth, is Mount Zion 
(comp. Lam. ii. 15). The psalmist writes 
as a devout Israelite. To him there is 
nothing in the world so lovely, nothing so 
gladdening, as Mount Zion and the holy 
oity seated on it. He does not mean to say 
that all the earth felt as he did; though 
he may have thought that, if men were wise, 
they would so feel. On the sides of the 
north. Professor Cheyne regards this clause 
as a gloss which has crept into the text. 
Others give a mystical interpretation 
founded on Isa. xiv. 15. But the simplest 
explanation seems to be the best, Zion, the 



city of David, lay to the north of the temple, 
and abutted on the city's northern wall. 
The city of the great King (comp. ver. 1, 
"the city of our God "). 

Yer. 3. — God is known in her palaces for a 
Befnge ; or, in her castles. The palaces of 
the king and his chief nobles are, no doubt, 
intended. 

Yer. 4. — ^For lo, the kings were assembled ; 
they passed by together. Some see in these 
"kings" Sennacherib's princes, who, accord- 
ing to him (Isa. x. 8), were "altogether 
kings." But actual monarchs, each leading 
his own army, seem rather to be intended. 

Yer. 5. — They saw it, and so they mar- 
velled; they were troubled, and hasted away. 
The sight of the city, with its walls and 
towers (vers. 12, 13), was enough for them 
— they recognized that the place was too 
strong to be attacked with any prospect of 
success ; " marvelled," or " were amazed " 
(Cheyne), at its strength, and, being troubled 
in mind, hasted away. The unconnected 
verbs remind the commentators of Ceesar's 
&mou6 despatch, » Yeni, vidi, vioi." 

Yer. 6. — Fear took hold upon them there, 
and pain, ai of a woman in travail. This 
description is wholly inapplicable to the 
destruction of Sennacherib's host, unper- 
oeived until it was accomplished (2 Kingi 
xix. 35), but U su£Boiently in agreement 
with the narrative of 2 Chron. xx. 1 — 23. 

Yer. 7. — Then breakest the ships of lai^ 
shish with an east wind. The literal ex* 
position is wholly out of place, since history 
does not speak of any co-operation of a fleet 
with a land army in any attack npon Pales- 
tine. The expression must be used meta- 
phorically of a great and violent destruction 
wrought by the arm of God upon Israel'! 
foes. Still, the imagery would scarcely hav* 
been used, unless there had been something 
in the circumstances of the time to suggest 
it, as there certainly was in Jehoshaphaf ■ 
time, whose fleet of " ships of Tarshish " 
was "broken" at Ezion-geber (2 Kings 
xxii. 18). The poet may have witnessed the 
catastrophe. 

Ver. 8. — ^As we have heard, so have we 
seen in the city of the Lord of hosts, in the 
oity of our God; i.e. as we have heard of 
former deliverances of Jerusalem from the 
attacks of enemies; e.g. from Shishak (2 
Chron. xii. 2—12), from Zerah (2 Chron. 
xiv. 9 — 18), so now we have seen with our 
own eyes a deliverance of the same favoured 
oity, such as might be expected from the 
fact that she is "the oity of the Lord of 
hosts, the city of our God." Having seen 
with our own eyes Jerusalem thus delivered, 
we come to the conclusion that God will 
establish it for ever. 

Ver. 9.— We have thought of thy loving^ 
kindness, God, in the midst of thy tempi*. 



PS. XLvni. 1 — 14.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



873 



Jehoshapliat,on bis return to Jemsalem from 
the scene of Ms adversaries' slaughter, held 
a thanksgiving service in the temple, " with 
psalteries, and harps, and trumpets," because 
the Lord had made the people to rejoice 
over their enemies (2 Chron. xx. 27, 28). 

Ver. 10. — According to thy Name, Ood, 
so is thy praise. The " Xame of God," i.e. 
the character that he has established for 
himielf l>y former mighty deeds, and the 

S raise which he has now won by the recent 
eliverance, are coextensive. Both of them 
reach onto the ends of the earth; i.e. over all 
the regions known to the writer. Thy right 
hand is fall of righteousness. Thou hast 
dealt oat a righteous judgment by thy right 
hand and thy stretched-out arm, thereby 
showing how full thy right hand is of justice 
and judgment. 

Ver. 11. — Let Uonnt Zion rejoice, let the 
daughters of Jndah be glad; i.e. let there 
be a chorus of joyful thanks over the length 
and breadth of the land, not only in Jerusa- 
lem, but in every city of Judah (Josh. xv. 
45) equally. Because of thy judgments. 
Because thou hast vindicated thy people, 
and executed judgment on their enemies. 

Yer. 12. — Walk about Zion, and go round 
about her; tell the towers thereof. Admire, 
i.e., O Israelites, your glorious city, which 
God has preserved for you intact. Walk 
around it, view it on every side ; observe its 
strength and beauty. I^ay, count its towers, 
and see how many they are, that ye may 
form a true estimate of its defences, which 



render it well-nigh impregnable. Such a 
survey would " tend to the glorifying of the 
God of Israel, and to the strengthening of 
their faith " (Hengstenberg). 

Ver. 13. — Mark ye well her bulwarks (or, 
her ramparts), consider her palaces. Note 
the height and fine masonry of her outer 
wall, which no people could destroy except 
the Eoinans (Neh. i. 3; ii. 13 — 17; iv. 6). 
And note also the grand houses of lier 
princes and nobles (Amos vi. 11), which 
show themselves even above the ramparts. 
That ye may tell it to the generation fol- 
lowing. That ye may let tliem know " how 
splendid Jerusalem appeared on the morrow 
of its great danger " (Oheyne). 

Ver. 14. — For this God (t.e. the God who 
has now delivered us) is our God for ever 
and ever ; t.e. he will always remain faithfol 
to un, as we will to him. He will be oni 
Guide even unto death. Dr. Kay trauslates 
"even over death," and understands that 
God's loving protection is promised to the 
faithful even in the laud beyond the grave. 
But he itands alone in this interpretation. 
Most modems question whether the words 
nw'pjj are any part of the psalm, and, com- 
paring them with the pb nm-'^j; of the title 
to Ps. ix., suggest that they are a mere 
musical notation. But the psalm would end 
abruptly without the words, and the meaning, 
"he will be our Guide unto death," ia 
quite satisfactory (so Hengstenberg and the 
Bevised Version). 



HOMILETIGS. 

Ver. 9. — OocTs loving-kindness. "We have thought of thy loving-kindness." 
Thought is quick. A lightning-flash of thought, a momentary recollection of Qod, 
may give guidance to take the right step, courage to speak the right word, strength to 
withstand sudden temptation, comfort when we are ready to give up all as lost. But 
this swift inspiration, sudden illumination, is not the kind of thought of which thia 
text speaks. It is calm meditation, devout ; leisurely contemplation. Memory spreads 
her stores. Faith, hope, love, drink full draughts from the living well of truth. 
Prayer and praise have time to clothe themselves in fit words. WhUe we muse, the 
fire burns. One of the greatest blessings of the sabbath is the opportunity for such 
prolonged, undisturbed thought. One of the richest fruits of the public service of 
Gkid'a house, and of the ministry of God's Word, is reaped when we are led to think of 
God^s Imring-hindness. 

I, The Revisers have wisely retained this beautiful wobd " lovino-kindness," 
although the same Hebrew word is frequently translated "mercy" (sometimes also 
" goodness," or " kindness "). We could ill afford to lose it, for no other English word 
BO happily expresses one of the most wonderful and delightful aspects of Divine mercy, 
goodness, or kindness; viz. Us special application to individuals. The Bible alone 
eheds this ray of Divine glory on the path of human life. We do not find it in heathen 
religions, for men do not naturally think thus of God. Science cannot reveal it ; for 
science deals with what is universal or general, not with individuals. We learn it by 
faith and experience. The histories of Scripture are full of it; e.g. Hagar in the 
desert; Eliezer at the well; Jacob at Bethel, at Haran, at Penuel; Elijah in the 
famine ; Ezra at Ahava (Ezra viii. 21, 22). The miracles of Scripture are largely 



374 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [rs. xLVin. 1—14. 

concerned in this lesson. Miracles are but lessons writ large, that none may be abl« 
to mistake their meaning. The promises of the Bible abundantly announce the same 
truth ; and the thanksgivings (in the Psalms and elsewhere) of those whose faith has 
tested those promises, bear witness to their fulfilment. So does the experience of 
God's children in all ages. 

II. This bpecial view op God's loving-kindness to individuals must not 

NARROW OB OBSCURE OUB VIEW OF HIS MBECT AND LOVING-KINDNESS ON THE BKOAD 

SCALE— to his Church and to mankind. " The earth is full of the goodness of the 
Lord " (Ps. xxxiii. 5, same Hebrew word ; Luke vi. 35, 36 ; John iii. 16 ; 1 John iv. 9). 
The " glad tidings of great joy," the gospel, is in the heart of it the message that 
God loves us. The transcendent proof, the gift of his Son, while it casts all lesser 
gifts into the shade, is the assurance of them all (Bom. viii. 32). 

III. Contemplation of God's loving-kindness in all these aspects — devout, 
thankful meditation on it, is at once a delight and a duty. A duty, because gratitude 
demands it (Ps. ciii. 2), because God wills it and is honoured thereby (Ps. cxi. 2 — 4), 
because thus the roots of our love and piety are nourished, and our doubts answered. 
But a duty that can be practised only by those to whom it is a delight. For really to 
apprehend God's loving-kindness without having our heart opened to its gladness 
atid brightness, as the flower to the sunshine, is impossible. Love only apprehends 
love (1 John iv. 8). What richer, sweeter, more glorious object of contemplation is 
possible ? 

IV. The contemplation of God's loving-kindness, nevbb out of season, ir 
ESPECIALLY SEASONABLE IN THE SANCTUABT. " In the temple." Here Asaph got quit 
of his doubts, and felt his faith and joy revive (Ps. Ixxiii. 17, 28). Christian places of 
meeting and worship are not called " temples " in the New 'Testament. But Christian 
I'eople are (2 Cor. vi. 16). The material temple present to the psalmist's thought, with 
ill! its glorious ritual and local sanctity, has vanished like a vision. Not because the 
Guspel has put us further frcm God, but because it has brought us nearer. The 
cross has hallowed the whole earth as ^the outer court of the temple, of which heaven 
is the sanctuary ; and we have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. 
How rich are the poorest who know that this portion is theirs, the loving-kindness 
of the Lord! Huw poor the richest without thisl Let our meditation of him be 
sweet I Let us be glad in the Lord 1 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — God's own Church the object of his special care. In this psalm, which 
is both song and psalm, and is one of those " for the sons of Korah," there is a general 
theme, illustrated by a reference to some historic event. The general theme is the 
loving-kindness and care of God over his Church. The specific historic illustration 
it is not possible to fix with certainty, although the preponderance of opinion, and 
also the largest amount of probability, seems to incline towards the wondrous repulse 
of Bdom, Ammon, Moab, and others, in answer to Jehoshaphat's prayer, without Israel 
having to fight in the battle (see 2 Chron. xx.). We see from the narrative of the 
Chronicles that the children of the Korahites sang a song of praise on the occasion of 
ttiat signal interposition of God, although it is not likely that the song then sang 
was the forty-eighth psalm ; for the reference in ver. 7 is against that ; and at first it 
is not easy to see how " ships of Tarshish " should come to be mentioned in this song, 
if prepared with reference to the event of wliich we have made mention. Bzekiel 
(xxvii. 25, 26) makes mention of ships of Tarshish which belonged to Tyre, being 
" broken " by the east wind ; and it is possible that the psalm may have an allusion 
thereto. But, singularly enough, the chapter that records Jehoshaphat's prayer and 
deliverance records also his defection and its punishment ; and we are told that his 
ships were broken so that they were not able to go to Tarshish (2 Chron. xx. 35 — 37), 
If this be the reference in the song before us, its significance would be very striking; 
in that case, it would mean that Jehovah, Israel's God, who put the heathen to flight 
for Israel's sake, put even Israel to shame when her people or her kings left the straight 
;iath of reliance on and obedience tu God nlone : a'ui that this was among the "jud'- 



PS. XLViii. 1— 14.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 375 



meiits" of liim wliose right hand is full of righteousness; showing us that God's care 
for his Church is just as marked when he rebukes her for her sins as wheu he delivers 
her from her foes; and that both for his faithful chastisement as for his mighty 
interposition, his loving-kindness is rehearsed in his temple with gratitude and song.^ 
And there is a holy pride in rehearsing the privileges of Zion as far outweighing thuse 
of the nations around — a pride, however, which refers all the honour and glory of Zion 
to God, and to God alone.* Interesting, however, as these historic allusions are to the 
student, the higher spiritual bearing of the psalm is far more interesting, and lar more 
important, as it sets before us this theme — the privilege and honour of the Church of 
Ood? We need not here argue the point that the Christian Church is the successor 
to the honours and privileges of the Jewish Church. A comparison of Bxod. xix. 6 
with 1 Pet. ii. 9 will show tliis. The Christian Church, in its largest sense, is made 
up of all believers in our Lord Jesus Christ. The organization of distinct and definite 
communities as Churches is a necessity for the time now present, but no such organi- 
zations include all believers ; many believers, moreover, are in no such organization at 
all ; only " the Lord knoweth them that are his ; " and over all such his care is exercised : 
in their totality as including all regenerated souls, they make up the Church of God. 
Of this Church as a unity we iiave now to speak. 

L God's dwelling-place is in his Chubch. (Vers. 1, 2.) It is quite possible 
that, after what we have just said about the Church in its entirety and vastness, and 
about the impossibility of its being scanned by any human eye, that it may be said, 
" But if the Church is thus undeflnable by us as to its limits, we cannot conceive of 
it as a dwelling-place." This we can easily understand. But the demur has, in reality, 
no force. For it is quite clear from the New Testament that as there is " the Church " 
in the highest spiritual sense, so there are local and organized Churches in the geo- 
graphical sense. Of this the epistles to the seven Churches of Asia are immediate 
and sufficient proof. And wherever a Church is faithful to its Lord, since whatever is 
true of the whole Church is true of any part of it, the believers in Jesus who belotjg 
to any local and faithful Church may apply to themselves that which Paul declared 
of the Bphesian converts when he wrote, " Ye also are builded together for a habita- 
tion of God through the Spirit." Thus no Christian need hesitate to apply the words 
to the fellowship of believers to which lie belongs; he may say, " God is known in our 
palaces for a Eefuge." This Church is a city of the great King. And the real presence 
of a living Saviour among us is our honour, our joy, our life (Matt, xviii. 20 ; xxviii. 20). 
IL God himself is the Ebfuge op the Church. (Ver. 3.) It is the j/r^^-jege of 
the individual believer, in all times of trial, sorrow, and care, to betake himself to his 
God and Saviour as to an unfailing Friend. But this privilege rises to sublimity when 
a whole company of believers, encompassed with peril and threatened by foes from 
without, can all rush to their Saviour in faith and prayer, as to a Refuge from the 
gatherins); storm ! 

III. God's loving-kindnbss is the theme of the Church. (Ver. 9.) How much 
ftiller and sweeter is this theme for meditation now than of old ! Then it was gained 
through prophets; now from him before whose presence lawgiver and prophet retire, 
as stars are concealed in the brightness of the sun! How incomparably does Eom. 
viii. surpass aught in the Old Testament 1 And what was there in the oLlen time so 
tender as Luke xv. ? Verily such a theme lifts the soul heavenward, tunes the lips to 
song, and speeds the feet to run the race set before us. 

IV. God's deliverances mark the history of the Church. (Vers. 4 — 8,) The 
effect of this vivid description is pictorial. We can almost see the kings eyeing 
Jerusalem with envy, plotting her capture, seized with panic and hurrying; away as 
for very life. The psalmist says that he had heard of such deliverances in times past, 
and now had seen them. And any student of Church history who has been withal 
for fifty years a close observer of Church life, can say the same. That God is the 

' Dr. Binnie, pp. 84, 85, and .Eev. A. B. Fausset, pp. 205 — 208, have some deeply 
interesting remarks on this psalm and its historic reference. 

' Dean Perowne's remarks on the wide contrast between the Greeks ascribing the glory 
of their city to man, and the Hebrews ascribing all glory to God, are very striking. 

• See Bishop Alexander's ' Bampton Lectures,' leot. v., on the images under which the 
Church is described in the Psalms. 



376 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. xlviii. 1— 14. 

perpetual Deliverer of his Church is the story of the past and the testimony of the 
present. Nor may we forget the double kind of deliverance : (1) from foes without ; 
(2) from mischief within. If the view given above of ver. 7 is correct, the verse 
suggests that the Church owes quite as much to Grod's chastening love in correcting 
her lor her sins, as to his rescuing power in spoiling her foes. That he will do this is 
part of the covenant (Ps. Ixxxix. 28 — 33). 

V. The HOKO0it of God's Name is his own pledge to the Chueoh. (Vers. 10, 11.) 
In the attribute of God's righteousness is the Church's repose and glory. Through 
the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, faithfulness, justice, righteousness, can be the 
supports of sinful men. This is the supreme wonder of redeeming grace. Think of itl 
Sinful people rejoicing that God's right hand is full of righteousness I 

VI. Qod'b gracious relations abb the guarantee of the perpetuity op the 
Church. (Vers. 12 — 14.) We omit the italic " it " in ver. 13 (A.uthorized Version), 
and translate the first word in ver. 14 " that." The psalmist incites to a study of 
Zion's towers, bulwarks, palaces, privileges, that it may be declared to the generation 
following, that " this God is our God for ever and ever." And when we study the 
redemption in Christ which has founded the Church, the spiritual power which it 
building up the Church, the watchful providence which has for eighteen centuries 
guarded the Church, the story which we have to hand down to the coming generation 
is the same, but told with vaster emphasis, surer faith, and more rapturous joy. " This 
Gk)d is our God for ever and ever ; he will be our Guide above death,' and beyond it 1 " 
" Happy is the people that is in such a case 1 yea, happy is that people whose God is 
the Lord !"—C. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — The Ghurch and her Head. This psalm may teach us something of— 

I. The globt of tee Churoh. The outward is the symbol of the inward. The 
glory of the Church is not material, but moral. Mind is of all things the greatest. 
One soul is infinitely more precious than the richest domains. Think of some great 
man — Newton, Bacon, or Shakespeare. If all the wealth in that one mind could be 
yours, would you not choose it rather than the grandest of earthly inheritances ? And 
how rich is the Church in mind I " The glorious company of the apostles, the goodly 
fellowship of the prophets, the noble army of martyrs," are here ; and here also are 
thousands and tens of thousands whose names have been unknown on earth, but are 
written in heaven. The Church, like Jerusalem, is set on high, but her beauty is not 
in " situation," but in character ; her " elevation " is not in outward advantages, but in 
nearness to God. She has the "righteousness which exalteth." 1. The glory of 
the Church is not limited, hut universal. Jerusalem was for a single people, but the 
Church is for all nations and kindreds and tongues. The light that dwells in her is 
to shine forth to all lands. The moral power that centres in her is to radiate it* 
gracious influences to the ends of the earth. Jerusalem had her daughters — in the 
towns and villages of Judah ; but the Church's daughters are to be found in every 
land under the sun. 2. The glory of the Church is not transitory, but eternal. It 
is not like the passing sl^ows of earthly kings ; nor is it short-lived and disappointing, 
like the glory of Jerusalem. It derives its being from God, and will endure 
whUe God endureth. Love and goodness can never die. Much of the glory of 
the Church is as yet hidden. There were mysteries in the days of Paul, and there 
are mysteries still. But the light will shine more and more to the perfect day. The 
past — " what we have heard," the present — " what we have seen," alike bear witness, 
and combine to raise our hopes of the coming glory. 

II. The gkbatnebs of the Church's Head. " Great." (Ver. 1.) The measure 
ol the glory of the Church is the greatness of the Church's Head. The certainty of 
the glory of the Chmch in all its transcendent developments, is to be found in the 
greatness of the Church's Head (Bph. i. 17 — 23). 1. In the might of his power. His 
enemies shall lick the dust (vers. 4 — 8). Sooner or later, either with the joy of lore 
or the torments of fear, the confession must be made — that " he is Lord " (Phil, ii, 
10, 11). 2. In the sweetness of his loving-kindness. (Ver. 9.) There is a fitness of 
place (" temple ") and a fitness of method (" wait "). As we keep our ears open, truth 
will come to us. As we bend our minds in eager thought upon Divine things, mora 

* See the various critics on the words in ver. 14, mD'hy, 



rs. xLix. 1— 20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 377 



and more of the Lord's goodness will be revealed to us. It is the •' loving-kindness " 
of God that has blessed the past, and it will, in like manner, but in larger measure, 
bless the future. God's loving-kindness culminated in the cross. There could be 
nothing higher. And the cross is the best help to our faith, and the surest guarantee 
of our hopes (Rom. v. 8 — 10). 3. In the righteousness of his judgments. (Vers. 10 — 
13.) The heathen fabled that Jove's hands were full of thunderbolts ; but our God's 
"right hand is full of righteousness." Let us praise Chd for freedom. There were 
terrors, but they have passed. We have the glad sense of escape. We are free. It 
is God who has done it. Let us give thanks for Divine protection. Jerusalem had 
her towers and bulwarks. Bound about her stood the everlasting hills. She seemed 
impregnable. But in the evil day of unbelief she fell. But the defences of God's 
people are better far, and can never be overthrown. Our " bulwarks " are not rampart 
and tower, but God's love and faithfulness. There will be assaults in the future as 
in the past, but the foundation standeth sure. There will be many a sore fight and 
struggle, but the powers against us can never prevail over the omnipotence of Qod. 
Let us rejoice in the everlasting love of Ood (vers. 13, 14). We should think of others 
as well as ourselves. We have a duty to our children and those who come after us. 
Musing on what God has done for us, our hearts will burn within us, and we shall be 
able to " tell " the generation following " the wonderful works of God." It is with 
exulting faith that we claim " this God " as " our God," and commend his love and his 
truth to others. What he has been to us he can be to them, and more. For ourselves 
we " know whom we have believed." He will keep us all our days. Our Guide into 
death, he will be our Portion and our Joy for ever. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 14. — The eternal city of God. A patriotic hymn, to be sung in the temple 
lervice in celebration of a signal deliverance of Jerusalem from an invading army. 
Commentators are nut agreed as to what army. Let it be taken as suggesting some 
things which may be said of the true eternal dty of Ood, what it is, and what it will 
become through everlasting ages, exhibiting the greatest glory of man and the highest 
fjlory of God. 

I. SooiETT rouNDBD AND BUILT UP IN HOLINESS. (Ver. 1.) Nothing unclean can 
permanently dwell in it. The heavenly Jerusalem. 

n. Filled throughout with Divinb joy. (Ver. 2.) " God shall wipe away all 
tears." No permanent sorrow. 

UL Etebnallt safe fbom danoeb of overthrow. (Ver. 3.) Often threatened 
during her earthly history by the combined forces of evil which have been arrayed 
against her. 

IV. God has expended the obandbst fowkbb op his nature in BuiLDiNa it up. 
1. Moral omnipotence. (Vers. 4 — 8.) The history of past times and personal experi- 
ence testify to this. He breaks the forces of evil as he broke the ships of Tarshish 
with an east wind. 2. It has been and is the theatre for the display of the infinite love. 
(Ver. 9.) " God is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself." 3. Also for the fullest 
display of the Divine righteousness. (Vers. 10, 11.) "Righteousness and judgment 
are the habitation of his throne." 4. He is the everlasting Ouide and Light of the city. 
(Ver. 14.) Because he is its King and Father and Lawgiver. Here ia a theme for 
grateful thanksgiving and joy and worship. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 
PSALM XLIX. 



This Is a didactic poem, and resembles in 
some respects Pes. xxxvii. and Ixxiii. It 
deals with the same problem — the contrast 
between the lot of the righteous man, whom 
the wicked persecute continually (ver. 5), 
and these wicked themselves, who are 



wealthy and prosperous, found families, 
leave them their wealth, and even "call 
their lands after their own names " (vers. 6, 
10, 11). The problem is solved, more dis- 
tinctly than anywhere else in the Psalms, 
by the doctrine of compensation in a future 
life (vers. 15, 19), so that (as Hupfeld says) 
the psalm " contains a real, though crude 



378 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. XLIX. 1 — 20 



and imperfect, theodicy." The wicked man 
has his good things in this life, and after 
death evil things, while with the good man 
the case is exactly the contrary. The date 
of the psalm is uncertain ; but from its style 
it may be placed between the time of David 
and that of Hezekiah. The ascription of it 
to " tile sons of Korah" deserves acceptance. 
Metrically, the composition divides itself 
into three portions : (1) a short prelude, or 
introduction (vers. 1 — 4) ; (2) a strophe, 
forming the main body of the psalm (vers. 
5 — 15) ; and (3) a summing-up, or conclu- 
sion (vera. 16—20). 

Ver. 1. — Hear this, all ye people ; rather, 
all ye peoples. Like Ps. xlvii., this psalm is 
addressed to the nations generally, who are 
all equally interested in it. The writer 
regards his mission as not confined to Israel, 
but extending to the whole of mankind. 
Give ear, all ye inhahitants of the world ; 
literally, of the fleeting (l^n), of this fleeting, 
transitory scene. 

Yer. 2. — Both high and low, rich and poor, 
together. The teaching of the psalm con- 
cerns all ranks alike. To the great and rich 
it will carry warning ; to the poor and lowly, 
consolation. 

Yer. 3. — Hy month shall speak of wisdom 
(comp. Job xxxiii. 3, 4). It is not his own 
"wisdom" that the psalmist is about to 
itter, but a wisdom communicated to him 
from without, to which lie has " to incline 
his ear" (ver. 4). And the meditation of 
my heart shall be of understanding ; or, of 
discernment (Kay). 

Yer. 4. — I ^vlll incline mine ear to a 
parable. The psalmist is " like a minstrel 
who has to play a piece of music put into 
his hands. The strain is none of his own 
devising; and as he proceeds, each note 
awakes in him a mysterious echo, which he 
would fain catch and retain in memory " 
(Kay). A " parable " in the Old Testament 
moans any enigmatical or dark saying, into 
which much metaphor or imagery is intro- 
duced, BO that it is only (puimv trwiToiirt. 
I will open my dark saying npon the harp; 
i.e. with a harp accompaniment. Music was 
a help to inspired persons in the delivery of 
messages which they were commissioned to 
deliver (see 1 Sam. x. 5 ; 2 Kings iii. 15). 

Vers. 5 — 15. — The prelude, or introduc- 
tion, being over, the substance of the " dark 
saying "is now brought forth. The problem 
is propounded. On the one hand are the 
righteous, fallen upon evil days, surrounded 
by treacherous foes, ever on the watch to do 
them a mischief (ver. 5) ; on the other are 



the wicked, " trusting in their wealth, and 
boasting themselves in the multitude of 
their riches " (ver. 6), so opulent that they 
build houses which they expect to " continue 
for ever," and proprietors on such a scale 
that tlieir lands are "called after theii 
names " (ver. 11) ; and both parties equally 
short-lived, soon swept away from earth 
(vers. 10, 12). How is it that God allows all 
this, and how is man to reconcile himself to 
it? Simply by two reflections — one, that 
for the wicked, who have their portion in 
this life, there is no hope of happiness after 
death (vers. 14, 17) ; and the other that " God 
will redeem the righteous from the power of 
the grave, and will receive them " (ver. 15). 

Yer. 5. — Wherefore should I fear in the 
days of evil? i.e. have I reason to fear, or 
may I trust in God's protection ? A re, or 
are not, the righteous under his care ? When 
the iniquity of my heels; rather, of my 
supplanteri— of those that would trip me up. 
Shall compass me about ; i.e. surround me, 
lie in wait for me on every side (comp. Ps. 
xvii. 10—12). 

Yer. 6. — They that trust in their wealth ; 
rather, even of them that trust in their 
wealth. The sense runs on from the pre- 
ceding verse (so Hengstenberg and Professor 
Cheyne). And boast themselves in the 
multitude of their riches. Such men are 
always persecutors of the righteous. They 
are worldly, carnal, godless. 

Yer. 7. — None of them can by any means 
redeem his brother. The text is suspected. 
If v.e read ■i|« for ns, with Ewald and Pro- 
fessor Cheyne, the right translation will be. 
Nevertheless, no man can by any means 
redeem himself. With all his boasting, the 
rich man cannot effect his own redemption ; 
nor, however great his wealth, can he give 
to God a ransom for him; t.e. for himself. 
" Brother " is not used in the Psalms in the 
sense of " fellow-man," but only in the 
literal sense of close blood relation (Pss, 
xixv. 14 ; 1. 20). 

Yer. 8. — For the redemption of their sonl 
is precious ; or, costly — too costly, i.e., for 
them, however rich they may be, to be able 
to effect it (comp. Job xxxvi. 18, 19). And 
it oeaseth for ever ; rather, and one must let 
that alone for ever (Cheyne, Kay, Hengsten- 
berg, Revised YersionV 

Yer. 9. — That he should still live for ever, 
and not see oorrnption. This verse is to be 
closely connected with ver. 7, ver. 8 being 
parenthetical. It describes tl le effect which 
the payment of a ransom by the lich, were 
it possible might be expected to have. 

Yer. 10. — For he seeth that wise men die. 



P8. XLII. 1 20.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



379 



likewise the fool and the brutish person 
perish. The rich man must see that any 
hope of ransoming himself by means of his 
vrealth, and so escaping death und the 
grave, is vain, since the law of mortaliiy, 
which is in operation all aronnd him, is 
universal. No one is redeemed from death, 
in the sense of escaping " the first death." 
Not only do " the fool and the brutish 
person " perish, but the fate of " the wise " 
is the samts. All die; all quit tlie earth; 
all leave boliind them everything that they 
possessed en earth ; no one can take with 
him the gold in which he has trusted (ver. 
6) ; all leave their wealth to others. 

Ver. 11. — Their inward thought is, tliat 
their houses shall continue for ever, and 
their dwelling-places to all generations. 
Still, though they know this, the rich and 
worldly have an idea — an "inward thought " 
— which tliey cherish, that they can in a 
certain sense escape death by founding 
families and leaving to their children sub- 
stantial houses, which will keep up the 
family reputation, and accumulating landed 
estates, to which they may affix their name, 
BO keeping their memories alive to future 
ages. They call their lands after their own 
names (8ee Gen. x. 2, 4, 6, 22, 23, 29, etc. ; 
and compare the Greek traditions with re- 
spect to Hellen, Ion, Achseus, Felops, Cad- 
mus, etc.). To call cities after their own 
names, or the names of their sons, was a still 
commoner practice of great men in the olden 
times (Gen. iv. 17; iL 31; Exod. i. 11 ; 
•Records of the Past,' vol. i. p, 14 ; vol. iii. 
pp 45, 92, 112; vol. vii. pp. 32, 39, etc.). 

Ver. 12. — ^Nevertheless man being in 
honour abideth not. Against these " inward 
thoughts" und outward actions, tlie psalmist 
simply maintains the ground already taken 
(ver. 10) : " Man, in whatever honour he 
may be, abideth not " — has but a short time 
to live. He is like the beasts that perish. 
Ho has no more continuance than many of 
the beasts ; like them, he passes from earth. 

Ver. 13. — This their way is their folly ; 
or, their vain conceit (Kay). By "their 
way" must be understood the course of 
couiluft described in vera. 7 — 12. Yet their 
posterity approve their sayings. Their de- 
scendants, or those who come after them, 
notwithstanding the foolishness of their 
course, adopt their principles and delight 
in them. 

Ver. 14. — Like sheep they are laid in the 
grave ; death shall feed on them. With the 
foolisli fancies and vain conceits of the 
ungodly rich men, the psalmist now con- 
trasts the reality. Wlien they die they are 
'• laid in the grave," or •' ranged in Hades " 
(Kay), as sheep in a sheepfold. There is no 
escape for them. Death is their shepherd ; 
he keeps them, watches over them, tends 



them, allows none to quit the fold. And the 
upright shall have dominion over them in 
the morning. When the resuirection morn 
comes — and no other explanation appears to 
be possible (see even Cheyne)— it will bring 
them no release ; the righteous will then 
" have domiDation over them," and will cer- 
tainly not set them free (Eev. xxi. 8). And 
their beauty shall consnme in the grave 
from their dwelling ; rather, and their beauty 
i» for Hadee to consume out of its dwelling ; 
i.e. its clay tenement (so Dr. Kay). 

Ver. 15. — But God will redeem my soul from 
the power of the grave. Here is the solution of 
the " dark saying," the key to the " parable." 
The souls of the righteous will be redeemed, 
not by themselves, but by God — they will 
be delivered '' from the power of the grave," 
or rather of Hades ; and, while the ungodly 
are held under by death and the grave (ver. 
14), they will be released, and enter upon a 
higher life. For he shall receive me. Ab 
God "took Enoch," when he "was not" 
(Gen. iv. 24) — took him to be with himself — 
so he will " receive " every righteous soul, 
and take it home, and give it rest and peace 
in liis own dwelling-place. As Professor 
Cheyne observes, "It is the weakest of 
explanations to say that the psalmist re- 
joices thus in the prospect of mere deliver- 
ance from the danger of death. A few 
years later, and the prospect will return in 
a heightened form." The fact is that " the 
poet hag that religious intuition which forms 
the kernel of the hope of immortality." At 
the same time, we may admit, as Hupfeld 
argues, that the belief in immortality is 
"not here stated as a revealed doctrine, 
but as a presentiment, a deep inward con- 
viction, inseparable from real living faith 
in a living God." 

Vers. 16 — 20. — The conclusion "repeats 
and confirms the general lessons of the 
psalm." Ver. 16 is a categorical answer to 
the doubt propounded in ver. 5. Vers. 17 — 
19 are an echo of ver. 14, and at the same 
time a counterpoise to the views put forth 
in vers. 6, 11. Ver. 20 is a repetition, but 
with an important modification, of ver. 12. 

Ver. 16. — Be not thou afraid when one is 
made rich (see vers. 5, 6). There is no 
ground for lear, nor even for perplexity, 
when the wicked grow rich and prosper. 
Their wealth will not ransom their souls 
(vers. 7 — 9). They cannot take it witli 
them to another world (ver. 17). They will 
have no advantage from it there. On the 
contrary, their misery in another world wiU 
be sr. ii as to far outweigh any enjoyment 
whictt they may have had on earth (vers. 
14, 19). When the glory of his hunse is 
increased (see ver. 11). 



380 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[ps. iLix. 1 — 20. 



Ver. 17. — For when he dieth he shall 
oarry nothing away. Nothing in the way 
of earthly posaessione — nothing but the 
qualities which he has imprinted on his 
soul, and made part and parcel of himself. 
The heathen nations, foolishly, were accus- 
tomed to bury clothes, and arms, and vessels, 
and stores of gold with the departed, as 
though they could take these with them into 
the other world (see the author's 'Herodo- 
tus,' vol. iii. pp. 59—62, and notes 9, 1, 2). 
The writer of the psalm, and those whom he 
addressed, were equally aware of the foolish- 
ness of such customs. His glory shall not 
descend after him. Whatever "glory" his 
wealth has secured to him in this life shall 
be left behind. He shall be imprisoned in 
Sheol, with death to shepherd him (ver. 14), 
and with no hope of returning to the " light " 
(ver. 19). 

Ver. 18. — Though while he lived he hlessed 
his son! (comp. Fs. x. 3 ; Luke xii. 19). He 
thought himself happy, and congratulated 
himself on his good fortune. And men will 
praise thee, when then doest well to thyself. 
A parenthetic remark. Not only do such 
men congratulate themselves, but the world's 
applause follows on them. So long as they 
are well-to-do, and keep themselves in the 
fore&ont of the battle of life, they will have 



" honour, reverence, and troops of friends," 
who will admire them and flatter them. 

Ver. 19. — He shall go to the generation of 
his fathers. In the Hebrew it is " thou shalt 
go," or "it (the soul) shall go;" but the 
meaning is well expressed by the Authorized 
Version. However much the wicked man 
delights in his life, and clings to it, never- 
theless he has to die (ver. 10), to join the 
" generations of his fathers," to go where 
they have gone before liim. And, once in 
Sheol (ver. 14), they shall never see light, 
God will redeem the soul of the righteous 
from the power of Sheol (ver. 15) ; but the 
rich ungodly man, and those to whom he 
goes — men of his sort — shall for evermore 
not eee light. 

Ver. 20. —Man that is in honour, and nnder- 
standeth not, is like the beasts that perish. 
In ver. 12 the writer had said of all men, 
that they are " like the beasts that perish," 
which is true in one sense ; i.e. in reference 
to this life. Now, having taken a loftier 
flight, and embraced in his mental vision 
the whole life of man, he makes an important 
qualification of what he liad said. All men 
die ; but only those who are " without 
understanding" die without hope— "like 
the beasts : " for otherB theie remaina the 
hope enunciated in ver. 15. 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 8. — Infinite redemption. " The redemption," etc. The same astonishing 
spectacle presents itself to tliis unknown psalmist which so sorely perplexed his brother 
psalmist, Asaph — " the prosperity of the wicked." But instead of being " envious at 
the foolish," or finding a painful enigma in their wealth and pride, he summons men 
of all lands — rich or poor, high or lowly — to listen while he " opens his dark saying," 
expounds the riddle. The world's pageant is transparent to the prophet's eye. Behind 
it are eternal realities. The shadow of death dims its glory. Death, like a spectral 
shepherd, waits by the grave's mouth to gather bis flock. What can, then, the rich 
man's wealth avail (vers. 7 — 9) ? Primarily, then, these words refer to the present 
life — the impotence of wealth and earthly glory to ward off deatb. But in ver. 15 
clearly " soul " means more than the life that now is — even a life of which this is but 
shadow and prelude, and a " second death." Following out, therefore, the thought of 
the text, we have (1) the infinite value of the soul, and its need of redemption; 
(2) the infinite cost at which it has been redeemed ; (3) the infinite issues of the 
redemption of a soul. 

I. (JOD BESTOWED IN THE BEGINNING AN INFINITE VALUE ON THE BOITL OP MAN. 

Man was made in the image of God, capable of knowing, loving, obeying, resembling 
his Maker. His complex nature has its lower side — "of the earth, earthy." His 
animal frame allies him to the lower creatures (vers. 12, 20). Learned leaders of 
science in our day are labouring to emphasize this side of humanity. Man, they say, 
has grown up from lower forms — is but a glorified, highly developed ape. " But there 
is a spirit in man " (Job xxxii. 8). This spiritual nature laughs to scorn the attempt 
t(i class it with "beasts that perish," and claims its Divine birthright (Acts xvii. 29). 
Enoch and Abraham, David, Isaiah, John, Paul, had something within them of which 
there is no trace, no speck or germ, in the lower ranks of life. So, too, has the 
humblest Christian — nay, the lowest savage, if but his heart will open to the message 
of God in Jesus. 1. (Jod loves the soul — fallen, sinful, at enmity with him though it 
is, and justly oundemned — yea, with infinite love (John iii. 16). It is in ruins; but 



P8. xLEt. 1—20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMa 881 

these are the ruias of God's temple. It is lost, but not irredeemably. He has " found 
a ransom " (of. Luke xv. 24). 2. The greatness of man's nature is proved by the very 
greatness of his ruin. Only from an exalted height could he fall so terribly. Beasts 
are not capable of sin. Low, materialistic views of our nature necessarily involve 
slight views of sin. God's great love, in place of implying indulgence or indifference 
to sin, is the very measure of his abhorreuce, because sin has (1) defaced his likeness ; 
(2) robbed him of men's love and trust ; (3) broken his highest law ; (4) destroyed 
man's happiness. 

IL Therefore " the redemption op the soul is pbboious ; " and at an infinite 
COST IT HAS BEEN EFFECTED. That there is such redemption the psalmist was assured. 
The faith of Old Testament saints was no doubt imperfect. The guiding light shone 

dimly. Yet now and then flashes out a gleam of startling brightness (Job xxxiii. 23 

28). For us the light shines clear (Matt. xx. 28). Cast away from these words 

"ransom," "cost," "price," and the like — all narrow (and as it were commercial) 
aawciatioDS. Bemember the Father not only accepts, but provides, the propitiation ; 
the atonement is his eternal purpose ; " the Lamb of God " is " his unspeakable Gift " 
(1 John iv. 9, 10). 

in. The issues of this redemption are niriNiTE. " It ceaseth for ever ; " or else 
• endures forever " (Heb. ix. 12 ; x. 26 ; John x. 27, 28 ; Bom. viii. 35 — 39: John iii. 
18, 19, 36). 

Every preacher must judge for himself whether to bring into the pulpit one of the 
most serious controversies of the day — the ultimate fate of those whom Scripture 
describes as " lost," " perishing." Who would not wish to entertain, if he could, what 
is called " the larger hope " ? But if it is to be realized, it must be by means unrevealed 
in Scripture, and upon principles and laws contrary to those which in this life form 
and fix character for gooii or evil. The soul which is hardened in hatred to God and 
goodness, gnawed with the feverish thirst of depraved appetites, and bound in the 
fetters of vicious habit, carries within it the elements of a present helL The danger 
is real and great, that in peering into the far-off future, beyond the day of judgment. 
Attention should be diverted from such plain warnings as Matt. x. 28; John viiL 24, 

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOES. 

Ters. 1 — ^20.—" A dark saying : " wealth in had hands. The author and the date 
of this psalm are alike unknown. There are, however, matters concerning it of 
much more importance, which we do know. One of these is that the writer was a 
believer in God ; and that while the dark problems of life perplexed him, as they do 
and have done so many others, he saw light above and beyond them. Another is that 
in this psalm we have the words of one who had " inclined his ear " to hear what the 
great Speaker would say unto him, and what he would have him write. He would 
not put pen to paper till he received the word from heaven. " Antequam ad alios 
loquar, prius devotd audiam ipse Spiritum Sanctum intus me erudientem." > " In the 
words, ' I will incline mine ear to a similitude,' it is plainly implied that the wisdom 
which the psalmist would communicate is no self-sprung possession, but one that has 
been acquired by him ... he only brought forth what he had learned in the school 
of God " (Hengstenberg, in loc.). The theme of the psalm is suggested by the fact, 
■o often observed, that much of the world's wealth is in the hands of the ungodly. 
Concerning it, " in Ps. xxxvii. David, in Ps. xlix. the sons of Korah, and in Ps. Ixxiii. 
Asaph, teach the same truth " (Fausset, p. 258). In dealing therewith we shall portion 
out the homiletic expositions in three distinct outlines. In this we deal with the 
darker side of the theme. 

L One of life's most perplexing facts ib that bo much wealth should be 
IN BAD HANDS. No observaut man can fail to see many illustrations of this.' The 
greatness assumed by the rich often overshadows humbler souls. It sets them wonder- 
ing why God should let so many of his people struggle with poverty while many of 
the ungodly are rolling in wealth. And, to the eye of sense, it darkens the world's 

' <Poli Synopsis,' in loe. The whole paragraph is worth attention. 

* See Expositor, vol. x. p. 466 ; and Smnilist, vol. xil. (Editor's seriesX p. 74. 



382 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlix. 1— 20. 

outlook when, while " money answereth all things," the great hulk of it sh (uld bo 
possessed by the godless, the selfish, the oppressors, and the vile. The fact creates 
fear (ver. 5) in the evil day, since those who have the money-power, and are in a 
sense the lords of the world, use their power unrighteously. So much so that our 
Lord employs the striking epithet, "the mammon of unrighteousDess " (Luke xvi.). 
Only one hint, indeed, is given, in the word " iniquity " (ver. 5), that these rich men 
are evil men. " But this seems to he designed, as in our Lord's parable of the rich 
man and Lazarus, to show that the selfish, proud, boastful use of riches, the mere 
luxuriousness of wealth, apart from violence or unscrupulousness of conduct, is evil, 
and finds its end in the outer darkness." ' But let us note — 

II. ThEBE ABE FIXED CONDITIONS ON WHICH THIS WEALTH IS POSSESSED. TheSe are 

here specified as fourfold. 1. Wealth cannot screen from death (vers. 7, 8, 12). There 
may he (Lev. xxv. 47 — 55), according to the Law, redemption from poverty ; but no 
brother has any ransom price wherewith to prevent death or to deliver from it. Then, 
it must be given up altogether. 2. After death the wealth cannot be controlled ; it is 
left to others (ver. 10). 3. The departed one must see corruption (ver. 10). 4. He 
can carry nothing away (ver. 17 ; 1 Tim. vi. 7). The " rich " one is " bankrupt " at 
the moment of death. 

III. Yet its possbssobs oheeish manifold dblitsions. 1. They trust in riches 
(ver. 6 ; Mark x. 24). 2. They boast of their wealth (ver. 6). Yet wealth can never 
ward off care or sickness. 3. They shut their eyes to their precarious holding of their 
wealth (ver. 11). 4. They even cherish "inward thoughts "of perpetuity ?ver. 11). 
6. They make special efforts to perpetuate their honour (vers. 11, 12). 6. They con- 
gratulate themselves on their greatness (ver. 18 ; Luke xii. 19). And all the while 
they are " fools " in wisdom's eye (ver. 13). 

IV. Fob stroH there is but a dismal outlook. 1. Like the brutes, they will yet 
be reduced to silence (ver. 12).* Their proud boasts will soon be stilled. 2. They will 
descend to Sheol ; i.e. to the realm of the departed. Neither the word " Sheol " nor 
the word " Hades contains per se any moral significance, nor does either word convey 
per se the notion of joy or sorrow. But the connection may give such significance 
to the words. Such is the case here and in Luke xvi. 23 ; in both the thought of evil 
and of sorrow is conveyed. 3. Death will shepherd them. They will be under him, 
for him to lead and feed them. What a shepherd — death I 4. Their flesh will con- 
sume away ; their glory will be gone (vers. 14, 17, 19, 20). No light ahead ! 6. In 
the great awakening, " in the morning " — the morning of the resurrection — the upright, 
whom they despised, shall have dominion over them (LXX., Karaitvpieia-oviriy). The lord- 
ship was theirs during the night, because of their riches ; in the morning that lordship 
will be transferred to the upright, because of their righteousness (Rev. ii. 26, 27)!* 
Hence, note : 1. There is no reason to fear in the day of evil; for evil itself is in the 
restraint of infinite Power. 2. Where the world sees cleverness and riches, be it our« 
to see folly and poverty, if godliness be not also there I " The wicked is driven away in 
his wickedness." — C. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — A contrast : unseen wealth. To those whose character and outlook 
are depicted in the hulk of this psalm its writer did not belong. He looks on them ; 
he writes of them ; but he is not one with them. The emphatic and striking word 
"but" (ver. 15) indicates what the context shows, that there is a great gulf between 
him and them. While the wicked ones who are rolling in wealth despise him because 
of his distance from them on the ground of earthly poverty, he, on the other hand, 
looks down with pity upon them because of their distance from him, on the ground 
of his having " a life hidden with Christ in God," and possessions in heaven, where no 
thief approacheth nor moth corrupteth. And the expositor may well devote his attention 
to the five lines of contrast indicated in this psalm. 

I. Theeb is a oonteast in characteb. (Ver. 14.) "The upright." This is the 

> So Ferowne, in his introduotion to the psalm. Why, however, is Luke xvi. 19 31 

regarded as a pardbile i 

* iBjiJ. See Lexicon, sub verb. UDj. 

• On the dominion of the righteous, see the present writet'c article on the verse of th* 
Apocalypse referred to above. 



PS. xLix. 1-20.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 883 

word oftorj used to express the character of the people of God, in distinction from the 
ungodly (Pss. xxxiii. 1 ; xxxii. 11 ; cxii. 4). The word does not mean " perfection," but 
true sincerity of spirit, combined with the desire to be right in the sight of God. 
Three things are included therein : (1) repentance ; (2) forgiveness ; (3) sanctification. 
Where sin is duly acknowledged, forsaken, forgiven, removed, there, in the sight of God, 
is an upright man. Uow great the contrast between such and the " fools," however 
rich the latter may be 1 

IL There is a contrast in possessions. Sach a one can say, " My God I " And he 
can think and write and speak of God as One who is his Life, his Hope, his Joy, his 
Friend, his All (ver. 15). 

IIL There ib a contrast in the immediate outlook. Instead of being driven 
at death into the shades of Sheol, he will be received by God (ver. 15). " He shall 
receive me." The same word is used of Enoch, " He was not, for God took him ; " 
and by Asaph, in Ps. Ixxiii. 24. 

IV. There is a contrast in the ArTBR-GUABDiANSHip. Instead of death being 
their shepherd by feeding on them, Jehovah is their Shepherd, and leads them beside 
living fountains of water. 

V. There is a contrast nst the fab look. (Ver. 15.) God will redeem my soul 
from the power of the grave ; i.e. he will restore me at the resurrection morning. This 
nature will be completely redeemed — body, soul, and spirit, to be for ever with the 
Lord.— 0. 

Ver. 14. — A vast change : " in the morning." There have been several different 
views entertained of the state after death. The realm of departed souls was called by 
the Hebrews Sheol, or the all-demanding world ; by the Greeks Hades, or the unknown 
world. Practically, either word may be used, since the two simply refer to the same 
realm looked at under different aspects. To the pag^in, Sheol (or Hades) was a dim 
and grim underworld, with no light beyond. To the Hebrews, Sheol was a dim under- 
world, with the light at the end — "in the awakening." To the Christian, Hades is 
a realm of perfect rest in Christ, where the righteous are awaiting the resurrection 
mom.i And we may now set forth the believer's hopes as to that day in far brighter 
and more vivid tones than were possible to the psalmists and seers of old. 

L There will be a besurreotion from the dead. Whether or no the psalmist 
descried this, we cannot tell ; but we do, for Jesus has brought life and incorruption 
to light through the gospel. He is the Resurrection and the Life. He is the Saviour 
of the body ; and " whosoever liveth and believeth in him shall never die." It wiU 
be indeed a glorious " morning " when death shall be swallowed up in victory. 

IL Jbhovah-Jbbus will then be the Shepherd of his flock. As he was their 
Shepherd when here, and had guard of them between death and the resurrection, so 
he will be their Shepherd still, to lead and feed them with his own hand. "The 
upright " will have no such doleful shepherd as death ; they will know nothing of 
dying. In the loving care of Jesus they will know only life and joy. 

III. Then those who have followed the Lobd Jesus will have the supbemaot. 
" Many that are last shall be first, and the first last," even within the kingdom. But how 
much more will this reversal be seen in the case of those who are not in the kingdom 
at all 1 Many who were among the great, the high, the noble, of earth will not then 
be owned by the King ; while many a poor but humble Christian, whom the world 
knew not because it knew him not, will hear a voice saying, " Friend, come up 
higher." Then many of earth's despised ones shall enter into the presence of the King ; 
they shall sit with him on his throne ; and they shall have dominion " in the morning." 
God will cause "all things" to work together for good to those that love him. Evil 
may ride high for a time, but it must hide its head at last. And when the wicked are 
ashamed, the righteous will lift up their heads, for the day of their redemption will 
have come. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — " Se not afraid." I. The preacher. (Vers. 3, 4.) He is marked 
by thoughtfulness. He lends his ear in many a secret pUce to learn wisdom. His 

' See the present writer on Bev. i. 18 ('Pulpit Commentary*), and also his sermon oa 
Katt. xvi. 18, in ' To the Light through the Cross ' (Dickinson). 



384 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. xlix. 1— 20. 

inspiration ia from above, and he does not speak of himself, but as moved by Divine 
impulses. What he has gathered by lang meditation and experience he gives forth 
freely for the good of others. His ambition is to make the dark clear, to discern 
between good and evil, to strip falsehood of its disguises, and to set forth the truth 
concerning &od and human life with all the clearness and charm in his power. Let 
snch a man stand between God and men, and he has a right to be heard. 

II. The audience. (Vers. 1, 2.) The call is to all people, for all are interested. 
Hearing is demanded, for without hearing all speech is vain., It is through hearing 
that the mind, the conscience, and the affections are reached, and that faith and all 
the good things which follow, come. Changes there have been, and changes there will 
be. The old order gives place to the new. But the subject propounded here is for all 
time. Rich and poor alike would do well to hear and to consider wisely what the 
preacher has to say; for it not only has the ring of truth, but it is backed by the 
experience of the ages. 

III. The discourse. The subject is propounded (ver. 5). It ia implied here that 
the wicked may become rich, and that they may even use their wealth in ways unjust 
and oppressive. Might and good fortune are at their command. They pursue their 
selfish and unholy schemes unchecked. God seems to leave them to do their pleasure. 
The stronger the hope of the godly that judgment will come, the greater their per- 
plexity at its delay. Here is a dark riddle, which presses heavily on many a heart, and 
which has often, in evil times, constrained the cry of the psalmist : " Why?" But 
light will arise to the righteous. We are taught to look at things as in the presence 
of God, discerning between truth and falsehood, and discovering that, in spite of all 
the outward shows and splendour of the ungodly, their inward state is wickedness, 
their prosperity is foUy, and their end is death— death without God and without 
hope. Whereas the godly, though they have their trials, have peace ; though they 
may have little of this world's goods, are rich toward God, and rejoice in the con- 
sciousness of a life which will conquer death, and of a hope of glory strong as truth 
is strong, pure as Christ is pure, and eternal as the eternal God. The arguments by 
which these truths are enforced are weighty and powerfuL 1. The impotence of wealth 
in the great emergencies of life. (Ver. 7.) 2. The transitorineis of aU eartUy 
possessions. (Vers. 10 — 12.) 8. The degradation of hvmam character through cove- 
tousnes) and pride. (Vers. 13, 14.) 4. The miserable end of the ungodly rich, <m 
contrcated with the happy end of the righteous. (Vers. 15 — 20.) 

Hear, then, the conclusion of the whole matter. " Be not afraid " (vers. 6, 16). 
The lessons which this old seeker after truth has set forth are elsewhere in Holy 
Scripture, and especially in the teaching of our Lord and his apostles, expounded and 
enforced with a clearness which leaves no excuse for ignorance, and with a charm 
which should win the conviction of all hearts. As we re^ the Sermon on the Mount, 
as we study the parables of the rich fool and of the good Samaritan, and as we grasp 
the great verities of the Gospels and the Epistles, our faith grows in strength and our 
courage in fervour, and looking unto Jesus, and to the joy set before us, we are »ble 
to say to ourselves, in the most evil times, «' Be not afraid." — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — 2%e issues of life. Connected with Pss. xvi, xvii., tne writer standi 
face to face with the great problem of the time — the prosperity of the wicked. Th« 
two chief causes which forced the conviction of a hereafter on the later Hebrews were 
a deep dissatisfaction at the prosperity of the wicked and the misfortunes of the 
righteous in the world ; and the earnest longing of the soul for a more perfect com- 
munion with QkA. than was possible in the present life ; for they could not but believe 
that God's promises to the righteous would be made good. The subject of this psalm 
is that the issues of life show the difference between the lot of the righteous and the 
wicked. 

I. Thb lot of the prosperous wicked, who trust in bioheb. 1. Their richei 
cannot purchase a ransom from death. (Vert 7 — 9.) Money may bribe men, but not 
God, nor death. 2. They cannot carry their riches or their glory with them when they 
die. (Vers. 16 — 18.) Both are only transient possessions, which soon pass away. 
3. piere is no deliverance for them from the grave. (Vers. 11 — 14.) The grave if 
their averlasting habitation, where all their beauty consumf s away. 



PB. L. 1—23.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



386 



II. The peivilegb of the kishteods. 1. Tole fearless and undaunted in respect 
to the evil devices of the wicked. (Vers. 6, 6, 16.^ 2. They shall ultimately obtain 
dominion over the wicked. (Ver. 14.) All the best and devoutest minds have 
never doubted that good shall at length triumph over evil. 3. Redemption from the 
grave, from Shed, into a life with Ood. (Ver. 15.) " No more momentous struggle 
ever swayed the heart of man than that which first led him to suspect himself to be 
immortal." 

III. These sreat issxros abb wobtht the study or am.. (Vers. 1 — L) High 
•nd low, rich and poor.^^ 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM li. 



Thb psalmist announces an appearance of 
G«d to Ms people "out of Ziou," and a 
pronouncement of judgment upon them, 
which all heaven (ver. 4) and earth (ver. 1) 
are called upon to witness. The judgment 
takes the shape of a twofold address ; first, 
to the righteous, who are exhorted to tho 
spiritual worship of God (vers. 14, 15), and 
warned against putting too much trust in 
sacrifice (vers. 8 — 13); secondly, to the 
wicked, who are sternly reproved for their 
hypocrisy, their hatred of instruction, their 
■ins in act and speech, their want of natural 
affection, and their low and unworthy idea 
of the nature of God (vers. 16—21). In 
conclusion, a word of final warning is given 
to the wicked (ver. 22), and a word of final 
encouragement to the righteous (ver. 23). 

The psalm oonsists of four portions : 1. 
As introduction (divided off by the pause- 
mark, " Selah," from the rest of the psalm), 
announcing the "appearance," and calling 
on heaven and earth to witness it (vers. 
1 — 6). 2. An address to the godly Israelites 
(vers. 7 — 15). 3. An address to the ungodly 
Israelites (vers. 16 — 21). 4. A conclusion, 
divided equally between threat and promise 
(vers. 22, 23). 

The psalm is ascribed to Asaph, the 
"chief," or superintendent, of the Levites 
to whom David assigned the ministry of 
piaise before the ark (1 Ohron. xvi 4, 5). 
So are also Pss. Ixxiii. — Ixxxiii. Some 
of these may have been composed by later 
Asaphite Levites ; but the present ode may 
well be Asaph's own, since it "bears all 
the marks of the golden age of Hebrew 
poetry." Asaph's composition of a portion 
of the Psalter is implied in Hezekiah's com- 
mand to the Levites, reported in 2 Chron. 
xxix. 30. 

PSALMS. 



Ver. 1. — The mighty God, even the lord, 
hath spoken. A combination of three names 
of God — viz. El, Blohim, and Jehovah — 
only found here and in Josh. xxii. 22. 
There it is translated "the Lord God of 
gods," which is a possible rendering. Sepa- 
rately, the three names seem to mean, "Tho 
Miglity One," " The Many in One" (Oheyne) 
or "The Three in One," and "The Self- 
Existent One." He who is all these, the 
psalmist announces, "has spoken," and 
called (or, summoned) the earth from the 
rising of the sun unto the going down 
thereof; i.e. God has summoned all man- 
kind to hear his judgment of his covenant 
people. 

Ver. 2. — 0«t of Zion, the perfection of 
beauty (comp. Ps. xlviii. 2; Lam. ii. IS; 
1 Maco. ii. 12). God hath shined ; i.e. hat 
shown himself in his dazzling radiance. 
The psalmist, however, does not mean to 
announce a material, but a spiritual, fact. 

Ver. 3. — Our God shall come, and shall 
not keep silence; rather, and let Mm not 
keep silence. Let him call attention to bia 
" coming," that his judgment may be widely 
known. A fire (rather, fire) shall devour 
before him (comp. Ps. xxi. 9). And it shall 
be very tempestuous round about him. So 
in all tbeophanies (bee Exod. xix. IS ; 1 
Kings xix. 11 ; Job xxxviii. 1 ; Pes. xviii. 
13; xcvii. 2 — 5; Actsii. 2; Eev. iv. 5, etc.). 

Ver. 4. — ^Ee shall call to the heavens from 
above ; rather, to the heavens above ; i.e. ts 
the inhabitants of heaven — the holy angels. 
And to the earth (comp. ver. 1). That he 
may judge his people. Heaven and earth 
are called upon to come together, and furnish 
a fit audience before which the judgment 
may proceed. 

Ver. 5. — Gather my saints together unto 
me. By " my saints " the psalmist means 
here, not godly Israel, as in Ps. xvi. 3, but 
all Israel — the whole nation, whether true 
servants of Jehovah, or only professed ser- 
vants. This is rendered clear by the 
ensuing clause. Those that have made a 
covenant with me by sacrifice. Kot even 
was the first covenant dedicated without 
blnod (Heb.jix. 18 ; comp. Bxod.xxiv. 3—8); 
nor could any Israelite remain witliin tho 

2 



S86 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PB. L. 1— 2a 



coTenant without frequent sacrifice (Exod. 
xii. 2 — 47, etc.). 

Yer. 6. — And the heavens shall declare 
his righteonsnesB. The nngelic host, which 
comes to witness the judgment of Israel 
(ver. 4), shall proclaim it a righteous judg- 
ment, for God is Judge himself. And he 
will certainly "do right" (Gen. xviii. 25). 

Vers. 7 — 15. — "The continuance of this 
dramatic scone," as Professor Cheyne re- 
marks, " scarcely answers to the commence- 
ment. The j udgment seems to be adj ourned, 
or to be left to the conscience of the de- 
fendants." The faithful are summoned, 
and appear, but not to receive unqualified 
commendation (see Matt. xxv. 31 — 40). 
Bather they receive a warning. The strong 
and prolonged depreciation of sacrifice (vers. 
8 — 13) necessarily implies that in the re- 
ligion of the tiiue too much stress was laid 
apon it. We know that, in the heathen 
world, men sought to buy God's favour by 
their sacrifices, some beUeving that, phy- 
sically, the gods were nourished by the 
steam of the victims, others regarding them 
as laid under obligations which they could 
not disregard (Plato, 'Kep.,' ii. § vi.; Baw- 
linson, ' Beligions of the Ancient World,' 
pp. 124, 125). We know, too, that, in the 
later monarchy, sacrifice to so great an extent 
superseded true spiritual worship among 
the Israelites themselves, that it became an 
offence to God, and was spoken of in terms 
of reprobation (Isa. i. 11 — 13; Ixvi. 3). 
Already, it would seem, this tendency was 
manifesting itself, and a warning from 
Heaven was needed against it. 

Ver. 7.— Hear, my people, and I will 
speak. God will not speak to deaf ears. 
Unless men are ready to attend to him, he 
keeps silence. Israel, and I will testify 
against theej or, protest unto thee (Kay, 
Cheyne). I am God, even thy God. And 
therefore am entitled to be heard. 

Ver. 8. — I will not reprove thee for thy 
sacrifices or thy burnt offerings. It is for 
no neglect of the outward ritual of religion 
—of sacrifice and offering — that I have to 
reprove thee. To have been continually be- 
fore me ; rather, they have been continually 
before me. I have had enough of them, and 
to spare. Not only have the daily morn- 
ing and evening sacrifices been regularly 
offered, and the national worship thus kept 
up without a break ; but the private offer- 
ings of individuals (see vers. 9, 13) have 
been continuous and ample in number. 
But they have not been acceptable. 



Ver. 9. — I will take no bullock out of thy 
house, nor he goats out of thy folds. The 
offerings of those who offer amiss will not 
be accepted. God declines to receive them. 

Ver. 10. — For every beast of the forest is 
mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. 
So the Eevised Version, Dr. Kay, Canon 
Cook, the Pour Friends, and others; but 
many critics regard such a rendering as 
impossible. Of tliese, some translate, " And 
the cattle upon the hiils, where there are 
thousands " (Hupfeld, Hengstenberg, etc.) ; 
while others read wrhn for P]^S, and render, 
" And the cattle upon the mountains of 
God " (Ulshauseo, Cheyne). 

Ver. 11.— I know all the fowls of the 
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field 
are mine ; literally, are with me. All crea- 
tion is God's, known to him, and owned by 
him, to be dealt with at his pleasure. How, 
then, should he need gifts from men ? 

Ver. 12. — If I were hungry, I would not 
teU thee; i.e. suppose it possible that I 
could be hungry, 1 should not have recourse 
to man ; for the world is mine, and the ful- 
ness thereof — and I should have recourse 
to it. 

Ver. 13.— Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or 
drink the blood of goats t But is it to be 
supposed, can any suppose it possible, that 
I, the Lord of heaven and earth, the in- 
visible Author of all things, both visible and 
invisible, can need material sustenance, and 
can condescend to find any sustenance im 
bulls' flesh and goats' blood ? Scarcely did 
even the grossest of the heathen take this 
view. A vapour, an odour (^Kviaaij), was 
thought to ascend from the victims sacri- 
ficed, and this penetrated to the Olympian 
abodes, and gratified, or, as some would 
say, " fed " the gods. But such coarse feed- 
ing as that suggested in the text was hardly 
imagined by any, unless it were by utter 
savages and barbarians. 

Ver. 14. — Offer unto God thanksgiving. 
The one offering acceptable to God is praise 
and thanksgiving out of a pure heart. This 
was designed to be the accompaniment of 
all sacrifice, and was the ground of accepta- 
bility in every case where sacrifice was 
acceptable. And pay thy vows unto the 
Most High ; i.e. " and so pay thy vows." So 
offer thy worship, and it will be accepted. 

Ver. J 5. — And oaU upon me in the day of 
trouble (oomp. Ps. xx. 1). I will deliver 
thee, and thou shalt glorify me. The mean- 
ing is, " Then, when thou shalt offer unto 
me a true worship (ver. 14), if thou wilt call 
upon me in the day of trouble, I will as- 
suredly deliver thee, and so give thee occa- 
sion for glorifying me." 

Vers. 16— 21.— While even the more godly 
among the Israelites have been thus, to a 



PH. u 1—23.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



387 



certain extent, reproved (Ter3. 8 — 14), the 
psalmist now addresses to the ungodly, the 
open and wilful tiansgressors, a far sterner 
rebuke. They claim the privileges of God's 
covenanted servants (ver. 16), but perforin 
none of the duties (vers. 17 — 20), thus bring- 
ing down upon themselves a terrible menace. 

Yer. 16. — Bat nnto the wicked &od saith, 
What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, 
or that thou shouldest take my covenant in 
thy mouth % The wicked assumed that they 
were true Israelites. They were familiar 
with tbe words of God's statutes, and with 
the terms of the covenant. They claimed 
the right of enforcing them against others 
(Kom. ii. 18 — 20), while in their own per^ 
sons they set them at nought (vers. 18 — 20). 
God declares that they have no right to 
assume to be teachers of others until they 
liave taught themselves — they are unfit 
even to " take his covenant in their mouth." 

Yer. 17. — Seeing thou hatest instrnetiou 
(comp. Prov. i. 25, 29). God, by his Law, 
teaches men their duties; but many men 
" hate " to be instructed. And oastest my 
words behind thee (comp. 1 Kings xiv. 9; 
Neh. ix. 26). They proceed from *' inward 
alienation " to " open rejection " of the 
moral law. 

Yer. 18. — When thou sawest a thief, then 
thou oonsentedst unto him. God tests his 
professed, but really disobedient, servants 
by the second table of the Decalogue, and 
finds them wanting. If they do not them- 
selves actually rob, they give their consent, 
they become accessories before the fact, to 
robbery. They probably participate in the 
gains. And hast been partaker with adul- 
terers; rather, and mth adulterer! is thy 
portion; i.e. thou hast thrown in thy lot 
with them, hast adopted their principles, 
hast set at nought the seventh no less than 
the eighth commandment. 

Yer. 19. — Thou givest thy mouth to evil, 
and thy tongue frameth deceit ; rather, thou, 
hast loosed thy mouth to evil; i.e. given it 
liberty to utter all manner of wicked speech ; 
and especially thou hast used mouth and 
tongue to cozen and deceive. 

Yer. 20. — Thou sittest nnd speakest against 
thy brother. Professor Gheyue understands 
by "brother" any fellow-Israelite; but the 



parallel in the second hemistich— Thou 
slanderest thine own mother's son — implies 
that an actual brother is intended. It is 
one of the special characteristics of the 
reprobate to be " without natural affection " 
(Eom. i. 31). 

Yer. 21. — These things hast thou done, 
and I kept silence ; thou thoughtest that I 
was altogether siicli an one as thyself. Be- 
cause God did not interpose openly to 
punish the sins committed, the transgressor 
dared to imagine him to be inrlifferent to 
sin, "such an one as himself" — no holier, 
no purer, no more averse to eviL But I 
will reprove thee, and set them in order 
before thine eyes. But now the time is 
come when I shall no longer keep silence ; 
I shall openly " reprove " thee, and marshal 
in set order before thee all the wicked deeds 
which thou hast done. God, as Calvin 
says, " wUl lay before them in exact order a 
full catalogue of their misdeeds, which they 
must read and own, whether they will or 
not." 

Ver. 22. — Now consider this, ye that for- 
get God. Having been " reproved," the 
wicked are now, in conclusion, exhorted and 
warned. " Consider this ; " i.e. take it to 
heart, reflect upon it, let it sink deeply into 
your minds and consciences, and act upon 
it. Lest I tear you in pieoes, and there be 
none to deliver. A most awful threat. To 
" tear in pieces " is the act of a wild beast 
(Ps. vii. 2). Job declares that God " teareth 
him ; " but otherwise the expression is 
scarcely used of Divine chastisements. 
Certainly, if God, in his anger, lays hold 
upon a man to punish him, there is no pos- 
sible deliverance at the hand of any other 
man (Ps. xlix. 7, 8). Deliverance, if it comes 
at all, must come from the Redeemer within 
the Godhead. 

Yer. 23. — Whoso offereth praise glorifieth 
me : and to him that ordereth his conversa- 
tion aright will I show the salvation of 
God. As the wicked have their parting 
warning, so the godly have their parting 
encouragement. God is " glorified " (see 
ver. 15) by those who offer him praise from 
a sincere heart ; and if a man will lay down 
for himself a straiglit path and pursue it, 
God will " show him his salvation," ».«. 
will bring him to peace and blessedness. 



HOMILBTIGS. 

Ver. 21.— Thoughts of Ood. "Thou thoughtest ... as thyself." What a man 
thinks in his heart of God is the turning-point of life and character. If we think "all 
things are naked and opened," etc. (Heb. iv. 13), that we really " have to do " with 
God, this must needs tell on our whole view of life, from its greatest affairs to its 
least. If we think God takes no note of sin, we shall be careless of sin. If we think 
of God as severe, implacable, unjust, we may fear him, but cannot love him. If we 



888 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. u 1—23, 

think of him as loving and merciful, "faithful and just to forgive," etc. (1 John L 9), 
we shall leam to " love him, because he first loved us " (iv. 19) ; and loving, sh^l 
obey. And if we think of him as holy, we shall hate sin, and strive after holiness 
(Heb. xii. 14). Let us note (1) the wrong thought of God here rebuked; (2) the 
equally dangerous opposite error ; (3) the truth, which in a distorted, imperfect form, is 
to be found in both. 

T. The ebbob of bbinoing down cub thoughts of God to the level op 
HUMAN NATUBE — measuring God by man. " Thou thoughtest," etc. This is the genn 
of idolatry. Man's nature makes him a worshipper. His reason demands God. Hit 
heart cries out for God. His weakness needs God. But his sinfulness shrinks from 
a righteous and holy God (see St. Paul's account of the matter, Rom. i. 19 — 25). 
But those to whom this warning is spoken are not idolaters, any more than they are 
atheists. They " declare God's statutes " and " take his aovenant in their mouth." 
Profassed members of his Church, even teachers in it. But "in works they deny 
him " (Titus L 16). Looking at this psalm as predictive, its first fulfilment was when 
our Saviour denounced the hypocrites of this day ; as in Matt. zxiv. Its final fulfilment 
will be that of which he speaks in Matt. vii. 21—23. (The whole second chapter of 
Bomans is a commentary on this psalm.) How is such self-deceiving hypocrisy 
possible? Through false thoughts of God. Men persuade themselves that he 
does not mean what he says ; will not be hard on them ; is too indulgent really to 
punish sin. Not only a fatal error, but one that adds to other sins that of insulting 
the Most High I Terrible to think that men may set up an idol in their own thought* 
— a false view of God's character and dealings, as unlike God as Baal or Juggernaut ! 

n. The oppositb ebrob is that of supposing that God in no eespect eesembles 
man; OB HAN, God. That there is nothing in our nature — conscience, reason, 
affections — firom which we may infer some correspondence in " the Father of spirits." 
God is thus removed out of all reach of our knowledge, sympathy, love; and even 
trust and obedience. This is the error to which men are most prone In our own day, 
especially men of cultured intellect and science. They see themselves surrounded by 
an order so stupendous, laws so unchangeable, worlds and systems so remote, so 
ancient, so infinite to our feeble thought, that the Creator seems infinitely removeil — 
lost in the greatness of his own works. The world by wisdom knows not God. If 
such men worship, it is not the God revealed in the Bible and in Christ, but an idol — 
not of sense or imagination, but intellect — " the Infinite," " the Absolute," " the 
Stream of tendency making for righteousness," " the Unknowable." 

III. In BOTH THESE EBBOBS THERE IB A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF TBUTH. But Only 

half the truth. Half-truths are often the most deadly errors, when mistaken for whole 
truths. But truth is not found by flying from one error to the opposite extreme. 
The truth contained, but concealed and distorted, in idolatry, is that man's nature 
has something akin to God, so that man can converse with God. The truth contained, 
but perverted, in the philosophy which declares God to be " unknowable," is that our 
knowledge of him, though real and true, must needs be very limited. Finite minds 
cannot comprehend the Infinite. 

The narrow limits of our knowledge of God, and its necessary imperfection, are 
amply taught in the Bible (see Exod. iii. 13, 14 ; Isa. zl. 25 ; Iv, 8, 9). But the main 
tfforti and purpose of the Bible, from first to last, is not to weigh us down with God's 
incomprehensible greatness, but to lift us up and bring us near to him. Its opening 
mge shows us, not Ood in the likeness of man, but man created in tht image of Ood. 
Then the Scripture goes on to reveal God (1) by providence, dealing with individuals 
as well as nations and the race; (2) by law, binding us to him in duty and obedience; 
(3) by promise, binding himself to us in a personal moral relation, which we personally 
enter into by faith ; by (4) miracle, making nature, where only dead law seems to 
reign, reveal his living presence, power, and love ; (5) by inspiration, communioatins 
in human thought and speech all that we most need to know of him. Lastly, all these 
meet and are perfected in Christ (Heb. i. 1 — 3 ; John i. 18 ; xiv. 9). 

Ver. 22. — Forgetfulness of Ood. " Now consider," etc. The prevailing character 
of the Book of Psalms is that Divine truth is clothed in the language of human experi- 
ence. But in this jisalm God alone speaks. The personality of the psalmist vanishes 



P8. t. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 889 

Man's voice is hushed. We are called into the very presence of God, like Israel at the 
foot of Sinai. It is God's voice that summons us to judgment, and sets our sins in 
order before our eyes. Yet it is the voice of merciful warning. " Consider 1 " (Isa. L 
18). The sin here rebuked is forget/ulness of Ood. 

I. It is not difficult to forget God. God might have made it impossible. He 
might have surrounded us with symbols of his presence which the dullest could not 
mistake. Voices from the sky might thunder his Name in our ears. An inward irre- 
sistible consciousness of his being and presence might have been an inseparable part of 
our nature. But no ! A mysterious veil hangs between our soul and our Creator. 
We have no direct knowledge of God. He has left us at liberty, if we please, to forget 
him. We can bury ourselves in things around us, and forget him in whom we " live 
and move and have our being." 

II. It seems wonderful that it is posstble, and not difficult ; but more wonderful 
still that FOBGETFULNESS OF GoD IS COMMON. Who are they who are here charged 
mth forgetting GoA 1 Not idolaters. Not atheists. Not the openly profane and 
irreligious. Those (ver. 16) who "declare God's statutes, and take his covenant in 
their mouth." Of such St. Paul speaks (Rom. ii. 17 — 23), and our Saviour (Matt. vii. 
21 — 23). They forget Ood. It is the description (alas I) of the daily life of thousands 
of habitual attendants on public worship. Hearers, but not doers ; forgetful hearers 
(Jas. i. 22—25). 

III. FOBGETFULNEBS OF GOD IB A HUGE INGBATITCSI ; A DEADLY SIN. HoW cau 

you account for it? Men may dislike the Scripture doctrine of the sinfulness of 
human nature. They may deny it. But this fact dtaies us in the face — ^prevailing 
forgetfulness of God. How explain it, except as the Scriptures explain it? — men do 
not like to retain God in their knowledge (Bom. i. 28 ; viii. 7). 

lY. FOBGETFULNESB OF GOD MUST NEEDS BE YEBT DANGEROUS ; IF FEBSIBTED IN, 

FATAL. Your forgetfulness does not affect the reality of things. It banishes God 
from your thought and affection ; not from his universe. He cannot forget. He must 
deal with you, and deal justly. He must take account of your forgetting him. 
"Consider!" Consider the folly, ingratitude, sin, danger, of forgetting God. His 
mercies are new every morning, " He will ever be mindful of his covenant ; " "He is 
faithful and just to forgive sins ; " and promises (Isa, xliii. 25) to " remember them no 
more," Can there be forgetfulness in the infinite mind ? Can God cease to be omni- 
•cient ? Not literally ; but by this intensely strong figure the Bible sets forth the 
generous and loving completeness of Divine forgiveness. It is an act of oblivion. 
"Consider ! " We have forgotten God, but he has not forgotten us. He " remembered 
us in our low estate ; for his mercy endureth for ever " (Ps. cxxxvL 23). He heseechM 
you to be reconciled I 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver». 1 — 23. — 77ie Judge, the Judged, and the eternal Judgment, A psalm-writer 
whom we have not met before, appears to have penned this psalm — Asaph. But 
whether it was by him or for his choir is somewhat uncertain. "Asaph was the 
leader and superintendent of the Levitic choirs appointed by David (1 Chron. xvi. 
i, 5 ; of, 2 Chron. xxix. 30). He and his sons presided over four out of the twenty-four 
groups, consisting each of twelve Levites, who conducted, in turn, the musical services 
of the temple."* " It is remarkable," says Hengstenberg, " that the voice against the 
false estimate of the external worship of God proceeded from the quarter which was 
expressly charged with its administration. Asaph, according to 1 Chron. vi. 24, was 
of the tribe of Levi." * But let the human penman have been whosoever he may, 
there is in this psalm so much of the sublime grandeur of a stem and inflexible 
righteousness, that we have therein, manifestly, the writing of one who was borne 
along by the Holy Ghost to utter words for God that should be suited for all Churches 
and all the ages throughout all time ; so that it behoves us to listen to them as to 

' Introduction to Ps. 1. in ' Speaker's Commentary.' 

' Dr. Birmie has an exceedinglv irtrrestin? passage on "The Psalms of Asaph the 
Beer," pp. 73— 7fi. 



390 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. l. 1— 23 

the words of the living God, declaring the principles of eternal judgment. "In a 
iiiagaificent vision the prophet to whom this psalm is due beholds the Almighty 
deuoiincing a solemn judgment against the degradation of his Name, and setting forth 
the requirements of a spiritual religion." * In opening up this psalm, therefore, the 
expositor may well yearn to unfold it, "not as the word of man, but, as it is in truth, 
the Word of God." In that spirit, and with that aim, we hope to deal with it now. 
There are some ten questions to be asked and answered concerning this diaolosure of 
judgment which the psalm so sublimely sets before us. 

I. To WHOM DOBS THE OFFICE OF JuDQE BELONO? In the sixth vsrse we read, 
" God is Judge himself." He allows none but himself to sit in judgment on others ; 
for none else has the authority or the ability to do it. But he, whose great Trinity of 
names is given here, keeps all in infinite hands. "God," the Supreme Ruler; El- 
Elohim, the God of gods; Jehovah, the covenant God of Israel; — he it is who is thus 
enthroned and speaks with his voice, on the eternal principles which are the basis of 
his throne. 

li. What is included in that office? As here indicated, it includes the 
expression of his mind and will, as to the worship he requires, the conduct he approves 
or disapproves, the decisions he forms, the sentences he pronounces, the destinies he 
assigns. For long God may have seemed to keep silence hereon (ver. 21), but he will 
not be silent always (ver. 3). 

III. When does the judqmbnt take placB V It can scarcely be questioned that 
the remarkable words in ver. 3 point to a specific time when God shall come to 
judgment, and when attendant on the judgment there will be great signs and wonders 
in the heaven above and the earth beneath (see vers. 1, 3, 4). But three or four dis- 
tinctive forms of God's judgment are indicated in Scripture. 1. The judgment at the 
last day. This is brought before us in Matt. xxv. 31—46. 2. The judgment expressed 
in providential dispensations on the Jewish Church (Jer. vii. 1 — 20; Ezek. ix. 4 — 6; 
1 Pet. iv. 17). 3. The judgments that are brought upon Christian Churches that are 
unfaithful. These are plainly enough shown us in the epistles to the seven Churches." 
4. The judgment that is ever going on in every visible Church — a judgment by 
One whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and who walks in the midst of the golden lamps. 
This is God's "eternal judgment" (Heb. vi. 1), the principles of which never, never 
vary. What they will be seen to be at the last day they are now, seen or unseen. 

IV. Who are the judged? (Ver. 5.) The heavens and the earth are called to 
be witnesses of God's judgment "of the covenant people" (Cheyne). "This psalm," 
says Dickson, " is a citing of the visible Church before God ... to compear before the 
tribunal of God, now in time while mercy may be had, timously to consider the Lord's 
controversy against the sintiers in his Church, that they may repent and be saved." 
" The psalm," says Perowne, " deals with ' the sinners and the hypocrites in Zion,' but 
it reaches to all men, in all places, to the end of time." It contains the message of 
Divine indignation to those in Israel who were not of Israel ; it specifies : 1. The 
superstitious — those who brought offerings of slain beasts in sacrifice, thinking that 
God accepted them as such, or who even, perhaps, stooped to the pagan notion that 
such sacrifices were " food for the gods." Hence, thouc;h there is no rebuke over any 
offerings withheld (ver. 8), yet there is severe indignation against the low conceptions 
of God and his worship with which these ofi'erings were brought (vers. 9 — 13). 
2. There were the scribes (see Matthew Poole), who expounded the Law, but kept it 
not (ver. 16). 3. There were those whose service was but a form — who vowed to God, 
but did not pay (ver. 14). 4. There were the openly wicked, who sought by profession 
of religion to cloak their wickedness (vers. 17 — 20). Think of such a heterogeneous 
mass being collected together in one visible Church I Is it any wonder that "judgment 
must legin at the house of God " ? 

V. What is the basis of judgment? (Ver. 2.) " Out of Zion God hath shined." 
As from Mount Sinai he declared his will in the legislation of Moses, so from Zion he 
1 1.1th declared his will in the proclamations of prophet, apostle, saint, and seer; and 
according to those principles of truth and righteousness thus proclaimed is God's 

' ' The Psalms, ohronologieally arrangeii,' by Four Friends, p. 168. See also the twenty^ 
fiitli lecture in Mr. Fausset's ' Studies in the Psalms.' 

■ Si-e the present writer's articles thereuu, in ' Pulpit Commentary.' 



M. L. 1-23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 891 

judgment ever being exercised ; according to them will it finally proceed. And aocordin;; 
to the measure of light granted to men, will be the standard by wliich they will be 
tried. Fuller light on this theme comes to view in the New Testament. Peter's words 
(Acts X. 35; 1 Pet. iii. 18— iv. 6), Paul's words (Rom. ii. 16; xiv. 10; 2 Oor. v. 10), 
throw a flood of light hereon, showing us that ere the fiiud judgment comes everj 
Boul will come to know its relation to the Lord Jesus, and that according to its 
response will be its destiny.' 

VI. What are the principles on which judoment will proceed? Five of 
these are indicated in the psalm. 1. That merely formal offerings are offensive to 
God (vers. 8 — 13). 2. That no measure of religiousness will be accepted if iniquity 
has prevailed in the heart and life (ver. 16). 3. That the truly acceptable worship is a 
life of consecration, fidelity, prayer, and praise (vers. 14, 15). 4. That whosoever has 
ordered his life after the revealed will of God, will see God's salvation (ver. 23). 
5. That wherever the life has been one of forgetfulness and neglect of God, the guilty 
one will be confounded (ver. 22). 

VII. What are the complaints made by the great Judge ? One is negative, 
viz. the absence of the worship of the heart ; another is positive — hypocrisy and guilt 
screened under a profession of religion, and the thought being cherished all the while 
that they would never be detected (ver. 21). 

VIII. What are the requirements of the Sovereign Judge ? A life of 
(1) praise (ver. 23) ; (2) thanksgiving (ver. 14) ; (3) loyalty (ver. 14) ; (4) prayer 
(ver. 15) ; (5) glorifying God (ver. 15) ; (6) a good and upright conversation (ver. 23). 
Who does not see how infinitely such a life rises above that of merely formal lip-service? 

IX. What will be the issue op the judgment ? Under varied forms of 
expression, the results are declared to be twofold, according to the main drifts of 
character and life. 1. For those in the wrong, rejection, sin set in order, brought 
home, exposed, condemned (vers. 21, 22). 2. For those who are in the right — the 
salvation of God (Acts z. 35; xv. 8, 9, 11). Thus under every head, though in 
archaic form, and with light less full, the very same truths are declared by the 
psalmist that were afterwards brought out more fully by Jesus Christ and his apostles. 

X. To WHOM 18 THE CALL ADDRESSED TO HEAR ALL THIS, AND WHY ? (Vers. 1, 4.) 

The whole earth is called on to witness and to watch the severely discriminating 
judgments of God on his visible Church ; and every one is called upon to hearken, 
because it is Ood who speaketh. The Apostle Peter raises a momentous question in 
1 Pet. iv. 17, 18. Whether we are ready to face the last judgment depends on how 
we stand in relation to that judgment which is going on every hour. Note : After 
studying such a psalm as this, how vain does the question put by Soman Catholics 
appear, " Where can I find God's true Church ? " For this whqle psalm is addressed 
to God's true Church. Yet whoever, even " in Zion," is at ease, or formal, or corrupt, 
will find that not even membership in any visible Church will save him. Only those 
will be saved whose hearts are purified by faith in Jesus Christ our Lord. — C. 

Vers. 1 — 23. — Ood the righteous Jvdge. I. That God will judge all men. 
Even now there is judgment. Every act of our lives has its moral character, and 
carries its consequences of good or evil. But this judgment is but partial and incom- 
plete. Reason, conscience, and Holy Scripture proclaim a judgment to come which 
will be perfect and final. The supreme Judge of all men is God. He and he alone 
has the right and the power. He has perfect knowledge, and cannot err ; he has 
absolute righteousness, and cannot do injustice ; he has almighty power, and cannot be 
prevented from carrying his judgments into effect. In the psalm the vision seems 
gradually to unfold itself till the great God stands before us in awful majesty and 
glory, " the Judge of the quick and the dead." 

II, That God's judgment will settle for ever the destinies or men. God 
comes to us now, but it is in mercy. He has no pleasure in the death of the sinner, 
but would rather that all should turn from their evil ways and live. But there is a 
great crisis near, when he will come as a Judge, and when all men shall be brought 
consciously before him for judgment. The judgment will be universal : not only Israel, 
but all the earth ; but it will begin at the house of God. Unavoidable : there will 

' See the present writer's book on ' Theories of Future Punishment,' 2nd edit. (Snow). 



392 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. l. 1—23. 

be no possibility of eluding the officers of justice, or of evading the testimony of the 
witnesses. Conclusive : it is the last judgment, from which there can be no appeal, 
whose sentences are irreversible and eternal. 

III. That God will settle the destinies of men on the qeounds op ETEEHiu 
JUSTICE. There is a hint as to the principles on which the judgment will be based in 
ver. 7. Everything may be said to turn on the kind of religion which we have. This 
is shown negatively (vers. 8 — 13), then positively (vers. 14 — 23). True religion is 
not outward, but inward ; not formal, but spiritus,! ; not conventional, but personal ; 
not in privileges, not in professions, not in ceremonial observances, but in the sincere 
obedience of the heart and life. It implies that God's love is supreme in the heart, 
and God's law is supreme in the life. Such a religion can only be obtained for sinners 
through Jesus Christ the Saviour. Where it really exists there is not only the form, 
but the power of godliness — in grateful thanksgiving and joyous obedience and 
adoring prayer (ver. 23). — W. F. 

Vers. 7 — ^21. — True religion and its cmmter/eitt. The great evil to which Israel 
was exposed was the separation of religion from morality. This comes out lamentably 
in their history, and forms the burden of much of the teaching of their prophets. So 
in this psalm, which contains a powerful demonstration of the worthlessness of religion 
without godliness. The psalm may help us to consider true reUgion and its eounter/etis. 

L Superstition. (Ver. 7.) Nothing in religion can be real and true but what 
is based on faith in the living God. What springs from fear without knowledge 
degenerates into the basest idolatries. 

II. FoBHALisH. (Vers. 8 — 14.) The heading of this psalm in our Bibles is very 
true and suggestive. " The pleasure of God is not in ceremonies, but in sincerity of 
obedience." To this all the prophets bear witness. Even ceremonies appointed by 
God himself become not only worthless, but odious, when they are observed without 
faith and love (Isa. i. 11 — 17). 

TIL Hypocbitioal fbofession. (Vers. 16 — 21.) There is much of this always in 
the world — false profession, insincere obedience, unloving service. The evil effect on 
individuals, families, and society is terrible. With what righteous indignation are 
such hypocrites arraigned! and with what stern, resistless argument is the inconsistency 
and enormity of their conduct denounced I — W. F. 

Ver. 15. — " The day of trouble." I. Hebe is a dat that will oohe to all. 
You may not have hitherto known " trouble ; " if so, be thankful, but prepared. The 
immunity of the past is no protection. Sooner or later it will be said to you, as 
Eliphaz said to Job, " Now it is come upon thee " (Job iv. 6). And this is wdL To 
be without trouble would be to lack one of the chief disciplines of life, and to lay oi 
under the suspicion of being " bastards, not sons." 

II. Hebe is a duty ubged upon all. "Gall upon me." 1. This duty is 
agreeable to our nature. In trouble we crave sympathy and help. As the child 
instinctively cries to its mother, so should we call upon God. 2. This duty is 
prompted by our circumstances. " Trouble " not only causes pain, but fear. Under 
the pressure of need we come to the throne of grace for mercy and grace. 3. This duty 
is enforced by the example of the good. They speak of what they have known. With 
grateful hearts they tell of what the Lord has done for them (Fs. Ixxvii. 1 ; 2 Cor. i, 
3, 4). 4. This duty is urged by Ood our heavenly Father. He anticipates our needs ; 
he lovingly invites our confidence ; he assures us of his readiness to give us help and 
comfort (Isa. xliii. 1, 2). 

III. Hebe is a pbomise ENcouBAama to all. The promise and the duty are 
connected, and both are to be taken together with what goes before (ver. 14). It is 
when we have been living near to God, and have been duly performing our vows to 
him with praise and thanksgiving, that we are best prepared for the duty of prayer 
and the fulfilment of the promises. This promise implies what God will do for us, 
and what return we should then make to God. Calling upon God in trouble has an 
elevating efit'ct ; it brings us into nearer fellowship with God in heart and will and 
life. We will "glorify" God fur being with us in trouble, as delivering us from 
trouble, as making trouble work for our good. — W. F. 



n. ti. 1 — 19 .J 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



89a 



Vers. 1 — 15. — False to covenant. God comes to Zion, as he once came to Sinai, 
amidst fire and tempest, calling upon the heavens and the earth to be hia witnesses, 
while he summons his people to judgment, in which he proclaims how they had been 
false to the covenant that was between them. 

L The accusation. (Vers. 7 — 13.) 1. ITiey had forgotten the spiritval relationi 
between them. (Vers. 5 — 7.) They were " his saints," " his people ; " " he was God, 
even their God." And he had to testify against them. They had not acted up to tha 
spirit of that relation. 2. I%ey brought him imspiritrtal sacrifices. Their heart did not 
go with their oflferings. He did not complain of the offering in itself, but of the spirit 
in which it was brought. 3. What they brought was no gift of their own. (Vers. 
10 — 12.) Their offerings were his possessions, which he had in abundance. 4. They 
had forgotten his spiritual nature and requirement. (Ver. 13.) The flesh and blood 
of animals could not please or satisfy a spiritual nature. 

II. The requirement. (Vers. 14, 15.) 1. Thanksgiving. The gratitude and 
praise of the heart — a spiritual offering. 2. ITie paying of vows. The vows that are 
npon us in consequence of our covenant with God — or fidelity, faithfulness. 3. Prayer. 
" CaU upon me in the day of trouble ; " not only then, but specially then. 

III. The reward op spiritual service. (Ver. 15.) " I will deliver thee in the 
day of trouble, and thou shalt praise me." — S. 

Vers. 16—23. — Hypoorisy. God speaks to the whole nation in the previons part of 
the psalm ; here to hypocrites. 

I. They uade profession of bblioion, which thbib lives oontbadioted. 

gToTB. 16 — 20.) 1. T%ey treated the Divine Law with open contempt. (Ver. 17.) 
ecause they " hated " the control that it imposes. 2. They were guilty of the grossest 
violations of that Law. (Vers. 18 — 20.) Theft, adultery, and false witness, not only 
against their neighbour, but against their own brothers, showing that they had lost 
•Ten natural affection. Observe the gradual, progressive power which siu has to 
corrupt the whole man. 

II. Evil men misintebpeet the roBBBASANOE OF God. (Ver. 21.) "Because 
sentence against an evil man is not speedily executed," etc. (Rom. ii. 1 — t). 

nL God will assubedlt enter into judoment with men. (Vers. 21, 22.) 
Men are solemnly called upon to consider and remember this truth, that they may 
repent, and so escape destruction. 

IV. The only true way of salvation is declared. (Ver. 23.) 1. 2%« love 
of a grateful heart. This glorifies God. 2. And the love of an obedient life. This 
only is salvation — obedience out of love. " He that hath my Word and keepeth it, ha 
it is that loveth me," etc. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM LI. 



Thu is the first of a series of fifteen psalms 
assigned by their titles to David, and mostly 
attached to special ciioumstances in his life, 
which are said to have furnished the occa- 
rions for their composition. The school of 
writers which brushes aside the " titles " as 
unauthorized and unhistorical, and so re- 
gards itself as wholly free to assign to any 
psalm any date and any author that it 
prefers, places this among post-Oaptivity 
compositions, especially on account of vers. 
18, 19 (so Professor Oheyne, Dr. Kobertaon 
Smith, the Four Friends, and others). 
Those, on the contrary, who consider the 



" titles " to be entitled to regard and respeot, 
even if not absolutely authoritative, find 
either nothing in the psalm unsuitable tc 
David's time, or else nothing but what may 
well have been a subsequent additioa for 
liturgical purposes. This is the view taken 
by many with respect to the last two verses. 
Others, however, note that the walla of 
Jerusalem were not built, but only in the 
course of being built, in David's time, and 
regard the whole psalm as eminently suited 
to the period whereto the title ascribes it 
(so Hengstenberg, Canon Cook, Dr. Kay, 
Professor Alexander, and others). 

The psalm consists of an opening strophe, 
extending to four verses, which is an earnesl 



394 



THE BOCi OF PSALMS. 



[pS. LI. 1—19. 



prayer for mercy and forgivenees (vers. 1 — 
i); a BBOond strophe, of eiglit verses, whioli 
ia an entreaty for restoration and renewal 
(vers. 5 — 12) ; a third strophe, of five verses, 
setting forth the return which the psalmist 
will make, if he is forgiven and restoied 
(vers. 13 — 17); and a conclusion, in two 
verses, praying for God's blessing on the 
people, and promising an ample return on 
their part (vers. 18, 19). 

Ver. 1.— Have mercy upon me, God, 
according to thy loving-kindness. It is 
observable that the whole psalm is addressed 
to God (Mohim), and not to Jehovah (the 
"Lord" in ver. 15 is Adonai), as though 
the psalmist felt himself unworthy to utter 
the covenant-name, and simply prostrated 
himself as a guilty man before his offended 
Maker. It is not correct to say that " loving- 
kindness implies a covenant" (Cheyne), 
since God is " good to all, and his tender 
mercies are over all his works " (Ps. oxlv. 
9). According nnto the multitude of thy 
tender mercies blot out my transgressions. 
David's first prayer is for pity ; his second, to 
have his offences " blotted out," or " wiped 
out" — entirely removed from God's book 
(comp. Bxod. ixxii. 32 ; Isa. xliii. 25 ; xliv. 
22). He says " my transgressions," in the 
plural, because " his great sin did not stand 
alone — adultery was followed by treachery 
and murder" (Canon Cook). 

Ver. 2. — Wash me throughly from mine 
iniquity. Wash me, as a fuller washes a 
fouled garment {ttKvvov, LXX., not vt^ov), 
not as a man washes his skin. And cleanse 
me from my sin. "Transgressions," 
" iniquity," " sin," cover every form of moral 
evil, and, united together, imply the deepest 
guilt (comp. vers. 3, 5, 9, 14). 

Ver. 3. — For I acknowledge my trans- 
gressions (comp. Fs. xxxii. 5, "t said, I 
will confess my transgressions unto the 
Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity of 
my sin"). The first step in repentance is 
contrition ; the second, confession ; the 
third, amendment of life. And my sin is 
ever before me. I bear it in mind ; I do not 
hide it from myself. I keep it continually 
before my mental vision. This, too, is 
characteristic of true penitence. Mock 
penitents confess their sins, and straight- 
way forget them. Beal genuine ones find 
it impossible to forget. 

Ver. 4. — Against thee, thee only, have I 
ginned. Though no sins could be more 
directly against man than adultery and 
murder, yet David feels that that aspect of 
them shrinks away into insignificance, and 
is as if it were not, when they are viewed 
in their true and real character, as offences 
Kgaiust the majesty of God. Every sin is 



mainly against God ; and tlie better sort of 
men always feel this. " How can I do this 
great wickedness," says Joseph, when 
tempted by Potiphar's wife, '^ and sin 
against Godt" And so David to Nathan, 
when he was first rebuked by him, " I have 
Binned against the Lord " (2 Sam. xii 13). 
And done this evil in thy sight ; that thon 
mightest he justified when thou speakest, 
and he clear when thou judgest. Clear in 
the eyes of the world, that is ; free from all 
charge of harshness or injustice, when thou 
judgest me, and condemnest me for my sins, 
as thou must do. 

Vers. 5 — 12. — The prayer now makes a 
stride in advance. It has been hitherto for 
the first step in justification — the wiping 
out of past transgressions. It is now for 
restoration, for a renewal of spiritual life, 
for a return to God's favour, and to the 
spiritual joy involved in it. First, how- 
ever, an additional confession is made (vers. 
5, 6). Not only have I committed acts of 
sin (vers. 1 — 4), but sin is thoroughly 
ingrained into my nature. I was conceived 
in it ; I was brought forth in it ; only the 
strongest remedies can cleanse me from it 
(ver. 7). But cleansing alone is not enough. 
I need renewal (ver. 10) ; I need thy Holy 
Spirit (ver. 11); I crave, above all, the 
sense of a restoration to thy favour — a re- 
turn to the old feelings of "joy and glad- 
ness " (ver. 8), even " the joy of thy salva- 
tion "(ver. 12). 

Ver. 5. — Behold, I was shapen in iniquity ; 
rather, in iniquity was I hrought forth. And 
in sin did my mother conceive me. It is 
doubtless true, as Professor Cheyne says, 
that " the Old Testament contains no theory 
of the origin of sin " — no formulated doctrine 
on the subject. But the fact of congenital 
depravity is stated, not only here, but also 
in Job xiv. 4 ; Ps. Iviii. 3 ; it is also implied 
in Isa. xliii. 27 and Hob. vi. 7. 

Ver. 6. — Behold, thou desirest truth in 
the inward parts (oomp. Job xxxviii. 36). 
God requires not merely such purity as 
might lie attained by the use of legal and 
ritual methods ; but true inward purity 
of thought and heart, which is a very 
different matter. And in the hidden part 
thou Shalt make me to know wisdom; rather, 
do tlMu make me. An optative, according 
to Professor Cheyne. The meaning is, "As 
nothing will content thee but this perfect, 
inward purity, do thou give me into my 
heart its fundamental principle — wisdom, oi 
the fear of God." 

Ver. 7.— Purge me with hyssop, and I 
shall be clean. "Hyssop" alone could by 



PS. LI. 1—19.^ 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



395 



the Levitical Law cleanse from coutact 
with a corpse (Numb. xix. 18) or from the 
defilement of leprosy (Lev. xiv. 4). David 
recognizes that his impurity is of the 
extremest kind, and needs the remedy 
which has the greatest purifying power. 
Legally, this was the hyssop, with its 
" blood of sprinkling " (Lev. xiv. 6, 7) ; 
spiritually, it was the blood of Christ, 
which was thus symbolized. Wash me, 
and I shall be whiter than snow. Again 
the word is used which corresponds to the 
Greek irKvvov. "Wash me as garments 
are washed by the fuller " (see the comment 
on ver. 2). 

Ver. 8. — Uake me to hear joy and 
gladness (comp. below, ver. 12). On for- 
giveness follows naturally the sense of it, 
and this sense is in itself a deep satisfaction. 
But the psalmist seems to ask for something 
more. He wants not mere negative peace 
and rest, but the active thrilling joy which 
those experience who feel themselves re- 
stored to God's favour, and bask in the 
light of his countenance. That the bones 
which thou hast broken may rejoice. That 
every ache and pain may cease, and be 
replaced by gladness and rejoicing. 

Ver. 9. — Hide thy face from my sins. 
Turn thyself away from them — do not so 
much as see them. The apostle speaks 
of times of ignorance, which God " winked 
at " (Acts xvii. 30). And blot out all mine 
iniquities (comp. ver. 1). 

Ver. 10 — Create in me a clean heart, 
God ; i.e. do more than purify me— do more 
than cleanse me (ver. 7); by an act of 
creative power (K13) make in me a. new 
dean heart. Compare the Christian doctrine 
of the "new birth" and "new life." And 
renew aright spirit within me. "Heart" 
and "spirit" are used interchangeably for 
the inward essence of man ; but, as Professor 
Cheyne observes, "Heart emphasizes the 
individual side of a man's life; spirit, its 
Divine, or at least preternatural side." 
David, in asking both for a new heart and 
a new spirit, requests the renovation of his 
entire mental and moral nature, which he 
recognizes as corrupt and depraved. 

Ver. 11. — Cast me not away from thy 
presence. To be '• cast away from God's 
presence" is to be altogether oast out of 
his covenant, made an alien from him, 
deprived of his favour and the light of his 
countenance (see Gen. iv, 11 ; 2 Kings xiii. 
23). The psalmist deprecates so terrible 
a punishment, although be feels that he has 
deserved it. And take not thy Holy Spirit 
from me. God's Holy Spirit had been 
poured upon David when he was first 
anointed by Samuel to the kingly office 
(1 Sam. xvi. 13). His great sins had un- 
doubtedly " grieved " and vexed the Spirit ; 



and, had they been continued or not repented 
of, would have caused him to withdraw 
himself; but they had not " wholly quenched 
the Spirit" (1 Thess. v. 19). David was 
therefore able to pray, as he does, that the 
Holy Spirit of God might still be vouchsafed 
to him, and not be "taken away," as from 
one wholly unworthy. 

Ver. 12. — Eestore unto me the joy of thy 
salvation. Give me back that " joy " which 
was mine when I was conscious of thy 
favour, and felt that thou wert my Strength 
and my Salvation (Pss. xviii. 1 ; Ixii. 2, 
etc.). And uphold me with thy free spirit. 
There is no " thy " in the original ; and it 
is his own spirit, not God's Spirit, of which 
the psalmist here speaks. "Uphold me," 
he says, " preserve me from falling, by 
giving Mie a ' free,' or ' generous,' or ' noble ' 
spirit — the opposite of that ' spirit of bond- 
age ' which the apostle says that ChrisMans 
do not receive " (Bom. viii. 15). 

Vers. 13 — 17. — The psalmist now tarns 
from prayer to promise. If God will grant 
his petitions, restore him to favour, and renew 
his spiritual life, then he will make snob 
return as is possible to him. First, he will 
teach transgressors God's wavs (ver. 13). 
Next, he will extol his righteousness, and 
show forth his praise (vers. 14, 15). Finally, 
he will offer him, not bloody sacrifice, but 
the sacrifice in which he delights — "the 
sacrifice of a broken spirit, a broken and 
oontrite heart" (vers. 16, 17). Such sacri* 
fice, he is sure, God will not despise. 

Ver. 13. — Then will I teach transgresBon 
thy ways. Tlie truly grateful heart cannot 
be satisfied without making some return 
to God for his goodness. The most satis- 
factory return is by deeds, not words. 
David's determination is to do his best to 
promote the glory of God by bringing others 
to salvation, turning them from their own 
evil ways to the " ways " that God would 
have them walk in. And sinners shall be 
converted onto thee. The result, he hopes, 
will be the conversion to God of many 
" sinners " (oomp. Ps. xxxii. 8). 

Ver. 14. — Deliver me from bloodgniltiness, 
God. In David's mouth this prayer is 
readily intelligible. In that of Babylonian 
exiles, the viptims of oppression and wrong, 
it would be most extraordinary. Thou Ood 
of my salvation (comp. Psa. xviii. 46; xxv. 
5; xxvii. 9; Ixxxviii. 1, etc.). And my 
tongue shall sing aload of thy righteous- 
ness. In further acknowledgment of God's 
goodness, and ius, in some sort, a return 
for it, David will employ himself in singing 
the praises of God (see his many psalms 



396 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[rs. LI, 1—19. 



of praise) and will especially exalt God's 
righteousness. "Jehovali," as Professor 
Ciieyue observes, "is equally righteous 
when he sends and when he removes 
chastisemeDts." 

Ver. 15. — Lord (not Jehovah, but 
Adonai), open thou my Ups; and my month 
shall show forth thy praise. A sense of liis 
guilt has long kept the psalmist's lips closed. 
Let his sins be forgiren, and his conscience 
relieved, then praise and thanksgiving will 
flow from his mouth freely and copiously. 

Ver. 16. — Per thou desirest not sacrifice ; 
else would I give it. If there had been 
any sacrifices which God desired or required 
for such offences as adultery and murder, 
David would have willingly offered them. 
But there were none. As Hammond 
obseryes, "The Mosaical Law allows no 
reconciliation, no sacrifice, for such sins." 
Thou delightest not in burnt offering. In 
the mere act of sacrifice — the untimely slay- 
ing of his own creatures — God could at no 
time have had any pleasure. His satis- 
faction could only arise from the spirit in 
which sacrifices were offered — the gratitnde, 
devotion, self-renunciation, obedience, of 
those who approached him with them (comp. 
Pbs. xl. 6; 1. 8—13; Isa. i 11-17, etc.). 

Ver. 17. — The sacrifices of God; t.«. the 
sacrifices which God really valnes and 
desires. Are a broken spirit : a broken and 
a contrite heart, Ood, thou wilt not 
despise. "The contrite heart," says Heng- 
stenberg, "denotes deep but soft and mild 
distress." It sets up no wild shriekings, 
no howls, like those of Oriental fanatics. 
But it nourishes a sorrow that Is deep and 
persistent. The joy on account of forgive- 
ness and restoration to favour does not 
exclude continued pain on account of past 
sin. 

Vers. 18, 19. — That this is an addition 
made to the original psalm, during the time 
of the Babylonian exile, or later, for litnrgi- 
eal purposes, has been maintained ]>y a large 
number of the commentators who ascribe 
the rest of the psalm to David. The chief 
ground for the supposition is the prayer 
in ver. 18, "Build thou the walls of 
Jerusalem," which has been supposed to 
imply that the walls were in ruins, whereas 
nnder David they should have been, it is 



thought, in good condition. But it hai 
been pointed out, very justly, that tlie 
fortifications of Jerusalem were not complete 
in David's time, and that both he and 
Solomon added considerably to them (2 Sam. 
v. 9; 1 Kings iii 1; ix. 15, 19). David 
may well have thought that, as a punish- 
ment for his sin, God might interfere with 
the work which he was doing for the benefit 
of his people, and hence have felt it needful 
to pray, " Do good unto Zion : build thon 
the walls of Jerusalem." 

Ver. 18. — ^Do good in thy good pleasnra 
unto Zion. It is characteristic of Duvid to 
pass from prayer for himself to prayer for 
the people committed to him, and especially 
to do 80 at or near the end of a psalm 
(see Pes. v. 11, 12; ixv. 22; xxviii. 9; 
xl. 16). And he closely connects — nay, 
identifies — the people with their capital 
city (see Pss. xlvi. 4 ; xlvili. 11 : Ixix. 35, 
etc.). Build thon the walls of Jerusalem. 
Josephus says that David encompassed the 
whole city of Jerusalem with walls (' Ant 
Jud.,' vii. 3, § 2) ; and we are told, in the 
Second Book of Samuel, that he "built 
round about from Millo and inward." It 
has been argued that his walls were just 
approaching their completion at the time 
of his great sin (fitirutian Observer, No. 333). 

Ver. 19. — Then shalt thon be pleased with 
the sacrifices of righteonsness. " Then " — 
when the walls are completed — thou shalt 
receive the public sacrifices which will 
naturally be offered on the aocompliahmeut 
of such a work (Neb. zii. 43). Aad these 
sacrifices, offered willingly by grateful 
hearts, will be pleasing and acceptabln nnto 
thee. With burnt offering, and whole burnt 
offering. Only the head, the fat, and certain 
portions of the interior were ordinarily 
btimt when a victim was offered (Lev. i. 8, 
12; iii. 3, 4, etc.); but sometimes, when 
the offerer's heart was full, and he desired 
to indicate its complete and undivided 
surrender to God, the entire victim was 
consumed (see Hengstenberg, ad loo.). Then 
shall they offer biQlocks upon thine altar. 
Bullocks, or oxen, were offered on all great 
oocasions (see 2 Sam. xxiv. 22 — 25; 1 
Kings viii. 68 ; 1 Chron. xxix. 21 ; 2 Chron. 
vii. 5; xxix. 32, 33; xxzv. 7,9; Bzra vL 
17, etc.). 



HOMILBTICS. 

Ver, 1. — The peniienfs plea for pardon. " Have mercy,* etc. This psalm is like a 
page of autobiography written in the author's life-blood. It is, indeed, the utterance 
of what ver. 17 describes, " a broken and a contrite heart." Nowhere in tho Old 
Testament Scriptures do we find so profound depth and tenderness of penitence, joined 



PS. LI. 1—19. J THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 897 



with such childlike faith in God's pardoning mercy. If the dark record of David'g 
crime had been silently omitted, we should have been utterly at a loss to understand 
this psalm. Who could have thought that from the same harp which uttered the 
sweet strain of Ps. xxiii. could proceed so deep a wail of grief and self-abasement ? Yet 
it is just because David's joy in Q-od and love to God were so real that his repentance 
was so bitter. No hypocrite oould have penned this psalm. Any one who calls David 
a hypocrite shows dense ignorance of human nature. 

I. The penitent's plea foe pabdon. " According to thy loving-kindness [or, 
'mercy']; according to the multitude of thy tender mercies [or, 'compassions']." 
He has nothing to plead in defence or palliation. God's mercy and pity are his solo 
hope. What warrant has he to expect them ? Answer : God's covenant with Israel. 
Such sins as David's (murder and adultery) could not be purged by sacrifice (see 
Heb. X. 28). And while under the condemnation of such guilt, it would have been 
vain presumption to offer peace offerings. Ver. 16 may include both. But the whole 
law of sacrifice revealed God's delight in mercy, while it foreshadowed the true 
atonement. The gospel puts this plea in our mouth in a new form. It supplies an 
incomparably more glorious warrant and encouragement than the Old Testament 
believer possessed — the atonement which God himself has provided (2 Cor. ▼. 21 ; Eph. 
i. 7 ; Eom. v, 8). 

II. The unlimited effioaot op this plea. It is difficult to imagine sins more 
heinous than those of which David had been guilty. Their guilt was enormously 
aggravated by the fact that he was the divinely chosen king of the chosen people, 
an inspired prophet, and the object of signal and unrivalled blessings from God. 
Perhaps we have sometimes wished this dark page of Scripture had remained 
unwritten. But there it stands, to teach us that no sinner need despair of God's mercy. 
The door at which David entered is wide enough for every true penitent. So St. Paul 
points to his own case as an encouragement to all (1 Tim. i. 15, 16). 

III. The exclusive adequacy of this plea. It admits no addition, no partner- 
ship, no substitute. It is this or none (Bom. iii. 23 — 26). By one sin, St. James 
teaches us, God's Law is as completely broken as by many (Jas. ii, 10). Therefore 
only the blood which cleanses from all sin (1 John i. 7) can cleanse from any (Titus ilL 
4 — 7). In the heavenly world there will be immense differences in glory and happiness, 
according to attainment and service. But in this respect — the ground of pardon and 
salvation — all stand on one level ; all join in one song (Rev. i. 5, 6 ; v. 9). 

The folly and guilt of impenitence appear most of all in this — that it is a despising 
of God's mercy and compassion (Bom. iL 4). 

Ver. 10. — Prayer for a pure heart. " Create in me," etc. Human life belongs to 
two different worlds, distinct, yet inseparably interwoven — the world of outward 
nature, and the world of inward experience. Since this psalm was written, amazing 
changes have passed on outward nature in relation to man's life ; but the world of 
inward experience is substantially unchanged. Even within half a century or less, 
human labour, discovery, and invention have so modified our relations to the globe we 
inhabit, and to the forces of nature, that we sometimes say we live in a different 
world. But the sreat inner world of joy and sorrow, love and hate, faith and unbelief, 
nobleness and baseness, holiness and sin, is the same in England to-day as in Judeea 
three thousand years ago. It has not ceased to be true that-" As in water," etc. (Prov. 
xxvii. 19). There is still the same room and need for the prayer of the text. It is still 
true that it is a prayer which only the Spirit of God could inspire, can fidfil, or can 
interpret. 

I. A PBATBE which ONLY THE HOLY SPIBIT OOULD INSPIRE. HoW clse Can it be 

rationally accounted for ? A prayer to God as Creator, for spiritual purity and recti- 
tude: "a clean heart and a right spirit." Whence came these ideas? Still more, 
whence came these desires? It is easy to answer — They were suggested by the purifi- 
cations ordained by the Law of Moses ; sprinkling with blood, with the water of purifica- 
tion in which the ashes of the heifer had been steeped, and " divers washings." But 
even supposing these rites could have originated the notion of inward purity and 
spiritual holiness, how oould they create any corresponding desire? But, in fact, these 
spiritual ideas were the very meaning of those rites, for the sake of which they wer« 



398 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. ll 1— 19 

ordained (see e.g. Bxod. lix. 5, 10, 11). It has been .asserted by scholars, who ought to 
know better, that the original notion of sin, in the Old Testament Scriptures and among 
the ancient Hebrews, was merely ceremonial. The doctrine of the inward, spiritual 
nature of sin, and need of inward purification, was gradually developed, it is said, by 
the prophets. No assertion can be more baseless. Of all the words (not fewer than ten) 
used in the sacred tongue to express sin, not one originally refers to outward defile- 
ments ; all are moral. The three principal occur in vers. 1, 2 (comp. Ps. xxxii. 1, 2 ; 
Exod. xxxiv. 7). (1) " Transgression," equivalent to " rebellion," viz. against God 
(cf. 2 Kings viii. 20 for Hebrew word). (2) " Iniquity," equivalent to " perverseness " — 
crooked and unjust thought or action. (3) " Siw," equivalent to "error" — missing the 
mark.^ These are moral, not ceremonial ideas. The notion of pollution or defilement 
by crime was familiar among ancient heathen nations. But it was external, to be 
removed by outward ceremonies (see the story in Herodotus, 1. 35 — i4). David felt 
that his heart, his «plrit, his inmost self, needed cleansing and renewal, which Qod 
alone could impart. 

II. A PKATER WHICH ONLY THE HoLT SPIBIT CAN P0LFIL. David begins (Yen. 

1 — 9) by asking for Divine mercy ; here he invokes Divine power. He uses the strongest 
term possible, "create." The same life-breathing Spirit who brooded over the dark waters 
at the first creation (Gen. i. 2) must descend on man's dark, sinful heart, and breathe 
life into it (2 Cor. iv. 6 ; Eph. ii. 1, 5, 10). Our Saviour expresses the same great 
spiritual change as a new birth (John iii. 3, 5 — 8). Thus the Old Testament here 
anticipates the deepest teaching of the New. But there is another side, equally recog- 
nized in Scripttire (Ezek. xviii. 31 ; Isa. i. 16). As strongly in the New Testament (Jas. 
iv. 4, 8 ; 1 John iii. 3). God does not Aea\ with men as machines or statues. God 
speaks to men, beseeches, warns, invites. Our Saviour did so, even to the very persons 
he described as closing their eyes, etc. (Matt. xiii. 15). It is by the reception of Divine 
truth that the heart is purified, spiritual life conveyed (1 Pet. i. 22 ; Jas. i. 18 ; 
John vi. 63). This cannot take place passively and unconsciously. Still, when all is 
said, life can come only from God (Ps. xxxvi. 9 ; Ezek. xi. 19). David's prayer goes to 
the central depth, the innermost need of our nature. Our reason is incompetent to 
reconcile these opposite views (Divine grace and human will) ; but St. Paul shows 
their practical harmony (Phil. ii. 12, 13). 

III. A PEATEE WHICH ONLY THE HoLY SpIBIT CAN lUTBEPEBT, AND TEACH D8 TO 

HAKE OUE OVTN. Inspiration is as needful to readers as to writers of the Scriptures; 
not the same, but as real. Tbe inspiration of the writer of this psatm we do not need. 
Here is the psalm, perfect, unrivalled, unexhausted. But before David wrote it he 
prayed it and felt it. We need that inspiration which taught him to pour out this 
prayer into God's ear (Rom. viii. 26). " A clean heart." In the earlier part of the 
psalm, washing and cleansing are the images of forgiveness (so Isa. i. 8 ; 1 John i. 7). 
But here, of renewal, spiritual purity (2 Cor. vii. 1). As the former prayer expresses 
sense of guilt, and desire for God's favour; so this sen^e <^ the foul impurity and hate- 
fulness of sin, and desire for God's likeness. See what follows. 

Reuaeks. 1. The utterance of this prayer with no sense of sin, no longing for holi- 
ness, would be mockery. If you feel you cannot honestly utter it, what you have to 
do is to ask that God's Holy Spirit will teach and enable you (John xvi. 8, 9). 2. If 
this is truly your prayer, the Holy Spirit must have taught you. And the prayers 
he teaches carry the earnest of their fulfilment. 

Ver. 12. — The joy of Ood's salvation. " Restore," etc. Two opposite kinds of experi- 
ence are wonderfully blended in this psalm — the experience of a conscience-stricken 
transgressor, and the experience of a believer rejoicing in Divine mercy. Nothing can 
be more mournful than David's profound self-abasement and piercing cry for pardon. 
Nothing can be more calm, hopeful, restful, than his trust in God's forgiving and 
restoring grace. He is like one emerging from a gloomy cavern, where no ray of light 
shone, who does not yet stand in the sunlight, but sees it shining at the cave's mouth, 
and knows that a few more steps will bring him into full sunshine. The secret of this 
blending of opposite experiences is that David is looking so earnestly away from him- 
self to God. In regard to his crimes, he looks not at the wrong done to fellow-mortals, 

> Not "defilement," as the ' Speaker's Commentary' nnaccountably explains. 



PB.LI. 1— 19.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 399 

but at his sin against God (ver. 4). And in regard to salvation, he does not measure 
his expectation by anything he can offer to God — repentance or amendment or atone- 
ment — but by the infinite fulness of God's love and grace. Therefore he is able to ask, 
not merely for pardon, to have his forfeited life and crown spared, but for full restoration 
to the happy consciousness of God's favour. The prayer of this verse is — 

I. A YBABNIKQ AFTER LOST JOT. It breathes a desolate sense of loss. Consider 
who utters it. This is not the sentimental moan of a recluse, morbidly poring over 
hiB inward experience. Not the visionary craving of a heart ignorant of life and of 
the world. Not the reactionary disgust of a worn-out worldling. If any man ever 
knew the world and enjoyed it, David did. The experience of even his wise son 
Solomon was limited compared with his. Endowed with personal grace and beauty 
which won love at first sight; a man of genius, skilfid in poetry and music; a hero in 
war, who had fought his way from the sheepfold to the throne; — he was in the heyday 
of prosperity and power. His armies and generals won victories for him, while he 
enjoyed the luxury of his palace. His servants devotedly obeyed, even when he 
required them to commit crimes. He had obtained the wife on whom his heart was 
passionately set. A son had been born to them. It might seem as though God had 
overlooked his sins, and was shedding on him the peaceful light of Divine favour. 
True, his sins — nay, crimes — had " made the enemies of the Lord blaspheme ; " but their 
counter-censures did not reach the royal ears. When the Prophet Nathan stood before 
him, and told his touching parable, David had no suspicion that it was aimed at himself 
(2 Sam. xii. 5). What lacked he, in the midst of his prosperity ? Two things — one 
of which the ungodly reckon a trifle, and the other the worldly regard as illusion — peace 
of conscience, and the sense of Divine favour, what in happier days he called " the 
light of God's ooimtenance." When Nathan's rebuke, like lightning from a clear sky, 
smote him, " Thou art the man ! " it was as though the whole fabric of his earthly bliss 
melted like a dream, leaving him alone with these two— coDScious guilt and Divine 
displeasure. Preachers are often reproached with denouncing a world they do not 
know ; decrying pleasures and wealth they would only be too glad to share. At all 
events, you cannot say this of David. The tide of worldly joy is at full with him, yet 
he is broken-hearted. He has lost what the world could not give, and all the world 
cannot make up for, " Restore," he cries, "the joy of thy salvation 1 " 

II. An uttebance of strong faith in God. That it was possible for a godly 
man, a man whom the Holy Spirit iaspired to compose psalms which are among the most 
sacred treasures of the Church, to fall as David fell, is a tremendous warnin ' that 
neither grace nor gifts are any security to one who neglects to watch and pray. Never- 
theless, it is impossible that an ungodly man could have written this psalm. Even a 
new convert, pierced with the pangs of a first repentance, could not have written it. 
David's self-abasement is measured by the height from which he has fallen. A penitent 
with no previous experience of communion with God would have thought more of his 
crimes against men, less of his sin against God. In David's view, the former seems 
swallowed up in the latter (ver. 4). Here is not mere/eeling, hut faith, as enlightened 
as simple, equally convinced of God's willingness to forgive, and of his pmver to restore. 
David asks for both, expects both. Nowhere can you find more clearly discriminated, 
more inseparably united, these two great gifts of God which together make np salvation 
— forgiveness and renewal ; righteousness and holiness ; deliverance from the guilt of 
sin ; and cleansing from its defilements (vers. 1, 2, 9, 10). See the contrast between 
remorse and repentance ; the first akin to pride and despair ; the second to humility 
and hope. See, too, the close union of humility and faith. As a grain of sand in the 
eye blots the sunlight, so a grain of self-righteousness would have marred David's trust. 
The key-note of the psalm is the opening plea, "According to thy loving-kindness." 

III. The voice of God's own Spirit, The cry, " Take not," etc. (ver. 11), could 
not come from a heart destitute of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit of God speaks here 
through the whole man ; his deepest experience is made transparent. Prophets were 
sometimes inspired to deliver messages they did not understand. Not so here. The 
Holy Spirit has dipped his pea in tlie heart, and written with life-blood. This is what 
makes this psalm so precious. A candid, thoughtful sceptic would do -Ti.iW to study this 
psalm carefully, deeply ; not its mere language, but its spirit. Can it be explained on 
mere natural principles, apart from Divine inspiration of some kind? Have we here 



400 THE BOOK L¥ PSALMS. [ps. li. 1—19. 

a simply human or a supernatural experience ? Nothing like it is to be found in 
classic literature ; nothing in the sacred books of the East. A soul face to face with 
God, broken-hearted because of sin, not chiefly as crime or as defilement (though both 
are profoundly felt), but supremely as sin against the righteous and holy God; yet 
taking refuge in God, with confident hope of pardon, spiritual renewal, and joy in God's 
lavour — this experience is distinctly superhuman, supernatural. Therefore is it full 
of encouragement. If it were David's alone, this would be no ground to think it may 
be ours. But the same Spirit who taught him thus to feel, thus to beliere, thus to 
pray, is promised " to them that ask." 

Ver. 17. — " The sacrifices of Qod," etc. We may call this psalm " the penitent's 
prayer-book." The spectacle of a good man falling into open sin is a sight to make 
angels weep, especially a man so distinguished as David falling into sins so gross and 
flagrant. We are ready to ask why a veil of silence was not allowed to hide this 
shameful example. This psalm supplies a twofold answer: the record of David's 
profound humiliation and bitter repentance is a warning to those who " think they 
stand ;" his humble but assured faith in God's pardoning mercy is an encouragement 
to those who know they have fallen. We could none of us afford to lose this page out 
of the Bible. No part of Old Testament Scripture enters more deeply into the spiritual 
life. These words set before us — 

I. What the siniteb oannot offeb to God. He can make no atonement for 
his sin, fulfil no duty that can be accepted as a counterpoise to his transgression. He 
has no hope but in the simple undeserved mercy of God (ver. 16). The word here for 
" sacrifice " is general, including sin offerings, Passover lambs, thank offerings — any 
sacrifice in which the victim was slain (so 1 Sam. iii. 14 ; Ezod. lii. 27 ; this is over- 
looked by some good writers). The sin offerings appointed by the Law provided for 
sins of ignorance, infirmity, and error, not for wilful transgressions of known law (" with 
a high hand ") (Lev. iv. 2 ; Numb. xv. 27, 30). They were not designed to interfere with 
the course of civil justice ; otherwise religion and law would have been in open conflict 
(Heb. X. 28). Therefore crimes like David's — adultery and murder, for either of which 
the Law sentenced him to death — could not be purged by sacrifice. He deserved to 
die, and he knew it. He casts himself on the sovereign mercy of God : " Deliver me 
from bloodguiltiness 1 " (ver. 14). 

U. What the sinnbb can offbb to God, and God will accept. " A broken 
spirit ; a broken and a contrite heart." Why is this called a " sacrifice " — a consecrated 
gift to God? 1. Because we glorify Gtod by frank, full. acknowledgment that his Law 
is holy, his authority supreme, and that he may justly condemn and punish (see ver. 4). 
David had deeply sinned against men ; but he seems to lose sight of this in the awful 
overwhelming view of his guilt against God (of. Josh. viL 19). 2. Because this " broken 
and contrite heart " implies the full giving up of ourselves to God, not only that he may 
forgive our sin, set us free from the burden of guilt, but that he may " renew a right 
spirit within " us (vers. 9 — 12), that he may make us wholly his own (of. Bom. xiL 1). 
Note that this word " sacrifice " does not of itself mean atonement. That meaning vma 
given to sacrifice by express Divine teaching (Lev. xvii. 11). 

III. The deepest pbnitenob — the truest sense of guilt and shame and grief for sin — 
IS consistent with boundless faith in God's foboivino meeoy. If ever there was the 
utterance of a broken, contrite heart, it is this psalm. No hypocrite, no ungodly man, 
oould possibly have written it. No, nor yet a sincere godly penitent, without a mighty 
inspiration of God's Spirit. And the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, breathes into the broken 
heart the healing balm of hope, trust, joy, and thankfulness. David, who dares not 
offer a sacrifice until he knows that he is forgiven, looks forward to the time when he 
shall offer sacrifices of thanksgiving, peace offerings, and whole burat offerings ; when 
God will bless him in his work of building the holy city, and will himself bless and 
guard Jerusalem (vers. 18, 19), without which verses the psalm would be maimed and 
incomplete. 

IV. The warbant of this assubed faith is found, not in the sinner's repentance, 
but in God's mercy and promise (ver. 1). Nathan had been commissioned to assure 
David of pardon as well as to charge him with his sia (2 Sam. xii. 13). If David had 
asked how it could be right and jvtst for God thus to pardon crimes which, as king. 



M. 1x1—19.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 401 



David himself would have been bound to punish in another man, we know not what 
answer he could have found, except to say, " God is Sovereign ! " The gospel alone 
reveals how God is "just, and the Justifier of him who believeth in Jesus " (Bom. iii. 
23 — 26). It was a wonderful new doctrine which the apostles proclaimed, that sing for 
which the Law of Moses provided no sin offerings are atoned for by him (Acts xiii. 38, 39). 
" All sin " (1 John i. 7). God has himself provided the Sacrifice which all the sacrifices 
of the Law faintly foreshadowed (John i. 29). Therefore the sacrifice of one contrite 
heart and of one joyful tongue, blemished, blind, lame, though it too often is, is accept- 
able to God, because our High Priest ever lives to intercede. 

Ver. 18. — Relations of ruler and people. " Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion," 
etc. This psalm would be very defective if it ended without such a prayer as this. 
For David the penitent transgressor, David the inspired psalmist, was also David the 
anointed of God, king of his people Israel. Modern criticism, eager to use its sharp 
shears, would out away these two verses as added by a later hand. But modern 
criticism, keen and accomplished as it is, is sorely lacking in sympathy and imagination. 
As matter of history, David's work of " building the walls of Jerusalem " was left 
incomplete, and finished by Solomon (2 Sam. v. 9 ; 1 Kings ix. 15 ; xi. 27). But ha 
knew and felt that the true wall of Zion was God's protection (Ps. cxxv. 2). And ai 
his people Israel had shared the shame, though not the guilt, of his crimes, he trusted 
they would share the blessing of God's pardoning mercy and restoring grace. (With 
ver. 19 comp. 2 Sam. xxiv. 25 ; 1 Kings iii. 15 ; viii. 63.) We are reminded — 

I. Nations strFi^B thbough their eulebs' sins. What is guilt in the ruler is 
calamity for the people. This is not arbitrary or unjust. It is but a case of the grecU 
law of solidarity pervading human life (Rom. xiv. 7). So with the parent and th« 
fiimily, teacher and scholars, head of a business and all in his employ. Power and 
privilege mean tremendous responsibility. No men have such heavy burdens as rulers, 
and few get less sympathy. 

II. National SArETY lies in God's protection. Scarcely even the history of 
Israel illustrates this more wonderfully than the history of our own nation. 

III. PbAYBB fob cub COUNTET 18 A WEIGHTY DUTY, A HIOH PBIVILEQE, AND CLAIMS 
A CONSTANT PLACE IN OUB PUBLIC, FAMILY, PRIVATE DEVOTIONS. (Ps. CXXii. 6.) Yet 

a venerable Jewish tradition. It belongs to the time when the temple at Jerusalem 
had not even been thought of. The tabernacle was at Nob, not far from the Mount of 
Olives (1 Sam. xxi. ; ' Handbook to Bible,' p. 277). It is possible to maintain Christian 
life in secrecy and solitude. But that is not what the New Testament describes ag 
history, and reveals as Christ's will. It is neither natural nor safe. Mushrooms may 
grow in cellars ; not fruit trees. The embodiment of spiritual life in fellowship is one 
of the most remarkable presentments of the New Testament records. Wherever ths 
gospel took root, the fence of Church fellowship was built round it, not by man's wisdom, 
but by him who said, " I will build my Church." 

IV. ThBEEFOBB THE BOOT OF CHRISTIAN LIFE, THE SBCEBT OF ITS FULNESS, BBAUTT, 

VRiriT-BEABlNa, IS PERSONAL FAITH. " I wiU trust in the mercy of God for ever and 
ever." The olive did not grow because it was planted in the house of the Lord, but 
because God put the hidden life into the seed. Church forms are but a delusion and a 
danger, if trusted in, to those who are strangers to the hidden life (Gal. iL 20). 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 19. — This might be call the minister's psalm. We may imagine the servant 
of the Lord engaged in devout meditation. He looks before and after. He communeg 
with himself as to his life and work. The deepest thov^hts of his heart are revealed. 

I. EvER-GBOWiNG SENSE OF THE EVIL OP SIN. Sin is thought of in the abstract, 
and its badness is seen. It is looked at in the world, in society, in the Church, and more 
and more its evils are discerned. But worst of all, it is felt to belong to one's self— 
" My sin." 

II. DeEPBE SYMPATHY WITH ALL TRUE SEEKERS AFTER TRUTH AND HOLINESS. 

The task is D«"ble, but difficult. Only those who have tried know how difficult. There 



402 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [ps. li. 1—19. 

are not only obstacles without, but there is the fearful obstacle within of • sinful 
heart. 

III. Tedbb realization of the greatness of the work of eestoration. 
Experience is the best teacher. It is better to judge from fact than from theory. Such 
as have themselves been " restored " are the fittest to speak of restoration. They know 
that the work is possible, though hard, for they themselves have experienced it. Like 
John Newton, the minister may take heart in time of despondency : " Grod has converted 
me, therefore I can never doubt of his power to convert the greatest sinner." This was 
Paul's argument (1 Tim. i. 15, 16). 

IV. The necessity of new and thorouoh coksboeation. Looking to the past, 
there is much to humble us. Looking to God, there is everything to encourage us. We 
need to give ourselves anew to Christ. Opportunities are precious. To save ourselves 
from " bloodguiltiness," we must pray more and watch more. The nearer we live to 
God, the more interested we shall be in God's work. 

V. Increased delight in carrying the message of peace to sinners. What 
we prize ourselves we commend to others. The peace we enjoy we would have others 
enjoy also. The freedom and the bright hopes that cheer our path we would gladly 
impart to others. When pressed with the burden of our own sins, we are under restraint ; 
but when freed from guilt and fear, we can plead for God with boldness. 

VI. Confidence in God's love and power as a Saviode. Our highest ambition 
is to " convert " sinners, not to a Creed, or a party, or a Church, but to God. " To thee." 
But this is God's work. He only is able to make the Word effectual unto salvation. 
Having the witness in our own hearts of his saving might, we speak with all boldness. 
" The love of Christ constiaineth us." 

VII. Bbightsb hopes op the futuee. There is a good time coming. The hope 
of this springs immortal in the hearts of the redeemed. When we are low, we take low 
views of things. If it be a dark time with ourselves, we are apt to despond as to the 
work of God in others. But when we are lifted up, all things seem possible. The 
future grows bright and yet brighter before us, and our hearts are thrilled with % 
foretaste of celestial joys. " Salvation to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and 
unto the Lamb! "— W. F. 

Ver. 3. — A portrait. Lord Macaulay tells us that the Earl of Breadalbane, who wai 
the chief hand in the Massacre of Glencoe, never had rest afterwards. " He did his best 
to assume an air of unconcern. He made his appearance in the most fashionable 
coffee-house in Edinburgh, and talked loudly and self-complacently about the important 
service in which he had been engaged in the mountains. Some of his soldiers, however, 
who observed him closely, whispered that all this bravery was put on. He was not the 
man that he had been before that night. The form of his countenance was changed. 
In aU places, at all hours, whether he waked or slept, Olencoe was for ever he/ore him" 
(vol. iii. p. 216). So it was also with David. As Cbrysostom has said, " He carried in 
his bosom a painted picture of adultery and murder." Let us consider this. 

I. The subject op the painting. Sin is everywhere. It is in the world, in 
Booiety, in our friends, but worst of all it is in our own hearts. "My sin I" What is 
" before " us is not the sins of others, but our own sins, or perhaps some particular sin 
that stands out in all its hideousness and enormity. 

II. The means by which the painting is wrought out. It is not said before 
the world or the Church, but " before me." Everything is individualized. 

" Awakened conscience acts the artist. 
Uses the sun of heaven's law 
To photograph the sinner's life ; 
Then holds it up, a hideous monster. 
To the affrighted eye 1 " 

But conscience has its allies. There is memory. All that we have thought and felt 
and done, all the varied events and experiences of our life, are recorded by memory. 
Much may seem to be forgotten, but nothing is really lost. Go where you will — 

" Yet doth remembrance, like a sovereign prince. 
For you a stately gallery maintain of gay and tragic pioturei." 



PS. LI. ]— 19.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 403 



" My sin I " It is there, in memory, to be brought out at the call of co. science. 

** The austere remembrance of that deed 
Will hang upon thy spirit like a cloud, 
And tinge its wurld of happy images with hnes of horror." 

.There Is also assoctation. One of its chief uses is to add force to conscience. We are 
strangely linked with the past. A book will recall the giver. A letter will start 
various trains of thought, according to its contents and the circumstances in which it 
is received. A portrait will bring up memories of the departed. Eemember how 
Cowper's heart was moved by the portrait of his mother — " faithful remembrancer of one 
so dear." So it is as to our sin. The place, the surroundings, the circumstances, or 
some link of association, may bring all the past before us fresh as a yesterday event. 
Eemember Pharaoh's butler (Gen. xli. 9), the widow of Zarephath (1 Kings xvii. 18), 
Peter the apostle (Mark xiv. 72). And what is presented to conscience by memory 
and association, the imagination works out with powerful effect, bringing in not only 
the past, but the future, the terrible result. But besides all this, we are to take into 
account the hand of God, working by conscience through providence and Holy Scripture. 
David's eyes were opened by the ministry of Nathan. He presented his sin to him in 
a parable, and then brought it home to himself in demonstration of the Spirit. " Thou 
art the man 1 " And so it is still. " By the Law is the knowledge of sin ; " " When the 
commandment came, sin revived, and I died." We have a striking illustration of this 
in Augustine (' Confessions,' bk. viii. ch. 7) : " Thou, O Lord, whilst he was speaking, 
didst turn me round towards myself, taking me from behind my back, where I had 
placed me, unwilling to observe myself, and setting me before my face, that I might 
see how foul I was, how crooked and defiled, bespotted and ulcerous." Sooner or later, 
this vision will come to ub all. " My sin is ever before me." This may be the cry in 
the torments of hell, and then there is no hope. It may be said under the power of a 
guilty conscience, and then the answer is, " Behold the Lamb of QoA, which taketh 
away the sin of the world I " 

III. The FEBIINGS WITH WHICH THIS PAINTINO SHOULD BB CONTEMPLATED. The 

sight is painful, but salutary. If it humbles ns, it leads us to exalt God. ,If it 
embitters sin to us, it endears Christ to us, and binds us for ever to him in love and 
devotion. 1. Sense of personal guilt. " Mi/ sin." We may have been tempted ; but 
in the deepest sense the guilt is ours, surely and inalienably. Our sins are more our 
own than anythinii else we possess. With this conviction we cry, " What shall we 
do ? " 2. Grief and self-abasement. Others may speak of " my place," " my merits," " my 
services ; " but for me it is " my sin." The more we study this picture — looking at it 
in the li^ht of the cross — the more vile and wicked do we become in our own eyes. We 
see ourselves as God sees us, and are filled with amazement and horror. Besides, we 
come to understand that our sin is not a casual thing, but the product of the sinful 
heart within. True grief will lead to sincere and full confession, and confession to 
forgiveness. When we justify God, God will justify us. 3. Simple and unfeigned 
faith. Despairing of ourselves, we cease from our own works, and cast oursf Ives upon 
the mercy of God. We accept the testimony which God has given of his Son, and, 
trusting in him, we find peace. 4. Adoring gratitude and love. To whom much is 
forgiven, the same loveth much. We owe everything to Christ, and the love of Christ 
constraineth us (2 Cor. v. 14, 15). The thought of the sins of the past, which we 
carry with us, will not only make us humble and watchful, but stimulate us to 
increasing love and zeal in the service of him who hath redeemed us by his precious 
blood.— W. F. 

Vers. 5— 7.— Secrets of the heart. "Behold ! " This is a word of power. It takes 
hold. It demands attention. It marks the solemnity and seriousness of the things to 
be brought before us. The veil is so far lifted. In the light of God, we get glimpses 
into the awful secrets of the heart. 

I. The sbcbet of sin is found in the corbupt heart. The first thing that 
startles and staggers us may be some actual transgression; but as we consider the 
matter, we are forced back and back, and closer and closer, till we end with the corrupt 
heart. Sin is everywhere; bufc always, when we seek its origin, we come to the same 



404 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [PS, li. 1— 19. 

source. We may not be able to explain fully why and how the heart is corrupt, but 
of the fact there can be no question. It is better to seek deliverance from the pit, 
than to weary and vex ourselves in vain with inquiiies how we came there. 

II. That the evil op sin is seen in the contbadiotion op tbuth. What God 
desires must be right aod good. But instead of "truth in the inward parts," it is the 
opposite. Instead of law, there is self-will ; instead of order, there is confusion ; instead 
of the unity of the Spirit, there is enmity and strife. The mind and the will are in 
contradiction to God. It is this that makes the disease so desperate, and the remedy 
so difficult (Gen. xvii. 9). We might make clean the outside of the cup, but it 
remains defiled within. We may whitewash the sepulchre, but after all it is a 
sepulchre, full of dead men's bones and of all uncleanness. Helpless, and well-nigh 
despairing, our cry is, " wretched maa that I am I who shall deliver me ? " 

ni. That delivebanoe pbom sin can only be efpected bt the bb-establish- 
ment op Goo's authobitt in the heabt. Healing that does not go to the root of 
the disease is vain and delusive. The heart must be made right or nothing is right. 
This is the work of God through Christ Jesus (Rom. vL 8 — 14). It ia not slight, or 
half-and-half work, but thorough. We cannot serve two masters. But by the grace 
of Christ we are saved from the bondage and misery of our old master, and God is again 
enthroned in our hearts as our true and rightful Lord, whose service ia perfect freedom, 
and whose rewards are peace and joy for evermore. — W. F. 

Yer. 7. — " Whiter than snow." Snow is remarkable for whiteness. As it glisten* 
on the mountains, or lies in virgin purity on the fields, what can compare with it? 
And yet David speaks of something whiter. Where? Not in nature, but in the 
kingdom of grace. Of whom? Not Christ, not the holy angels, not the saints in 
glory, but, strange to say, of himself. Like Paul, he was " the chief of sinners," and 
he was, therefore, the fitter ensample of the marvellous kindness and grace of God. 
In his prayer we find — 

I. The becoil op the bocl pbom sin. Many find pleasure in sin; but when once 
the soul is quickened, there is an end to this. Sin is felt to be vile and loathsome. 
Its touch is defilement ; its presence is abhorrent ; its effects are dreaded as the most 
terrible. 

II. The teabnino op the soul pob FCBrrr. All things aroimd us that retain 
their freshness and their purity condemn us and put us to shame. They show what 
we have lost ; they intensify our pains and our sorrows. At the same time, they help 
to keep alive our hopes. While they testify that we are fallen, they testify also that 
sin is not of our true nature — that it is not something that rightly belongs to us, but 
that it should be abjured and abhorred. The more we compare ourselves with QoA't 
Law, and the more truly we realize God's will concerning us, the more earnestly shall 
we cry for deliverance. 

III. The sufbeue tbust op the bodl in God. There is the cry, " Wash me ! " 
Thig implies weakness and submission. We cannot " wash" ourselves. Our tears and 
prayers, our penitences and endeavours, are in vain. We cast ourselves implicitly upon 
God. Let God, who is holy and good, do this great thing for us, and do it in his own 
way. It is not the priest, it is not the saints ; God only can save. There is also 
the glad faith. " And I shall be whiter than snow." The lost purity will be restored. 
What God does, he does perfectly. What joy in being "whiter than snow" 1 — ^not 
only pardoned (Isa. i. 18), but cleansed (1 John L 7; Bev. vii. 14). It is heaven 
begun. — W. P. 

Vers. 10, 17. — TVue prayer. Prayer is the index of the heart. When true, it is the 
"heart's sincere desire," and expresses not only the feeling, but the cry of the soul 
to God. 

I. The fbayeb hebe is THORonoH-ooiNO. It is not pardon that is asked — ^that has 
been obtained; but renewal. It is not present relief that is craved, but complete 
restoration, such a change wrought in the heart as is equivalent to a reconstruction, 
and as will re-establish and fix the right relation to God for evermore. 

II. This fbayeb is founded on God's fbomises. We should only ask for things 
agreeable to God's will. Here we can have no doubt. What God wants is a "clean 



M. LI. 1—19., THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 405 



heart." What God delights in is "a broken and a contrite heart." When we look to 
ourselves, and remember God's command, " Make you clean " (Isa. i. 16) ; " Make you 
a new heart" (Ezek. xviii. 31), we are filled with despair. But when we look to God, 
and remember his promises, "A new heart will I give you" (Ezek. xxxvi. 26), hope 
springs up anew. G^d's commands are not the commands of a tyrant like Pharaoh 
(Bxod. V. 6 — 8), but of a Father great in love as in power. We should put his 
commaods and his promises side by side, and then we have confidence that what we 
ask we shall receive. 

III. This pbatek implies complete self-subhendbe to the will and ways op 
God. God is sovereign and holy. He has bis own ways of working. We must be 
brought low before we are raised up. We must be emptied of self before we can be 
filled with the fulness of God. There will be not only the Word which quickeneth, but 
the rod which disciplineth (ver. 8). 

IV. This fbateb, finally, leads to a new life op love and obedience. 
Life is made a sacrifice (Rom. xii. 1) — offered, not on the altar of burnt offering, but 
upon the golden altar of incense; not as an atonement, for Christ's blood alone 
maketh atonement, but as a thanksgiving for redenjption. — W. F. 

Vers. 11, 12. — A great evil deprecated, and a great good desired. I. A qbeat kvil 
DEPBEOATED. The evil is twofold (ver. 11). It is felt that this judgment is deserved. 
God might justly do this. His presence had been outraged; his Spirit had been not 
only resisted and grieved, but for a time quenched. But such judgment would be 
utter ruin and woe, and it is shrunk from with horror. To be " cast away " was ruin, 
but to have "the Spirit taken away" was to have that ruin made complete and 
irremediable. It is only those who have the Spirit, and who know something of the 
joys of God's presence, that can truly utter this prayer. 

II. A GBBAT GOOD DESIRED. The good is also twofold, meeting and matching 
the evil. "Salvation," with its joys, is the remedy for the dreaded casting away. 
God's free Spirit, with his loving and gracious upholding, is the sure deliverance from 
the woes of desertion. This prayer is very bold. At the very time when hanging 
on the verge of the precipice, the cry is made, not for arrestment, not for delay, not 
for mere mercy, but for complete restoration. The prayer is ^Iso far-reaching. It 
looks on. It sees dangers ahead. It contemplates the possibility of further sins and 
falls. But it also sees how all trials can be met and all temptation vanquished. The 
believer stands, as it were, on the Delectable Mountains, and sees the path clear before 
him ; with the heavenly city gleaming bright in the distance. The prayer is urged 
with childlike trust and confidence. There is the consciousness of willingness, and, 
if the soul is willing, God must be willing also. What we desire, he who kindled the 
desire is able to accomplish. It is as when a child, with a sense of weakness, but with 
clinging love and trust, says to its father, " I am afraid. Take my hand. Guide me 
in the dark. Uphold me lest I fall. I cannot walk alone." "ihyiB peace and joy axe 
brought to the heart. The believer, committing himself to the fatherly care of God, 
can tread wi»T a free soul and a joyous step the way set before him, knowing that 
it leads to glory, honour, and immortality. In this great prayer there is hope for the 
chief of sinners, and comfort for the most troubled of saints. — W. F. 

Vers. 1—8. — Repentance and forgiveness. Some deny the Davidio origin of this 
psalm ; but most refer it to the time when Nathan charged David with the sins of 
adultery and murder. In these verses we have set forth the nature of forgiveness, and 
the nature of repentance. _ , j ^ j 7 

I. Peaybb fob roBGivBNBSS. 1. Forgivencss is the inward and outward cleansmg 
from tin. It is blotting out a record or a debt that is against us— that is, the outward 
cleansing. And it is a washing, or cleansing, or purging— that is, the inward forgive- 
ness, or the taking away of sin. So that it is a double work. 2. When we become 
conscious of such forgiveness, we rejoice with a great gladness. (Ver. 8.) ihe strength 
(bones) which sin has brokeu is restored and rejoices. , „. . , . 

II The natubb of eepentanob. 1. It is a trust in the Dtvine goodness and 
mercy (Ver. 1.) Sorrow for sin without hope in God is remorse and death— not 
repentance. 2. A consciousness that our sin is more against God than against man. 



406 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. li. 1—19. 

(Ver. 4.) "Inasmuch as ye did it against one of the least of these,'' etc. 3. An 
acknowledgment of the Divine righteoHsneis in the punishment he has suffered. 
(Ver. 21.) 4. He not only confesses the sinful deed, hut traces it to the inheritance of 
a nature sinfully inclined. (Yer. 6.) 5. He prays for inward truthfulness and wisdotr. 
as his only safety for the future (ver. 6). — S. 

Vers. 9 — 12. — Renewed and elevation. True repentance is not satisfied with tha 
knowledge of forgiveness, but goes on to seek the renewal and elevation of the nature 
that has sinned and fallen into disorder. 

I. He seeks a new bbvelation of the force ob favottb of God. (Ver. 9.) 
" Do not look upon me in anger for my sins, so as to bring me into judgment, but lift 
upon me the glory of thy face, or presence." And to this end — 

II. "Create in me a pure heart, that I may be able to see thee." (Ver. 
10 ; Matt. V. 8.) 

III. " Give mb again a steadfast spirit of obbdibnoe to thy will." (Ver. 10.) 
A strong spirit not easily swayed to and fro through its own weakness, or by the gusts 
of temptations, but persistent in right aims and endeavours. 

IV. He peays that he may nevbb lose the succoTm and strength of the 
Divine Spirit. (Ver. 11.) Such a prayer on the lips of David could not mean all 
that it means now to a Christian. Christ has revealed the work and the necessity o£ 
the Divine Strengthener (the Paraclete) far more clearly than it was known to David. 
As the Teacher of the truth and the Helper of our weakness. 

V. He prays fob that sense of joy which is united with the spibit of a 
free obedience. (Ver. 12.) Our spirits attain to their greatest freedom when 
under the influence of the Spirit of God — ^like water heated by fire. — S. 

Ver. 12. — The joy of salvation. " Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation ; and 
uphold me with a joyful [willing] spirit." 

I. That the consciousness of salvation is accompanied with a geeateb o» 
LESS degbee of " JOY." Salvatlou is a deliverance from the greatest danger the soul 
can apprehend, and is, therefore, a cause of the most rapturous joy the soul can feel. It 
is preceded, in the majority of cases, by terror of the Divine anger ; by the despair 
awakened by guilt; by the deep sorrow which distraction brings after it; till the 
revelation of the Divine mercy through Jesus Christ is embraced, and the way of 
escape is known, and then the soul is unable to restrain its joy. This is the outward 
aspect of salvation. Salvation as an inward fact is the enjoyment of a new state of 
the affections towards Christ, or love to Qod. And this is a perpetual spring of ever- 
increasing joy. Joy may become not a momentary rapture merely. 

II. That by the indulgence of sin we forfeit the joy of salvation. We 
may not utterly forfeit the hope of salvation; for hope is a thing of degrees: how 
long a faint hope may linger, and in connection with how much sin, is a practical 
question difficult of determination! The question of our personal salvation may 
become even to ourselves a very debatable, doubtful question, a struggle of hope 
against despair. Here certainly the Joy of salvation is forfeited. Then, again, though 
the hope may not be gone, there may be so much remorse and sorrow in consequence 
of sin as to destroy all ihejoy which is connected with an assured state of the heart. 

III. On what ground can we pray God to bestore what we have sinfully 
lost ? 1. That Ood is the Author of all renewal and salvation in man's soul. This 
prayer is therefore a prayer for the renewal of the influence and work of the Holy Spirit : 
"Take not thy Holy Spirit from me." It is called God's salvation for which he prays. 
2. This prayer for joy presupposes that which is the condition of all real joy. The 
previous work of deep, genuine sorrow — repentance and hatred of the sin which has 
caused the sorrow. This is the unalterable condition on which we obtain any 
lasting joy. 

IV. That thb eecoveky of this joy is necessary to our futubb constancy. 
" Uphold me with a joyful spirit." Doubt, sorrow, remorse, paralyze all the powers ol 
prayer, action, resistance to evil. They are the sickness and disease of the soul. Joy 
quickens. A joyous, willing mind has strength for the future, because it lias onquered 
in the past ; for that is the condition of its jo^ousness. — S. 



M. LII. 1 —9.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



407 



Vers. 13 — 19. — Working for God. With a conscience set free from guilt, Wktli 
a heart renewed by the Spirit of God, and full of thankfulness for God's great mercy, 
he cannot keep silent, but will seek to turn other sinners to God. The thirty-second 
psalm shows how this resolution was kept. 

I. He who by his example had taught othees to sin will now seek to 
CONVERT THEM TO THE WAY OF OBEDIENCE. (Ver. 13.) To the ways of God's 
commandment. We cannot undo all the evil which our example has done ; but we 
can in part repair it if we renew our lives. 

II. DeLIVEBED PBOM his sin, he would proclaim THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD IN 

PUNISHINO AND DELIVERING HIM. (Ver. 14.) God IS good and righteous in both — 
in punishing and saving from sin. " If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous 
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 

III. The CONSCIOUSNESS op pardoned sin uncloses the lips which sin had 
SEALED, AND HE CAN NOW TRULY PRAISE GoD. (Ver. 15.) God opcns the Ups 
by giving the sense of forgiveness ; then we can preach and sing with a full heart. 

IV. The TRUEST sacrifice wb can offer to God for our sin is repentance. 
(Vers. 16, 17.) Not blood or burnt offering ; the cleansing of the heart by sorrow and 
renewal of mind — the work of God's Spirit. 

V. Whew a man has been truly restored himself, his sympathies widen 
OUT with pbayeb fob the nation and the wobld. (Vers. 18, 19.) Genuine 
concern for others is founded upon the regeneration of our own spiritual nature. Zeal 
for others is spurious if we have not been zealous about ourselves; like those philosophers 
Cowper speaks of-^ 

"Giving lives to distant worlds, 
And trifling in ooi own." 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM LH 



Hkik, again, the title is the best guide to 
the origin, intent, and authorship of the 
psalm. It is ascribed to David, and said 
to have been written on the occasion when 
Doeg the Edomite acquainted Saul with 
the fact of David's visit to Ahimeleoh the 
priest, recorded in 1 Sam. xxi. 1 — 9. This 
information led to a fearful massacre, in 
which Doeg himself took the chief part 
(1 Sam. xxii. 11—19). The bitterness of 
feeling displayed in the psalm is thus 
accounted for. 

Metrically, the psalm seems to consist of 
three strophes, extending respectively to 
four, three, and two verses. In the first 
strophe Doeg's wickedness is set forth (vers. 
1 — i) ; in the second (vers. 5 — 7), he is 
threatened with God's vengeance; in the 
third (vers. 8, 9). David thanks God for the 
vengeance which he has executed, and de- 
clares his intention always to trust in him. 

Ver. 1. — Why boastest thou thyself in 
mischief, mighty mani Doeg was "the 
Bhiefest of the lierdmen that belonged to 
Saul" (1 Sam. xxi. 7), or, according to 
another passage (1 Sam. xxii. 9), "set dver 



the servants of Sanl." The position wonld 
be a high one, and wonld imply the posses- 
sion of much physical strength. A sense 
of tyranny or extreme arrogance seems to 
attach to the word translated "mighty 
one " (gibhor') ; see Gen. vi. 4 ; x. 8. The 
word translated "mischief" implies some- 
thing worse. In Ps. vi. 9 it is rendered 
" wickedness," and is thougnt to mean, in 
the Psalms generally, " ruinous, unfathom- 
able evil — destructive malignity" (Canon 
Cook). The goodness of Ooi endureth oon- 
tinnally. Why not follow the Divine pat- 
tern, instead of setting thyself in direct 
antagonism to it? Canst thou expect to 
prosper when thou art thus opposed to the 
Almighty ? 

Ver. 2. — Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs ; 
or, malignities — evils of the worst kind. It 
was Doeg's "tongue" that brought about 
the entire ghastly massacre (see 1 Sam. 
xxii. 9, 10). like a sharp razor, working 
deceitfully. Doeg had "worked deceit- 
fully," since ho had not told Saul the cir- 
cumstances that made Ahimeleoh's giving 
aid to David no disloyalty to the king 
(1 Sam. xxi. 2, 8). The eupprestio vert is a 
tuggestio falsi. 

Ver. 3. — Thou lovest evil more than good. 
To "love evil" is to have reached the 
lowest depth of depravity. It is to say, 
with Milton's Satan, " Evil, be thou my 
pond I " And lying rather than to speak 



408 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[m. lh. 1 — 9. 



I'igliteonsness (see the comment on ver. 2). 
Doeg'a crimes seem to have arisen out of a 
mere love of evil. 

Ver. 4.— Thou lovest all devouring words. 
"Devouring words" are words that cause 
ruin and destrnction. thou deceitful 
tongue ! or (as in the margin), and the 
deceitful tongue. 

Ver. 5. — God shall likewise destroy thee 
for ever. As thy "devouring words" have 
been the destruction of many, so shall God, 
in return, "destroy thee" (literally, pull 
thee dototi) "for ever" — destroy thee, i.e., 
with a complete and final destruction. He 
shall take thee away; rather, seize thee 
(Kay, Cheyne), and pluck thee out of thy 
dwelling-place ; literally, out of thy tent 
(oomp. Job xviii. 14 ; 1 Kings zii. 16). 
And root thee out of the land of the living. 
Destroy thee, root and branch, as thou 
didst destroy the entire honse of Ahimelech 
(1 Sam. xxii. 17—19). 

Ver. 6. — The lighteons also shall see, 
and fear. Every manifestation of the 
Divine power and justice produces in the 
righteous man a feeling of awe. And shall 
laugh at him; literally, over him. This 
awe does not, however, prevent him from 
indulging in something like derision of his 
fallen enemy — or, at least, it did not under 
the old covenant, when men had not yet 
been taught that they ought to "love" 
their enemies. 

Ver. 7. — Lo, this is the man that made 
not Sod his strength. The root of Doeg's 
wickedness was want of trust in God, 
and consequent alienation from him. But 
trusted in the abundance of his riches. 
This led on to an excessive trust in riches, 
and greediness of gain. To obtain wealth 
he became Saul's unscrupulous tool, the 
willing instrument of hia cruelty. No 



doubt Saul richly rewarded him. And 
strengthened himself in his wickedness ; or, 
in his subitance (Cheyne). 

Ver. 8. — ^But I am like a green olive tree 
in the house of God. In conclusion, the 
psalmist contrasts his own condition, as 
one of God's people, with that of Doeg, 
which he had described in vers. 7 — 9. Doeg 
is about to be " plucked up " and " rooted 
out of the land of the living " (ver. 5) ; he 
is like a flourishing green olive tree planted 
in the sanctuary, or " house of God." Doeg 
is entirely without any trust in the Almighty 
(ver. 7) ; he declares of himself, I trust 
in the mercy of God for ever and ever. 
It is questioned whether olive trees were 
at any time planted in the courts of either 
the tabernacle or the temple ; but it cer- 
tainly cannot be proved that they were not. 
In the courts of Egyptian temples trees 
were abundant (Herod., ii. 138 ; Wilkinson, 
in the author's ' Herodotus,' vol. ii. p. 236), 
also probably in Phoenician temples (Ferrot 
and Chipiez, ' Histoire do I'Art dans 1' An- 
tiquity,' vol. iii. p. 322). And to thii day 
there grow in the Haram area at Jerusalem, 
on the site of the Jewish temple, a number 
of magnificent cypresses, olive, and lemon 
trees. 

Ver. 9. — ^I will praise thee for ever, 
because thou hast done it. So Dr. Kay, 
who explains the passage as meaning, 
" because thou hast worked out this deliver- 
ance." The tense is " the preterite of pro- 
phetic certainty " (oomp. Ps. liv. 7). And 
I will wait on thy Name; for it is good 
before thy saints ; rather, I mill wait on thy 
Name in the presence of thy saint*, because it 
is good; or perhaps, if we adopt Hnpt'eld'i 
emendation (njnN. for i^^^, I wiU proclaim 
thy Name before thy $aint$ that it i$ gooi 
(bo Cheyne). 



HOMILETICS. 

Ver. 7. — The man on whom God's just judgment descends. " Lo, this is the man," eta. 
The destruction of a human being, however depraved, the loss of a soul, however 
guilty, is matter, not of triumph, but of lamentation. God has no pleasuie in the death 
of a sinner. But the overthrow of tyranny and injustice, the just punishment of high- 
handed crime, the downlall of God-defying and man-despising pride, is matter of satia- 
faction and thanksgiving. " There is such a thing as a righteous hatred, a righteous 
scorn. There is such a thing as a shout of righteous joy at the downfall of the tyrant 
and the oppressor ; at the triumph of righteousness and truth over wrong and false- 
hood" (Perowne). See this expressed in the poems of Byron and Southey on the 
downfall of Napoleon. This is the spirit of this psalm — not revenge or cruelty, but 
triumph in the vindication of righteousness. Here are three principal features in tho 
portrait of the man on whom God's just judgment descends. Proud unbehef ; covetous 
worldliness ; obstinate, perverse impenitence. 

L Pkoud unbelief. " Made not God his strength." This is a far deadlier sin than 
people are apt to think. It is practical denial of our dependence on him " whose our 
breath is ; " " in whom we live, and move, and have our being." It is the cutting of^ 



PS. Lii. 1—9.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 401 



as far as thought, afftotion, will, and conscience are concerned, of the tree from its root, 
the stream from its fountain. The Bible always regards unbelief as springing from 
man's moral nature ; a defect of the heait. In our day it is looked at as intellectual, 
scientific ; created into a philosophy under the name of agnosticism. The universe is 
supposed to be a riddle without a key ; human spirits, orphans; human life, a wander- 
ing without an aim, a guide, a hope, a home. How is it that any feeling heart or 
thoughtful mind can accept this dark creed, and not be bowed down in constant sorrow 
by the horror and desolate misery of it ? 

II. Covetous worldliness. " Trusted in the abundance of his riches." The 
unbeliever here described is not a speculative agnostic, but one who does " not like to 
retain God in his knowledge " (Rom. i. 28) ; because his whole heart is taken up with 
■elfish greed (1 John ii. 15). 

III. Obstinate impenitenob. " Strengthened himself in his wickedness." Makes 
his own will his law ; turns a deaf ear to reproof, warning, Divine truth, mercy, love. 
What must be the end ? What can it ' be ? Do not let us deceive ourselves. The 
warnings of Christ's gospel are as faithful as its promises (Heb. x. 26, etc. ; 2 Pet. iii.9). 
The cross itself, the hope and refuge of repentant sinners, is Crod's chief witness against 
■in ; and warning of the guilt, folly, danger, of persevering in unbelief, worldliness, and 
impenitence. 

Ver. 8. — The oUvg an emblem of the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, "I am 
like a green olive tree," etc. In Ps. xoii. the righteous are compared to two of the 
noblest trees — the queenly palm and the imperial cedar. In Fs. i. to an evergreen 
tree that loves to grow by flowing waters — the orange or citron, crowned at once with 
silver blossom and golden fruit. Here a less majestic tree is chosen, yet one which 
plays a great part in Scripture — the olive, whose golden oil, from its ordinary plentifiil 
use in food and in light, and from its rare sacredness in the anointing of kings, priests, 
and prophets, is the constant emblem of the graces and gifts of the Holy Spirit. 

I, The lesson common to all these similitudes — palm, cedar, citron, olive ; and what 
our Lord adds, the vine and its branches, is this : each Christian life must havb 
ITS OWN eoot, and should exhibit a beauty and a feuitfulnbss op its own. 
The image is in strong contrast with the picture of the ungodly man (ver. 7 ; of. Fs. 
xxxvii. 35 ; John xv. 6). " I " — for my part, whatever others may think or say, 
desire, or do — I choose my part here, in Christ : " rooted and grounded in [his] love." 
" Green," q,d. flourishing ; mil of life and beauty ; and no less of fruit — a flourishing 
olive tree. 

II. Nevertheless, the home of the Christian life is in the Church of God, 
OF whioh the ancient temple was the shadow. (Eph. ii. 20 — 22 ; 1 Cor. iii. 16.) 
Trees could not grow, of course, in the temple, strictly so called ; but in the ample spac* 
of the " Court of the Gentiles " (" the mountain of the house "), olive berries were likely 
to be dropped and take root. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — A betrayer. The " mighty man" might have been Doeg or some other 
who had gained notoriety as a betrayer. 

I. The odiousness of his ohabaoteb. It is marked by deceitfulness. Craft and 
lying are the tools of the betrayer. He cannot get on without them, and he waxes 
expert in their use. He may pretend friendship, but malice is in his heart. Even if he 
speaks truth, it is not in love, but in hate. " Whispering tongues can poison truth." 
Bent on mischief, he does not think of consequences. If he can injure the man he 
hates, he cares not though the innocent also should suffer. When he comes by a secret, 
which may be turned to advantage, he is elated. His paltry soul swells within him, 
he grows big with the idea of his own importance. Life and death are in the power of 
his tongue. And when his miserable schemes succeed, he boasts as if he had done a 
brave thing; as if he were the hero of the hour. 

II. The teekibleness of his doom. There was a time when Doeg seemed to 
succeed. Then he may have blessed his soul, and the men of Saul's court, no doubt, 



*10 THE BOOK OP PSALMS. [pb. lii. 1— a 

praised him, while he was doing good, as they thought, to himself, and was able to do 
good to them. But changes came. His real character was unmasked. The fearful 
results of his treachery were brought to light, and then he must have become the object 
of detestation to all right-thinking men. It is thus that reputations built on sand fall 
in the day of trial. The judgment of yesterday may be reversed to-day. The men who 
stand high to-day may be covered with scorn and infamy to-morrow. God is long- 
suffering. He even bears long, and strangely, with the wicked. But their day is 
coming. The judgment described in the psalm is terrible in its completeness. Image 
is added to image. The metaphors rise in intensity and force. There is not only 
defeat, as of a house beaten down, but there is expulsion, as from a home made desolate ; 
and more, there is extinction, as of a family rooted out of the land (ver. 5). The over- 
throw is complete, and all this is by the hand of God, indicating that all deceit and 
malice and evil-doing are contrary to the Divine order, and doomed in the end to ruin. 
There is a conscience in society, and, as it is rightly quickened and enlightened, it sayg 
" Amen " to God's righteous judgments. 

III. The MOBAii LESSONS OF HIS LIFE. There is much here deserving close study. 
Learn: 1. The justice of Ood. He is ever on the side of truth. His judaments are all 
righteous. 2. The folly of sin. (Ver. 7.) 3. The blessedness of the righteous. This 
lesson is heightened by contrast. How different the tree overthrown, and torn up by 
the roots, and the "olive tree" standing beautiful and secure in " the house of God" ! 
How markedly and utterly separate, the evil-doer judged and put to shame, and the 
godly man trusting, praising, waiting, rejoicing in the sunshine of God's love, and the 
hope of his mercy for ever and ever ! — W. P- 

Vers. 8, 9. — ^Here we have the testimony of a taint, confirmed as "good " hy all the 
saints. I. The charactbh of the saints. "I am like a green olive tree." The 
olive was remarkable for life, beauty, and usefulness. Habakkuk speaks of the " labours 
of the olive " (Hab. iii. 17) ; Jeremiah, of its " goodly fruit " (Jer. xi. 16) ; and Hosea, of 
its "beauty" (Hos. xiv. 6). It was therefore a fitting symbol of God's people (Rom. 
xi. 16), who are adorned with the beauty of holiness, and bear fruit to the praise of God. 

II. The occupations of the saints. 1. The first thing named is trusting. " I trust 
in the mercy of God." The wisdom, the power, the faithfulness, of God all command 
our trust; but "mercy," what is most needed and always needed, is here singled out. 
The next thing is : 2. Praising. " I will praise thee for ever." Looking to the past, 
the present, and the future, countless reasons rise up for praise. What God has done is 
proof and promise of what he will do. 3. "Waiting" is the last thing mentioned. "I 
will wait on thy Name." God's Name is himself, in all that he is and says and does. 
The more clearly and fully we know God's Name, the more will our hearts go forth to 
him in love and hope. Waiting upon him ever brings refreshment, and invigorates our 
souls for new endeavour. 

III. The home of the saints. " The house of God." So it is here. So it will 
be hereafter. The saints are happy in their being, secure in their possessions, joyous 
in their prospects. There are ever light, and sweetness, and holy companionships, and 
delightful employments, where they dwell. Heaven is their eternal home." — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — " This psalm is a stern upbraiding addressed to the man who, unscru- 
pulous in the exercise of his power, and proud of his wealth, finds his delight in all the 
arts of the practised liar." 

I. The arrogance of a wicked man in worldly power. 1. He boasts of the 
evil which he does. He is not ashamed of his wickedness. 2. He is bent upon ever new 
forms of mischief. Works deceitfully, and not openly, and his tongue, as the instrument 
of his mind, is ever plotting fresh devices of evil. 3. He loves false speaking and false 
ways more than the true. The wickedness is inarained, and not merely resorted to for 
a purpose. 4. He exults in material riches. Thinks they can carry him through, and 
enable him to brave all consequences. 

II. The certainty of his overthrow. 1. The goodness of Ood will ensure it. 
God loves the good ; and his love for them endureth for ever — ensuring the overthrow 
of the wicked. 2. The sure connection of guilt and punishment, (Ver. 6.) Th« 
psalmist had no hesitation in predicting his future fall. 



«. Lm^ V, -6.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



411 



III. The sympathy which good men fbel with God's biohteous wobk. (Ver. 6.) 
They are filled with a ho\y filial fear ; and they rejoice at the triumph of the right and 
the true over the unjust and the untrue. 

IV. God's ooodness gives conpidekob and THANKirrLUEss to thk BiaHntoub. 
(Vers. 8, 9.) Trust, praise, and patience wait upon thy Name. — S. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM Lin. 



This psalm is a repetition of Ps. xiv., with 
certain not very important yariations. The 
most remarkable is the suhatitution through- 
out of " Elohim " for " Jehovah." The only 
variations which alter the sense are in 
ver. 5. These cannot be accounted for by 
corruption, and seem to indicate a retouch- 
ing of the original composition in order to 
adapt it to a special occasion. 

The expression, "upon Mahalath," or, 
" Bet to Mahalath," in the title, is thought 
to be a musical direction, and is explained 
by Dr. Kay as equivalent to the modern 
Maestoso. 

Vers. 1 nnd 2 are identical with the same 
verses of Ps. xiv., with the single exception 
that" Jehovah "is replaced by "Elohim," 
as the first word of ver. 2. 

Ver. 3. — Per "they are all gone aside" 
(ID hsn) in Ps. xiv., the present psalm has, 
" every one of them is gone back " (JD i'?3) 
— a difference which may be due to corrup- 
tion, and which is, at any rate, of no impor- 
tance. 

Ver. 4. — For " the workers of iniquity " 
in thia verse, Ps. xiv. has "all the workeri 



of iniquity " — a difference wholly nnimpo. 
tant. 

Ver. 5. — There were they in great fear, 
where no fear was. So long a phrase as 
•• where no f ear was " (nna n'mo) can scarcely 
have "fallen out," and must have been added 
intentionally to mark that, on the occasion 
in connection with which the revision was 
made, there had been no ground at all for 
the panic. For God hath scattered the bones 
of him that enoampeth against thee. This 
clause takes the place of the following in 
Ps. xiv. : " For God is in the generation of 
the righteous" — a very considerable change, 
whicli must certainly have been intentional. 
On the second occasion whereto the psalm 
was made applicable, there must have been 
a very great catastrophe — some vast slaugli- 
ter of an enemy who had been at open war 
with Israel. Sennacherib is suggested 
(Canon Cook). Thou hast put them tg 
shame, because God hath despised them. 
The clause in Ps. xiv. which this replaces 
runs as follows: "Ye have shamed the 
counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his 
Refuge." Here again, both the phrases 
used, and the whole tenor of the thought in 
either case, are different. 

Yer. 6. — This verse Is identioal with Ps. 
xiv. 7, except in the substitution of " Elo- 
him" for "Jehovah," and in the pointing 
of one word. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa 

Vers 1 2 —Atheism contrasted toith godliness. L Atheism. "No God." This 
imolies'- 1 Denial of Ood's existence. This is folly. The assertion proves nothing. 
Negatives are not arguments. Besides, there may be a God, though you, the denier, 
have not found him. You have not yet explored the universe.^ 2. Dernal of Qod s 
moral governmmt of the world. " No God ! » if so, then there is nothmg but ohance. 
There can be no law without a lawgiver, no order without a controlling mind. No 
Godl" then we are free to do our own pleasure. "Let us eat and dnnk; for to- 
morrow we die." 3. Denial of Ood's grace in the redemption of sinners by Jesus 
Christ "No God!" then the Bible is a fable, heaven and hell are dreams, the 
benefit's of the gospel are a delusion, faith in Christ and the resurrection is a mockery 

''"iL GoDLiNBBS. " The fool hath said in his heart. There ia no God ; ''but the wise 
man says that there is a God, and that "he is the Rewarder of all who diligentljr seek 
him." Godliness implies: 1. Faith in God as revealed tn Christ Jesus. Here is the 
satisfaction of the soul. 2. Life ruled hythe law of Chnst, whrch « holy, just and 
good. Here is the true ideal, and the Spirit, by the gospel, shows how it may be 



412 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. LIV. 1 — 7 



realized. 3. Prayer and holy endeavour to the end. We are not left to struggle alone, 
but have the Wont to guide us, the promises to chepr >is, the love of Christ to 
inspire us, that we may go from strength to strength, and that when called hence we 
may enter upon the blessed and perfect life beyond this world. Thus the godly 
witness for God. They testify to his being, for in him they live ; to his character, foi 
their aim is to be holy as he is holy ; to his will and government, for they strive to 
do justly as he does justly, and to be merciful as he is merciful, who " maketh his sun 
to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just anrl on the unjust." 
All the good in themselves, in society, in the world, is from God. What has been is 
in agreement with what is now. The progress of all things is towards a perfect end. 
The cross, which overthrew paganism, and triumphed over the eagles of Rome, is 
destined to win greater and yet greater victories. Tet a little while, and the great 
voices of heaven shall cry, " The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of 
our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever " (Rev. xi. 15). — W. P. 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM LIV. 
This it a short psalm, written in a time of 
great trouble, and containing, first, an 
earnest prayer for deliverance (vers. 1 — 3) ; 
and then an expression of confidence in 
God's aid, and of thankfulness for the 
deliverance, which is counted as absolutely 
certain (vers. 4—7). The " title," which 
assigns the psalm to David, and makes the 
occasion his betrayal to Saul by the 
Ziphites, appears to be trustworthy. 

Ver. 1.— Save me, God, by thy Name; 
i.e. by the qualities of which thy " Name " 
is significant — power, goodness, and truth. 
And judge me ; i.e. " vindicate me," or 
"judge my cause." By thy strength; or, 
"thy might" — the might which thou pos- 
eessest as a gibhdr, or " hero." 

Ver. 2. — Hear my prayer, God; give ear 
to the words of my moutli (comp. Pss. 
xxxix. 12 ; Iv. 1). 

Ver. 3. — For strangers are risen up 
against me. David's designation of his 
foes as "strangers" has been made an 
argument against the trustworthiness of the 
" title," since the Ziphites were Israelites 
of the tribe of Judali (Josh. xv. 55). But 
he might well call those "strangers" who 
were treating him as an alien. Oomp, Ps. 
cxx. 5, where "the psalmist, heavily op- 
pressed by his countrymen, complains that 
he dwelt in Meshech and Kedar " (Heng- 
stenberg). And oppressors seek after my 
soul; or, my life. The phrase is exactly 
that used in 1 Sam. xxiii. ]5, when David 
was in the wilderness of Ziph, in a wood, and 
" saw that Saul was come out to seek his life." 
They have not set God before them (comp. 
Ps. Ixxxvi. 14). David, on the contrary, " set 
the Lord always before him" (Ps. xvi. 8). 

Ver. 4. — Behold, God is mine Helper. 
There is a pause between vers. 3 and 4, 



indicated by the pause-mark, "Selah." 
Then, confident of his prayer having been 
heard, the psalmist breaks out into a joyous 
barst of thankfulness and self-gratnlation 
(vers. 4 — 7). The Lord is with them that 
uphold my soul; rather, of them (Bevised 
Version) ; i.e. " one of them." But the in- 
tention is not to place God on a par with 
other helpers. Bather, as Professor Oheyne 
remarks, it is to make him the representa- 
tive of " the class of helpers." 

Ver. 5. — He shall reward evil unto mine 
enemies ; literally, he ehaU return the wrong 
upon my adversaries. "The wrong" is that 
which his adversaries had wished to inflict 
upon the psalmist, viz. death (see 1 Sam. 
xxiii. 19, 20). Cut them off in thy truth ; 
or, " in thy truthfulness " (Cheyne). God 
had given his people — those who were faith- 
ful to him — the promise of his protection, 
and, being true, could not go back from his 
word. 

Ver. 6. — ^I will freely sacrifice unto thee. 
Confidence has now mounted up to cer- 
tainty. Begarding the deliverance as ac- 
complished, the psalmist promises a free- 
will oficring (Hengstenberg, Kay, Canon 
Cook) to God, so soon as & can approach 
the sanctuary. The phrase used is the 
ordinary one for sacrifices of thanksgiving 
(Numb. XV. 3). I will praise thy Name, 
Lord ; for it is good (comp. Ps. liL 9). 

Ver. 7. — For he hath delivered me oat of 
all trouble. " The poet looks forward, and 
treats the future as past " (Cheyne). He 
sees the " troubles " over, the Ziphites dis- 
appointed and punished, himself not only 
preserved from the immediate danger, but 
altogether freed from trouble of every kind, 
and rejoices in the deliverance which he 
feels has been accorded him. And mine eye 
hath seen his desire upon mine enemies. 
There is nothing about "desire" in the 
original, which seems rather to mean, 
" Mine eye has looked, calmly and leisurely, 
upon my (defeated) enemies' (so Dr. Kay). 



PS. LV. 1—23.] 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



413 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Peril and prayer. Here we have — 

I. Peril Movnia to peateb. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Danger may arise from various causes. 
Soul-danger is the worst. Then when sore pressed and in trouble, the instinct of the 
heart is to cry to God, " Save mel " Prayer is " the mighty utterance of a mighty 
need " (Trench). 

n. Pbatbb inspibing confidence. (Ver. 4.) Prayer brings the soul into the very 
presence of God. The thought of what he is (" thy Name ") and of what he has done 
("God is mine Helper"), furnish ample pleas for entreaty, and sure ground for hope. 
Experience gives us courage to cleave to the word of promise. " If God be with us, who 
can be against us ? " 

ni. CoNriDENOE ANTIOIPATIN& DELivBBANOE. (Ver. 5.) The Dearer we get to 
God, the niore truly we are in sympathy with him, so as to make his will our will, the 
more certain do we become of deliverance. We rise to the vision of victory. God is 
ever on the side of right. There may still be clouds, but we see the bright light shining 
above the clouds. There may still be struggles and pains, but we press on with 
renewed ardour and assurance, for we know whom we have believed, and that he is 
able to keep that which we have committed to him, and to bring forth judgment unto 
victory. 

IV. Deliteranoe awaking peaisb. (Ver. 6.) Some forget their obligations to 
God when the danger is past ; but it will not be so with the righteous. Like the 
Samaritan leper, they return to give glory to God — with sacrifices of thanksgiving and 
songs of praise. — W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 7. — Frayer for deliverance. I. A pbateb to be dbmvbbed from 
Impendinq danger. (Vers. 1 — 3.) The prayer is grounded: 1.. Upon the Divine 
nature. " By thy Name, by thy strength." It is God's nature to save ; he uses his 
omnipotence on behalf of those who call upon him. 2. Upon the righteousness of his 
cause. " Judge my cause [or, ' avenge me '] by thy strength." We can pray when we 
are pleading for a good cause. 3. Upon the character of those who threatened his safety. 
(Ver. 3.) They were not men who acted as if they were seen of God ; did not set God 
before them. 

n. The tbhtmphant assubancb of the psalmist's faith. (Vers. 4 — 7.) 1. E» 
is assured of the general truth that God was his Helper. (Ver. 4.) He knew that God 
stood to him in that relation usually, and for ever. He would therefore trust. 2. Hit 
assurance is so great that he regards his deliverance as already accomplished. (Vera. 
6 — 7.) He is therefore at rest and in peace, delivered from danger. 3. Ee will sacrifice 
and praise as one already saved. Faith — real faith — is always joined to works.-~A, 



EXPOSITION. 



PSALM LV. 



This psalm has been assigned to Jeremiah 
by Hitzig, and by others to an unknown 
writer of the seventh century b.o. But no 
solid grounds have been shown for setting 
aside the traditionary evidence of the " title," 
which ascribes it to David. It is Davidio 
in its depth of feeling, in its abrupt tran- 
sitions (vers. 9, 15, 20), and in its reference 
to a faithless friend, who is the chief cause 
of the writer's sufferings (vers. 12 — 14, 20, 
21 ; comp. Pa. xli. 9). The Davidio author- 
ship is accepted by Hengstenberg, Dr. Kay, 



and Oanon Oook. The probable date of the 
psalm is the time of Absalom's rebellion, 
David, still a dweller at Jerusalem (vers. 
9 — 11), has become aware of the conspiracy 
which has been formed against him (vers. 
3 — 8), and of the participation In it of his 
" familiar friend," Ahithophel (vers. 12 — 14). 
Ho is already contemplating flight from 
Jerusalem (vers. 6 — 8), since he knows that 
his enemies seek his life (ver, 4), Under 
these circumstances, he pours ont his soul 
to God, first depicting in eight verses (vers, 
1 — 8) his desperate condition and longing 
for deliverance ; then, in seven verses (vers. 



4X4 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



[PS. i,v. 1- 23. 



9 — 15), describing the prevailing -wicked- 
ness and ungodliness ; and finally, in eight 
verses (vers. 16 — 23), giving vent to a feel- 
ing of confidence that God will come to his 
aid in answer to his earnest prayers, "aflSict" 
hia enemies, and rescue him from their 
hands. 

Ver. 1. — Give ear to my prayer, God; 
and hide not thyself Irom my supplication 
(comp. Pb. liv. 2 ; and, for the second clause, 
see Pss. xiii. 1; xxvii. 8; Ixix. 17; Ixxxix. 
46, etc.). 

Ver. 2. — Attend unto me, and hear me. 
A very special need is indicated by these 
four petitions to be heard (vers. 1, 2). I 
mourn in my complaint, and make a noise ; 
rather, / wander in my musing, and moan 
aloud. " I wander," i.e. " from one sad 
thought to another " (Kay) ; and, unable to 
constrain myself, I give vent to moanings. 
Orientals are given to open displays of their 
grief (Herod., viii. 99 ; .ffisohylus, ' Persse,' 
passim). 

Ver. 8. — Because of the voice of the enemy, 
because Of the oppression of the wicked. 
Professor Cheyne says that by " the wicked " 
heathen men are primarily intended. But 
J)!?'! — the Vf ord used — is " the wicked man," 
in the simplest and widest sense (see Pss. i. 
1, 4, 5, 6; vii. 9; ix. 16, etc.). For they 
cast iniquity upon me; or, "hurl wicked- 
ness at me'' (Cheyne). And in wrath they 
hate me ; rather, Ihey persecute me (Heng- 
Btenberg, Kay, Cheyne, Revised Version). 

Ver. 4. — My heart is sore pained within 
me. Tlie attacks of his enemies (ver. 3) 
deeply grieve and pain the heart of the 
psalmist. It is not as if they were foreigners, 
whose hostility was to be expected. They 
are his own countrymen ; one of them is his 
own familiar friend (vir. 12). Yet they 
threaten his life. And the terrors of death 
are fallen upon me. When a king is the 
object of a conspiracy, he well knows, 
especially in the East, that nothing but his 
death will satisfy the conspirators. So on 
David, long before he made up his mind to 
quit Jerusalem (2 Sam. xv. 14), the "terrors 
of death " must have fallen. 

Ver. 5. — Fearfulness and trembling are 
come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed 
me. A graphic description of the feelings 
which the apprehension of death naturally 
excites in a man. Where the expectation 
of a life beyond the grave was so dim and 
shadowy as in Judsea at this time, the 
" horror " of death would be the greater. 

Ver. 6.— And I said, Oh that I had wings 
like a dove ! The beauty of this passage 
has sunk deep into the Oliristian heart. 
Great composers have set to it some of their 
most exquisite music. The desire is one 



which finds an echo in almost every human 
breast, and the expression of it here has all 
the beauty of the best Eastern poetry. 
Jeremiah's words are far tamer, " Oh that 
I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of 
wayfaring men, that I might leave my 
people, and go from them I " For then 
would I fly away, and be at rest. The 
desire of "rest" is universal. Whatever 
the delights of action, they can only charm 
us for a time. In our hearts we are always 
longing to have done with action, and to 
be at rest. 

Ver. 7.— lo, then would I wander far off, 
and remain in the wilderness ; rather, and 
lodge in the wilderness. Doves, ring-doves, 
and others, are abundant in Palestine, and 
frequent wild and rocky places, far from the 
haunts of man. Speaking of a rocky gorge 
near the Lake of Gennesaret, Canon Tris- 
tram says, " But no description can give 
an adequate idea of the myriads of rock- 
pigeons. In absolute crowds they dashed 
to and fro in the ravine, whirling round 
with a rush and a whirr that could be felt 
like a gust of wind" ('Land ot Israel,' p. 
446). 

Ver. 8. — I would hasten my escape from 
the windy storm and tempest. As doves 
fly from storm and tempest to their nests in 
the rocks, so the psalmist would fain haste 
away from the passions and perils of the 
city to some safe refuge in the wilds. What 
he here anticipates, he afterwards accom- 
plished, when he fled from Absalom over 
Jordan (2 Sam. xv. 14). 

Vers. 9 — 15. — With a sudden transition, 
the writer passes from his own Bufferings, 
fears, and longings, to imprecations on his 
enemies, and a description of their wicked 
proceedings. In the course of his description 
he singles out one individual for special 
remark — one who had been his own guide, 
companion, and friend — ^but who had turned 
against him, and joined the company of his 
adversaries (vers. 12 — 14). * 

Ver. 9. — Destroyi lord, and divide their 
tongues. The second clause contains a 
reference to the confusion of tongues at 
Babel (Gen. xi. 7). " Introduce cojifusion 
into their counsels, and disperse them, as 
thou didst with the wicked ones who were 
forced to leave off to build the Tower." For 
I have seen violence and strife in the city. 
Such quarrels and broils, t.e., as usually 
precede revolutionary disturbance. 

Ver. 10. — ^Day and night they go about 
it upon the walls thereof. "It is not a 
siege or blockade that is described ; and the 
persons spoken of are not foreign, but native 
euemiea. These are compared to watchmen 



P8. LV. 1—23.] 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



415 



on the walla ; only, Instead of keeping watch 
ugaiuut the enemy, they 'watch for ini- 
quity ' " (Cheyne). Uischief also and sorrow 
are in the midst of it ; rather, iniquity also 
and trouble. Compare the " violence and 
strife" of ver. 9. Society is disorganized. 
It is not only that wickedness prevails, but 
throughout the city there is violence and 
contention. 

Ver. 11. — Wickedness is In the midst 
thereof; deceit and guile depart not from 
her streets ; literally, out of her street (rehab) 
— " the open square, where justice ought to 
have been administered "(Kay), " adjoining 
the vaulted passage of the city gate" 
(Cheyne) ; comp. Job xxix. 7. 

Ver. 12. — For it was not an enemy that 
reproached me ; then I oould have borne it. 
The psalmist passes from the general to the 
particular — from the great mass of his 
opponents to one special individual. Even 
Professor Cheyne allows this, and suggests 
that we have here Jeremiah inveighing 
against Pashur. But the general sentiment 
of commentators has always been that 
Ahithophel is intended. And, if we allow 
the psalm to be David's, we can scarcely 
give any other explanation. Ahithophel 
was kuown as " David's counsellor " (2 Sam. 
X.V. 12), i.e. Lis chief advisM, his "grand 
vizier," his "prime minister." What he 
counselled was considered as a sort of 
"oracle of God" (2 Sam. xvi. 23). His 
defection was the bitterest drop in the cup 
of the unhappy king. Anything else he 
" oould have borne ; ' but this was too much. 
Heither was it he that hated me that did 
magnify himself against me. It nas not 
one among my proteased and opeu emmies 
— not one of those whose hatred I had long 
known and reckoned on. Then I would 
have hid myself from him. Instead of open- 
ing all my lieart to him, as I have done to 
Ahithophel. 

Ver. 13. — Bat it was thou, a man mine 
equal; literally, a man according to my 
valuing; i.e. one of my social rank, with 
whom I was on familiar terms. My guide ; 
or, " my companion." But the LXX. have 
riye/iau. And mine aoquaintanoe. "My 
confidant" (Kay); "my familiar friend" 
(Cheyne, and Bevised Version). 

Ver. 14. — ^We took sweet coansel together 
(comp. 2 Sam. xv. 12; xvi. 23; 1 Chron. 
xxvii. 33). And walked unto the house of 
God in company; rather, in the throng 
(Clieyne, Keviaed Version) ; i.e. in the midst 
of the crowd of worshippers. When David 
went up to the house of God, who is more 
likely to have accompanied him than his 
chief "counsellor" ? 

Ver. 15.— Let death seize upon them. As 
this strophe begins (ver. 9), so it ends, with 
an imprecation. The psalmist calls on God 



to bring destruction upon the whole mass of 
his enemies. Of the two readings in the 
original, the one adopted by our translators 
seems tlie best, " Let death come suddenly 
upon them." Let them go down quick (i.e. 
alive) into hell. There is an allusion to the 
fate of Korah and his company (Nurub. xvi. 
30 — 33), who " went down quick into the 
pit; " but probably the psalmist neither 
expected nor desired a literal fulfilment of 
his imprecation. The deatlis of Ahithophel 
(2 Sam. xvii. 23) and Absalom (2 Sam. 
xviii. 14, 15), and of so many of Absalom's 
follnwers (2 Sam. xviii. 7, 8), were quite a 
sufBcient fulfilment. For wickedness is 
in their dwellings, and among them (comp. 
vers. 3, 9—11). 

Vers. 16 — 23.-»-In conclusion, the psalmist 
turns altogether to God, whom he now 
addresses as " Jehovah " (vers. 16, 22), and 
expresses his confidence that, in answer to 
his continual prayers (ver. 17), God will 
come to his aid, will deliver his soul from 
the machinations of his enemies, and will 
visit them with " affliction " (ver. 19) and 
"destruction" (ver. 23). Still grieved 
chiefly by the defection of his unfaithful 
friend, he once more describes the treachery 
and heinousness of his conduct (vers. 20, 
21), before winding up with a word of com- 
fort for all the righteous (ver. 22), and of 
menace against all the ungodly (ver. 23). 

Ver. 16.— As for me, I will call upon God ; 
and the Lord (Jehovah) shall save me, The 
call is upon the God known to man by 
nature as the Almighty Ruler of the 
universe ; the answer is from the covenant 
God of Israel, the Self-existeut One, in 
whom Israel trusts. The two are different 
aspects of one and the same Boing. 

Ver. 17. — Evening, and morning (comp. 
Gen. i. 5, 8, etc.), and at noon, will I 
pray, and cry aloud. From this passage 
and from Daniel's conduct (Dan. vi. 10) we 
learn that devout Israelites habitually 
offered prayer to God at these three times 
of the day. The " morning " and " evening " 
devotions were doubtless suggested by the 
law of the morning and evening sacrifice 
(Exod. xxix. 38-42); but the midday 
prayer, being nowhere commanded, can only 
be ascribed to natural piety. And he shall 
hear my voice. Constant unremitting prayer 
is oprtaiu of an answer. Compare the parable 
of the importunate friend (Luke xi. 5—8). 

Ver. 18. — He hath delivered my soul in 
peace from the battle that was against me. 
Once more " the preterite of prophetic cer- 
tainty." David sees I lis deliverance effected. 
He beholds the coming battle (2 Sam. xvii. 



416 



THE BOOK OP PSALMS. 



[P8. LT. 1—23. 



11 ; xviii. 6 — 8). He fiees that there are 
many with him; i.e. "many that contend 
with him ; " but his courage does not fail — 
he is assured of being " delivereil " and 
re-established in Ids kingdom "in peace." 

Ver. 19. — God shall hear, and afflict them ; 
i.e. "God will bear my prayers, and will 
afflict my adversaries ; " or, perhaps, " God 
will h«ar me and answer me." But this 
requires a change in the reading. £ven he 
that ahideth of old; or, "he that is enthroned 
of old ; " he, i.e., that sitteth, and has always 
sat, on his eternal throne in the heavens. 
Selah. The"Belah" here marks probably 
a pause for adoration of the great and 
eternal King enthroned in all his glory. 
Beoanse they have no changes ; rather, the 
men wlto have no changes — exegetical of 
"them" in the first clause of the verse. 
The wicked "have no changes," t.e. no 
great reverses of fortune, until their end 
comes (see Job xxi. 7 — 15). Therefore they 
fear not Qod ; rather, and who do not fear God, 

Ver. 20. — ^He hath put forth his hands 
against such as be at peace with him. 
Some explain " he " as " the wicked col- 
lectively," and maintain that in this verse 
and the next no particular person is pointed 
at ; but it seems better to regard the psalmist 
as "suddenly reverting to the fixed and 
deepest thought in his heart — the treachery 
of his friend" (Canon Cook). Ahithophel 
had "put forth his hand against such as 
were at peace with him." He hath broken 
his covenant. The covenant of friendship 
with David (ver. 14), not, perhaps, a formal 
one, but involved in the terms on which 
they stood one towards the other, 

Ver. 21. — The words of his mouth were 
smoother than batter; literally, tmooth were 



the butters of hie mouth — i.e. his flattering 
utterances. Bnt war was in his heart; 
literally, but his heart was war. His words 
were softer than oil, yet were they drawn 
swords ; i.e. keen, cutting — according to oni 
own idiom, " like daggers." 

Ver. 22. — Cast thy burden upon the lord; 
rather, thy portion — or, the lot assigned 
thee — that which God has given thee to 
bear. And he shall sustain thee, God wiU 
support thee under the lot which he assigns, 
however hard it is. Ho shall never suffer 
the righteous to he moved; i.e. to be dis- 
turbed, shaken, unsettled from their faith 
in him. Note that these promises are made 
to the righteous only ; and, among them, 
only to those who cast themselves in full 
faith upon God. 

Ver. 23. — But thou, Ood, shalt bring 
them down into the pit of destruction. We 
must understand by " them " the ungodly, 
the thought of whom is associated with that 
of the righteous by the law of contrast. 
While God sustains and supports the 
righteous, he "brings down" and crushes 
the ungodly. The " pit of destruction " is 
the grave. Bloody and deceitful men shall 
not live out half their days (comp. Jei; 
xvii. 1). Of course, the statement is not 
intended for a universal law, and indeed 
was probably pointed especially at the 
" bloody and deceitful men " of whom the 
psalmist had been speaking. The suicide 
of Ahithophel, and the slaughter of Absalom 
with BO many of his followers, furnished a 
striking commentary on the statement. Bat 
I will trust in thee; i.e. but I, for my 
part, will put no trust in violence or deceit-— 
I will trust in nothing and no one but 
God (comp. Pas. yii. 1 ; xi. 1, eto.> 



HOMILETIOS. 

Vers, e — 8. — A pathetic prayer. " Oh that I had wings," etc. ! A very natural wish, 
pathetically and beautifully expressed. The Prophet Jeremiah gave utterance to the 
same wish, and for similar reasons (Jer. ix. 2). Hence some have conjectured he was 
the author of this psalm. The title, ascribing it to David, represents ancient Jewish 
tiadition, which there is no adequate ground for rejecting. But the psalm contains 
nothing certainly to indicate at what time in David's history it was composed, or 
who was the treacherous friend referred to. The fact is, the Book of Psalms is a 
treasury, not of history, but of spiritual experience ; a manual of prayer, praise, medi- 
tation, faith, for the Church in all ages. Its perennial meaning and value are rather 
raised than lowered by the uncertainty besetting special occasions and dates which 
keen critics labour to drag to light. 

I. These words piotubb fob trs a heabt weabt of the world. The writer 
longs passionately to be quit, of it, out of sight and hearing, in restful solitude. He 
feels as our English poet, when taking up Jeremiah's thought he wrote— 

" Oh for a lodge in some vast wilderness, 
Some boundless contiguity of shade. 
Where rumour of oppression and deceit. 
Of unsuccessful or successful war. 
Might never reach me more 1 " 



P8.lt. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 417 

This world-weariness may be of different kinds — from widely opposite causes. There 
is the case of the man who has loved the world with all his heart, and is sick and 
«ated, and still hungry and unsatisfied. He has loved pleaswre, laid the reins on the 
neck of his lusts ; and his reward is a diseased body, a worn-out heart, a blighted 
character, a guilty conscience. Or money ; and while he has been piling up what men 
call a fortune, his heart has dried up, friends have grown estranged, the power of enjoy- 
ment has dwindled as the material means of buying it grew. Or political power ; and 
has learned how thankless a task it is to serve people against their prejudices, how 
futile is popularity, party allegiance, how unstable earthly greatness. Like many a 
monarch and statesman, he is longing for freedom and rest. It is not these kinds of 
world- weariness the Holy Spirit depicts here. Those tired-out worldlings do not write 
psalms. They have sown to the flesh, and reaped corruption. What David and 
Jeremiah were so weary of was the wickedness of the world (vers. 3, 9, 11, 19). This 
is the key to the tremendous denunciations of the guilt and fate of sinners, in other 
psalms as well as here. Intense personal feeling is no doubt implied; but it is as 
rebels against God, not as private foes, they are described. The king — the Lord's 
anointed — ought to have punished them if he could ; feeling his inability, he appeals to 
God. And be it borne in mind, God did punish them ; as (e.^.) Ahithophel and 
Absalom. It is often asked — How can we reconcile these denunciations with our Lord's 
prayer, " Father, forgive them " ? Answer : Eemember the ground on which this 
forgiveness was possible : " They know not what they do," They were to have room 
for repentance. Eemember, that only two or three days before, Jesus had uttered. In 
the temple, denunciations more severe than any in the Psalms ; and, lastly, that these 
woes were fulfilled to the letter, after forty years, in the destruction of Jerusalem. 

n. EVEET KBAL OhEISTIAN MUST KNOW SOMETHING OF THIS HBABT-SICKNBSS, BOXJI.- 
WEARINBSS, ON ACCOTJNT OF THE PBBVALBNOB OP SIN IN THE WORLD. The better he 

knows the world, tte more he feels this. Once our Saviour gave a momentary glimpse 
of the daily burden this was to him (Matt. xvii. 17). If so very imperfect a saint as 
Lot « vexed his righteous soul from day to day " (2 Pet. ii. 7, 8), what must the Holy 
One of God have endured in the hourly contact with sin I He was the " Friend of 
■inners." The Christian Church of the present day — and society outside the Church — 
shows more than in any former age of the likeness of his compassion for sinners. But 
are we not sorely lacking in that righteous indignation against wrong, and deep grief 
at the dishonour offered to God's Name, which are no less part of " the mind that was 
in Christ Jesus"? 

III. We MtTBT NOT ALLOW THIS HEAET-WEABINBSS TO SLIDE INTO DBSPAIE. It 

must not abate hope, slacken efibrt, hinder prayer. The temptation may be strong — 
partly from forgetfulness or ignorance of the past. When a great poet allows himself 
to exclaim, " When was age so crammed with meanness, madness, written, spoken 
lies?" the reply is — ^What former age was less so? Not the ago of Isaiah, or of 
Jeremiah, or of Malachi. Not the age which cried, " Not this Man, but Barabbas ! " 
Nor the ages of the decline and fall of Rome. Nor what some call " the age of faith ; " 
others, more justly, " the dark ages." Nor of the Tudors and Stuarts. Nor the cold- 
hearted, cruel eighteenth century. No I It is an old story, " The whole world lieth 
in wickedness." It is an ancient cry, " How long, Lord, how long ? We are " as 
they that watch for the morning." But courage I " The night is far spent (Eom. xui. 
12). Armour is not for flight, but fight. "Like a dove!" Yes, David; if thou 
wert B. dove I But thou art a king— God's servant, Israel's champion and prophet 

(Eph. vi, 13). . ^ 1. .V, i. -i. 

If this prayer is David's, it is pathetic and instructive to remember that it was 
jiranted, though not as he desired (2 Sam, xvii. 23). God can show us the unwisdom 
of our prayers by granting as well as denying. For the present, our Savour's prayer 
for his own is not that they be taken out of the world (John xvu. 15). But whatever 
Is right and true in this prayer shall in due time be answered (Rev. xxi. 3, i, 27). 

Ver 16 —Prayer. " As for me, I will call," etc. In this verse— the crisis or turn- 
Ine-Doint of the whole psalm— you see the storm-tossed vessel making for the harbour, 
ai^ casting anchor in safe shelter. A sorely wounded soul, vexed and out of heart 
with the tumult and strife of life, the wickedness of men. longs foJ 

PSALMS. ^ 



418 THE bJOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lt. 1—231 

" A lodge in some vast wilderaess, 
Some boundless contiguity of shade ; " 

where, far from the sisiht of violence and fraud, the din of. business, politics, or war, he 
might be alone with God. But he discerns that if he cannot flee from mankind, ha 
can take refuge in God. He appeals from an unjust and cruel world to eternal 
righteousness, infinite love. Divine faithfulness. He pours out his heart to God, and 
lays hold on him ; and light and peace begin to stream in (vers. 18, 22, and closing 
words of psalm). The text suggests some very important views oi prayer. 

I. Its personal ohabacteb ; as expressing individual need and desire ; the 
voluntary confidential converse of the heart with God. Custom, fashion, human 
sympathy, and opinion are all out of court. If in the whole world not another heart 
or voice were raised in prayer, the believer would yet say, " As for me, I will call upon 
God." There are other kinds of prayer : the united prayer of two or three, agreed 
touching what they shall ask ; the public prayer of the assembled Church. In private 
prayer, too, all is not petition for one's self or others ; there is confession, thanksgiving, 
consecration, submission, adoration. Worship may be wordless, silent. But the most 
wonderful, instructive, encouraging examples of prayer recorded in the Bible show ua 
some strong earnest spirit face to face with God, in direct petition ; alone with the 
Father of spirits, the Almighty Creator, even though a multitude were looking on. 
Abraham; Jacob; Moses; Joshua; Elijah; Hezekiah; Paul, This is what makes 
this Book of Psalms so precious a manual for the Church and for each Christian ; a 
storehouse of liturgies, a magazine of prayers. This makes David's life, in spite of his 
faults and sins, so true and grand a type of real godliness ; the clear, full sense and 
unhesitating utterance, of personal relationship to God ; the reality, blessedness, duty, 
glorious privilege, of drawing nigh to God. Think of it. There is something more 
than sublime — appalling — in this view of prayer. That a child of dust, yesterday in 
the cradle, hanging on God's absolute power over the gulf of nothingness, whose voice 
can reach so few, even of his fellow-men, whose knowledge, thought, will, are bounded 
in such strait limits, should be able at will to speak with the Ruler and Author of the 
universe ; to make his wish, weakness, misery, or his boldest hope and loftiest purpose^ 
known beyond the stars, above the thrones of archangels, behind all the laws and 
causes and inmost springs of nature — to God himself; and that he should have a right 
to expect an answer ! Is not this, I say, an amazing, sublime, appalling contempla- 
tion ? How poor and low are all the heights of worldly dignity compared with the 
point to which these words lift our thoughts, to which you or I may soar if we make 
them our own ! "As for me," etc. 

II. The cebtainty that God heabs frayeb ; its sure warrant, reasonable assur- 
ance, joyful encouragement. " And the Lord shall save me." If this certainty were 
merely an inward persuasion, born of strong desire, it would be worthless. If based 
on any supposed claim of merit or special favouritism, it would be blind presumption. 
If on the experience of fact, that God does olten answer prayer, it would rest on as 
sure foundation as the discoveries of science, and what we call " laws of nature." But 
the haunting uncertainty would paralyze faith — Will God hear Tny prayer? It rests : 
1. On OocPs promises. If the Bible contains any Divine promises, they are promisee 
to prayer. 2. On the mediation of the Lord Jesus. The Old Testament believer took 
his stand on the ground of God's covenant ; and securely, because, though the priest- 
hood and sacrifices were but shadows, they were shadows of the great 'RealMy^Chriit. 
How much more boldly may we draw near, to whom the reality stands unveiled (Hebi 
iv. 16 ; Eom. viii. 34) ! 3. On the promised help of the Holy Spirit. (Bom. viiL 26, 
24.) Let us take up David's purpose (ver. 17), and hold fast David's faith, " He shall 
hear my voice." 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Ver. 1. — The godly man in three aspects. " Uneasy lies the head that wears a orown." 
David felt this. Often had he been in trouble, but never perhaps bad he been brought 
so low before. Evils dreaded had become realities. The dark clouds, long gatherings 
had now burst over him in furious tempest. Absalom, his dearly loved son, has risen 



ps.lv. 1—23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 419 



in revolt, and multitudes flock to his standard. Even old companions in arms desert, 
and the very friend most trusted turns traitor. It vsras a terrible time. The aged 
monarch, sad and dispirited, his name traduced, his tenderest feelings outraged, his life 
and kingdom threatened, is compelled, with the few found faithful, to seek safety in 
flight (2 Sam. xv.). But even then there was no rest for the king. His mind is in a 
turmoil ; his heart is borne down by cruel doubts and tears, and the sorrows of death 
compassed him about. But in the dark hour he found rest and hope in God. The 
good man is presented in this psalm as — 

I. The subject of geeat mental distress. (Vers. 1 — 8.) The cares of a divided 
house and the complaints of a disaffected people pressed heavy on David's soul. But 
worse things still troubled him — private sorrows, which he could tell only to God. 
Human nature is not changed. Trials are much the same now as they were three thousand 
years ago. How thankful should we be for such a record as we have in this psalm I 
We are taught that when sorrow comes it is not as if any strange thing happened to 
us. We see as in a glass how others have suffered, and we learn from them not only 
how to be patient, but where to find sure relief. How many, in all ages, since the days 
of David, have found, in his confessions and prayers, words wherewith fitly to express 
the surging feelings of their hearts ! 

II. The victim of social tkeaoheet. We mix with our fellow-men. We have 
o\Ji friends and, it may be, our enemies. However it be, we cannot live long without 
knowing something of the bitterness of disappointment and the pain of betrayal. In 
such circumstances we have need to walk circumspectly. We must watch and pray, 
lest our grief should pass into unholy passion, and our just resentment rise to cruel 
revenge. There is a better way. Bather let the sense of injury breed in us a hatred 
of all injury. Bather let the feeling that we suffer wrongfully move us to sympathy 
with all others suffering in like manner. Rather let the faithlessness of man make us 
rejoice the more in the faithfulness of God, whose care of us never ceases, and whose 
love never fails. 

III. The object of Divine delivbbancb. "As for me" (ver. 16) marks the 
difference between the godly and the ungodly, and points the way to the true Resource 
in every trouble. Help comes largely from prayer (ver. 17). Recollection of past 
deliverances is reviving (ver. 18). There is also comfort from a clearer insight into 
the purposes and doings of God (ver. 19). But the great relief, even when face to face 
with the most grievous trials, is in casting all our cares upon God, who careth for ub 
(ver. 22). The burden which is too heavy for us, and which is crushing us to the 
earth, we roll upon God, and therefore enter into rest and assured hope. The last 
words of the psalm are a fit watchword for life and for death : " But I will trust in 
thee."— W. P. 

Yer. 6.— Seeking rest. " Oh that I had wings like a dove ! " David was not the first 
nor the last to utter this cry. Men in all ages have suffered. Everywhere we find 
the same unconquerable desire for rest. This longing underlies all religions and 
philosophies. And there are times when the cry rises instinctively, and presses for an 
answer. Who is there who has not, in sorrow or in pain bodily and mentally, or when 
sick and weary and overborne by earthly troubles, been moved to cry, " Oh for rest I 
And yet the wish may be vain. We need to examine and try ourselves. There is a 
wrong as well as a right way of seeking rest. 

I It is vain to hope foe rest by sebkinq the impossible. Man was made 
"but • little lower than the angels ; " and yet, though all things are said to have been 
put under him, there are points in which the "beasts of the field and the fowls of the 
air •' have the advantage of him. Hence they may become objects of envy. We are 
Umited beings; but we can conceive ourselves endowed with powers beyond what we 
DOSseSB. There is danger in such fancies. The dove flies past, and all seems peace. 
But this may be a delusion. We know not what fate awaits it. Besides, we cheat 
ourselves with a silly thought. We know we have not, and cannot have, wings. 
Wishins for the impossible only leaves us the more weak and discontented. Better 
face difficulty manfully. Better do what God has made us capable of doing rf we are 
wiUin.', than waste time and strength in idle fancies of what cannot be. The doubter 
wants a "sign." The anxious sinner craves some sensible proof of acceptance, ine 



*20 THE BOOK OF PSALMS. [ps. lt, 1— 2a 

troubled mind, tossed to and fro amidst the endless strife of controversy, longs for some 
infallible guide. There is what Wordsworth calls, " the universal instinct of repose^ 
the longing for confirmed tranquillity." But this is not God's way. " Every man 
shall bear his own burden " (Gal. vi. 5). 

If. It is vain to hope fob kest by mebe change of otjtwaud conditions. 
Place has much to do with feeling. What is near seems more real than what is far ofE^ 
What we see touches us more keenly than what we only hear of from others (Lam. iii, 
15). So with respect to •' rest." We are prone to blame circumstances. We delude 
ourselves with the thought that, if things were altered, all would be well. The 
" imagined otherwise " is the heaven of many. So it is with many of the sick, the 
poor, the oppressed, the discontented. Absalom played cunningly upon this feeling 
(2 Sam. XV. 4). But " rest " is a state of the mind. It does not come from without, 
but from within. It is not won by change of condition, but by change of heart. So 
Paul learned (Phil. iv. 11). 

III. It is vain to hope fob best by flight prom the immediate causes or 
DiSTEBSS. There are times when flight may be expedient (Matt. x. 23 ; 2 Tim. ii. 22). 
Again, there are times when flight would be a sin (Neh. vi. 11; 2 Tim. iv. 10). 
Besides, flight may be a vain resource (Amos v. 19). The question is — What is our 
duty? Then, when we have settled that, like Paul, we should stand firm (Acts xx. 24). 
There are people who would quiet conscience by silencing the preacher, like Herod ; 
or get rid of an unpleasant duty by flying, like Jonah ; or hasten their escape from 
trouble, like David. But this will not avail. It is better to stand than to fly ; to do 
our duty humbly and quietly in the place where God calls us, than to seek an easier 
lot. Elijah was a nobler figure confronting singly the hosts of Baal, than hiding in 
the desert. Peter and Paul and Stephen were truer men, and did a grander work by 
not holding their lives dear, than if they had cared more for themselves than for 
Christ. The true way of rest is the way of self-sacrifice. It is when we surrender 
ourselves wholly to Christ, to be his and his only, and to love and do his will for ever- 
more, that we enter into rest (Matt. xi. 28 — 30). The psalmist in his better moments 
felt this. If his first impulse was " to flee away,'' when he came to himself he turned 
to the Lord as his sure Befuge (ver. 9). And what he learned for himself he commends 
with confidence to others: "Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain 
thee"(ver.22).— W. F. 

Vers. 1 — 8. — 2^ true and the false way of encountering the difficulties vf life. 
Borrow, danger, and terror had come upon the psalmist with the force of a tempest. 
He thinks of two ways of escape — casting himself upon God and flight. Suggests the 
true and the false way of encountering the difficulties of life. 

I. Take the false fibst. " Oh that I had wings," etc. 1 (vers. 6 — 8). We must 
conquer difficulties, not fly from them : 1. Because the post of difficulty is often the 
fwst of duty. And we find no rest in flight, because we have sought to evade or 
neglect our duty. 2. The post of difficulty is the post of discipline. Difficulty is ona 
of the Divine instruments of our training; gives health and strength. 3. Solitude 
brings an exchange of difficulties, and does not free us from the power of the world. 
It is better to fight the battle of life than for the heart to prey upon itself apart from 
the fellowship of men and women. 

II. The tbue way of ENConNTEEiNO THE DiFPioiTLTiBS OF LIFE. By Seeking the 
help of Ood. (Vers. 1, 2.) 1. God will help us to a greater faith. "This is tha 
victory that overcometh the world, even your faith " — ^faith in Divine help, and faith 
in the good and righteous cause. 2. God will inspire us with a truer courage. " In 
the world ye shall have tribulation : but be of good cheer ; I have overcome the world." 
3. Ood ivill give to those who are faithful all needed strength. Will fulfil the promise, 
"As thy day [or, 'need'] is so shall thy strength be." 4. Victory is easier to u* 
than to the psalmist, through Christ, Faith in God through faith in Christ will 
give every believer the victory. — S. 

Vers. 9 — 15. — A picture of corrupt city life and private life, and a denunciation of 
Ood's judgments upon them. I. Corrupt city life. (Vers. 10, 11.) 1. Corrupt in 
every part, on the walls and in the interior. Violence and strife reign unchecked 



w. LT. 1— 23.] THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 421 



universally. 2. Faltehood and deceit ruled in the marJcet-place. (Ver. 11.) In the 
square, or market-plaoa, near the gates, where was the general place of concourse, men 
cheated and deceived each other in their ordinary intercourse. 

_ II. PiOTUiM or ooBBUPT PEivATK LITE. The Sanctities of friendship were open^ 
violated and renounced. The offence was aggravated by two things. 1. That he who 
had hecome t?ie ptalmisft enemy had been a dosdy intimate friend. Love had turned 
to hate, because of the triumph of evil designs or passions, or of " the whispering 
tongues that can poison truth." 2. Their friendship had hetn consecrated hy rdigions 
associations. (Yer. 14.) A depraved life can sweep out of the mind the tenderest 
memories and the most holy associations, human and Divine. 

IIL Thk fsaluist pbayb fob God's judomekts upon this oobeupt litb. The two 
forms of judgment which he imprecates are : 1. The Judgment thatfeU upon the huilders 
of Babel. (Ver. 9.) Discord among themselves and their counsels, so that they 
might destroy one another. 2. That they might go down to the grave alive. (Yer. 15.) 
Like Korah and his company, let them be carried away by death in the fulness of life 
and strength. The psalmist knew of none but violent means and tempond judgments 
by which such wickedness could be removed. — S. 

Vers. 16 — 23. — Contrasts in the character and experiene* of the righteous and the 
wicked. I. Chabaoteb and bxpebienob of the biohteoub. 1. Ei* life is a continued 
exercise of prayer and faith. Calls upon God, evening, morning, and at noon. Carries 
all his anxieties and fears to God ; casts upon him his burden (ver. 22). And he does 
all this with an assured /oj<A (vers. 16, 17). " And he shall hear my voice." " The 
Lord shall save me." 2. He has been already delivered from great dangers. (Ver. 18.) 
"Many were against him." Every good man has a past full of such experiences. 
3. He has confident assurance of futwre protection and guidance. "He shall sustain 
thee : he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved." God is good and righteous, 
and this is the foundation of his assurance. 

II. Chabaoteb and bxpeeienoe or the wicked. 1. Oenerally, they have no fear of 
Ood. Without God in the world ; living, therefore, without restraint. 2. I%ey are 
traitors to former vows of friendship. They violate without compunction former oaths 
and covenants. 3. Ihey are guilty of the most cruel deceit. (Ver. 21.) Bloody and 
deceitful men. 4. Ood shall afflict and humble them. (Ver. 19.) 6. They shaU dis m 
premature death. (Ver. 23.)— S. 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



TO 



THE BOOK OF PSALMS. 



VOLUME L 



PSALM L 

THBm PA6B 

The Godly Man ... 2 

"He shall be like a Tree," eto. ... 3 

The Title : The Book of Psalms : the 

Psalms — their Variety and Value ... 4 

The Happy Man ... ... ... 6 

The Blessedness of the True ... 7 

Character ... ... ... 8 

Gwatness, Happiness, Prosperity ... 8 

Blessedness ... ... ... 9 

A Contrast ... ... „. 9 

Tnie Blessedness... ... ... 10 

PSALM II. 

The Kingdom and Glory of Christ ... 12 

The Kiss of Homage ... ... 13 

The King in Zion : a Messianic Psalm 13 

The Heathen in Three Aspects ... 15 

The False and the True ia Kingship 16 

The Divine King ... ... ... 16 

PSALM lU. 

God the Believer's Glory ... ... IS 

A Morning Song in Perilous Times ... 19 

Bright Morning after a Dark Night ... 20 

The Tmth about Numbers... ... 21 

David'i Dependence on God ... 22 

PSALM IV. 

God's Care for the Bighteoaa ... 24 

Fear of Sin ... ... ... 24 



THEUS pAO 

The Supreme Quesc of Life ... 26 
An Evening Song in Perilous Times, 

showing us the Secret of Happiness 26 
Quieting Thoughts for a Time of 

Trouble ... ... ... 28 

Three Great Things ... ... 28 

A Cry for Deliverance ... ... 29 

The Believer's Ground of Confidence 29 

PSALM V. 

Prayer ... ... „. «. S8 

God's Hatred of Sin ... ... 82 

The Joy of Faith 33 

A Morning Prayer : for Sanctuary 

Service : in Evil Times ... ... 33 

A Morning Prayer ... ... 35 

Prayer for Deliverance from Wicked 

Men ... ... ... ... 36 

The Bighteousness of God ... ... 36 

PSALM VL 

The School of Adversity ... ... 88 

The Moan of a Saint, and the Mercy 

of his God ... ... ... 39 

A Cry to God, and its Besponse ... 40 

Night and Morning in the Soul ... 41 

Great AfSictions, Greater Consolation 41 

Deliverance from Sore Trouble ... 41 

PSALM VIL 

God's Bighteous Displeasure against 

Sin is an Abiding Reality ... 44 



INDEX. 



The Slandered Saint appealing to his 

God ... ... ... ... 45 

Purity of Heart ... ... ... 47 

God the True Kefuge of the Soul ... 47 

Trust in God ... ... ... 48 

PSALM VIII. 

Man's Littleness and hi« Greatness ... SO 

Man — ^Nature — God ... ... 50 

"Lord, what is Man? " ... ... 51 

God the Glorious Creator ... ... 53 

God glorified in Little Children ... 54 

The Greatness of God in Kedemption 55 

God's Glory revealed ... ... 55 

PSALM IX. 

An Appeal to Experience, and its 

Becord ... ... ... 58 

An Appeal to God ... ... 59 

Praise for the Destroyer's Destruction 60 
» The Gates of Death " and « the Gates 

ofZion" ... ... ... 62 

A Song of Thanksgiving for Salvation 62 

Thanksgiving ... ... ... 63 

The Cause of Gratitude ... ... 63 

A Bighteons God... ... ... 63 

Prayer to G«d ... ... ... 64 



PSALM X. 



67 



The Protest of Faith against Sin ... 
Why? or. Hard Facts and Puzzling 

Questions ... ... ... 68 

Times of Du-kness and Fear ... 69 

Han's Thoughts ... ... ... 70 

Trial in Three Aspects ... ... 70 

The Bighteons God ... ... 70 

PSALM XL 

The Question of Fear and the Answer 
of Faith ... ... ... 72 

The Victory of Faith ; or, Best amid 
Storm... ... ... ... 73 

A Battle in the Soul ... ... 74 

"The Bighteons Lord loveth Bight- 
eousness" ... ... ... 75 

Faith's Antidot« to Fear ... ... 75 



PSALM XIL 

Unbridled Speech ... ... 77 

The Preoionsness of the Word ... 78 



THBMS FAOa 

Hard Times ... ... ... 78 

Christian Growth ... ... ... 80 

Lamentation over the Growing Cor- 
ruption of the Nation ... ... 80 

PSALM XIIL 

Despair turned to Thankfulness ... 81 

Sorrow and Trust ; Sighing and Song 82 

From Despondency to Peace ... 84 

God's Averted Face ... ... 84 

The Agony of Desertion ... ... 8fi 

PSALM XIV. 

The Fool's Creed, and its Conse- 
quences ... ... ... 86 

The Depravity of a Godless World, 

viewed by God... ... ... 88 

Bight Views of God's Government ... 90 

Conflict between God and the Wicked 90 

PSALM XV. 

A Standard of Integrity ... ... 92 

The Man in Undisturbed Best ... 93 

A Life without Eeproach ... ... 95 

The Essentials of a Spiritual Beligion 95 

PSALM XVL 

The Antidote to Death ... ... 98 

"The Path of Life" 99 

"Fulness of Joy"... ... ... 99 

"Once thine, ever thine:'' the Song 

of a Saint, the Vision of a Seer ... 100 

Lifelong Convictions ... ... 102 

The Future State... ... ... 101 

Grounds of the Prayer for Preser- 
vation... ... ... ... 103 

The Confidence of the Psalmist's Faith 

in the Future ... ... ... 104 

The Supreme Choice of the Soul ... 105 



PSALM xvn. 



107 



True Satisfaction ... 

The Saint's Appeal from the Wrongs 

of Earth to the Bighteons One on 

the Throne 109 

The Bighteousness of God's Dealing 111 

The Visits of God in the Night ... 113 

Three Awakings ... ... ,,. 113 

The Prayer of the Bighteons „. 113 

Confidence in God ... m. 114 



INDEX. 



ill 



PSALM XVIII. 

VHEKC PAOB 

God's Revelation of himself is suited 
to Man's Capacity ... ... 121 

Our Exaltation through God's Gentle- 
ness ... ... ... ... 122 

The Conqueror's Song of Praise and 
Hope ... ... ... ... 124 

A Betrospeot of Life ... ... 126 

A God-made Man... ... ... 127 

The Retrospect of a Life: a Sermon 
for the Close of the Year ... 127 

PSALM XIX. 

The Saint's Prayer against Sin ... 130 

The Voice of God in his "Works ... 132 

The Voice of Jehovah in his Word ... 134 

Katore as a Preacher ... ... 136 

The Word of God 136 

God'g Revelation of himself in Nature 

and in his Word ... ... 137 

Man's Relation to the Divine Law ... 137 

A Sacrifice and a Prayer ... ••. 138 

PSALM XX. 

The Safeguards of Prayer ... ... 140 

Prayer for Israel's King when going 

forth to Battle : a National Sermon 141 

-The Day of Trouble" ... ... 143 

Help from the Sanctuary for the Battle 

of Life... ... ••• ••• 143 



PSALM XXI. 



146 



The Triumph of Victory ... ... 

A Royal Thanksgiving for Answers to 
Prayer. (For a Day of National 
Thanksgiving) ... ... ... 147 

"Let the Children of Zion be Joyful 
in their King" 149 

Prayer ... ... ••• ••• 150 

Thanksgiving for Prayer answered ... 150 

PSALM XXII. 

A Pedigree of Faith and Piety ... 165 
God's Supreme Dominion over aU 

Nations ... ••• ••• 156 

From Darkness to Light; or, the Song 

of the Early Dawn ... ... 156 

A Struggle from the Gloom of Advei- 
" iity to Peace and Joy ... ... 160 



The Cry of Despair struggling with 

the Cry of Faith 161 

Prayer in Suffering ... ... 162 

Consequences of Deliverance ... 162 

PSALM XXIIL 

Human Experience and Divine In- 
spiration ... ... ... 164 

" The Shepherd of Israel " 16S 

Goodness and Mercy ... ... 166 

The Good Shepherd and his Flock 167, 169 

The Power of Reflection ... ... 170 

A Table prepared ... ... 170 

" All the Days of my Life " ... 171 

God's Providential Care ... ... 171 

"Fulness of Joy" 172 

PSALM XXIV. 

The World for God 174 

A High Standard of Practical Morality 175 
Celebrating the Real Presence. (For 

Opening or Reopening a Church)... 176 

The King of Glory ... ... 178 

The Spirit of Aspiration ... ... 178 

Whocandwpll with God? 179 

Appeal for God's Entrance into the 

Heart of Man ... ... ... 180 

PSALM XXV. 

"Show me thy Ways," etc. ... 183 

Glorious Prospect of God's Dealings 183 

"For thy Name's Sake" 184 

Prayer: its Warrant, Petitions, and 

Arguments ... ... ..• 186 

Onward and Upward ... ... 187 

Sins of Youth ... ... ~. 188 

God's Revelation to Man ... ... 189 

Three Stages in the Godly Man's 

Life 189 

Trust in God ... ... ... 190 

The Supreme Importance of Divine 

Interposition ... ... ... 190 

The Troubles of the Righteous m. 191 

PSALM XXVI. 

Faith's Bold Request ... ... 193 

The Sin of Bribery ... ... 194 

Assailed Integrity's Final Appeal ... 194 

Integrity ... ••• ••• 196 

The Oppressed Righteous Man .. 197 



INDEX. 



PSALM XXVIL 

THEMK rAOE 

The Believing Heart's Obedience to 

God's Oommand ... ... 200 

The Reward of Diligent Search ... 201 

A Double Safeguard ... ... 201 

Jehovah's Self-revelatlon, and Faith's 

Beeponse thereto ... ... 202 

True Beligion ... ... ... 204 

Fearlees Conrage ... ... ... 205 

Strengthened in God ... ... 206 

How to become Strong ... ... 206 

PSALM XXVIIL 

Providence and Prayer ... _ 208 

Man's Cry and God's Response ... 210 

The Oppressed Righteous King ... 211 

PSALM XXIX. 

" The Beauty of Holiness " ... 213 
The Glorious Sceptre of Universal 

Power... ... ... ... 214 

The Works and the Word of God ... 216 

The Priestly Benediction ... ... 217 

The Thunderstorm ... ... 217 

PSALM XXX. 

Mercy and Judgment ... ... 220 

A Noble View of Life 220 

A Public Thanksgiving on Recovery 

from Sickness ... ... ... 221 

God's Chastening Hand ... ... 223 

The Holiness of Christ ... ... 224 

The Changes and Consolations of Life 225 

The Mercy of God ... ... 225 

Vain Confidence ... ... ... 226 

PSALM XXXL 

A Prayer for Guidance ... ... 229 

God's Sovereign Will ... ... 230 

The Saint rehearsing his Experience 

of the Great Protector's Care ... 231 

Duty and Destiny... ... ... 233 

Opportunity ... ... ... 233 

A Prayer lor Grace in Trouble ... 234 

A Story of Suffering and Sorrow ... 235 

Praise and Thanksgiving ... ... 235 

PSALM XXXIL 

The Blessedness of Pardon m. 238 

Hindrances to Confession of Sin ... 239 



THEUE 

Confession of Sin ... ... ... 

Divine Forgiveness ... ... 

The Blessedness of Forgiveness 
God's Guidance ... 
Prom Great Misery to Greater Blessed- 
ness ... ... 

The Attitude of the Penitent ... 



lAOI 

239 

240 
242 
243 

244 
244 



PSALM XXXIIL 

Spiritual Worship ... 

Methods of Worship ... 

Creation... 

Permanence of Divine Purpose 

Joy in God 

A Hymn of Praise to God ... 

A Call to praise God 



,. 248 

. 248 

. 249 

. 250 

. 251 

. 253 

. 253 

What God's People possess in him ... 2f>4 

PSALM XXXIV. 

A Duty, a Privilege, a Purpose ... 257 

The Test of Experience ... ... 257 

Life's Experiences turned to Manifold 

Uses 258 

Links of Grace ... ... ... 260 

Proving what is Good ... ... 261 

"Long Life" ... «.. ... 262 

Three Great Things ... ... 263 

God's Face ... ... ... 263 

Deliverance and Gratitude... ... 263 

TheFearof God ... ... ... 264 

The Secret and Blessings of a Happy 

Life ... ... ... ... 264 

PSALM XXXV. 

The Assurance of Salvation ... 268 

A Hard Case — a very Hard One — 

laid before God ... ... 269 

The Flesh and the Spirit ... ... 271 

God's Silence ... ... ... 272 

Battle and Victory ... ... 273 

The Wicked and the Good... ... 273 

Pleas for Triumph ... ... 273 

PSALM XXXVL 

The Portrait of the Godless Man ... 276 

« The Fountain of Life" ... ... 277 

Ood's Revelation of Man to himself; 
or, the Transgressor's Heart turned 

inside ont ... ... ... 278 

God's Revelation of himself to Man ... 279 



INDEX. 



A Terrible Picture of the Wicked Man 282 

Aspice ... ... ... ... 282 

BighteouBness ; Judgment ; Loviag- 

kindness ... ... ... 283 

The Curse of WlokedneeB and the 

Blessedness of Fellowship with Ood 284 

PSALM XXXVIL 

Delight in God ... ... ... 289 

The Best of the Soul ... ... 289 

Vindication of God's Supreme and 

Gracious Providence ... ... 290 

The Good Man's Directory... ... 291 

Two Pictures ... ... ... 293 

A Sweet Picture of a Noble Life ... 294 

Evil-doers ... ... ... 295 

Goodness ... ... ... 295 

Doubts raised by the Divine Provi- 
dence, and how to meet them ... 29& 
Confidence in God ... ... 296 

The Bighteous and the Wicked ... 296 

God orders the Good Life ... ... 297 

The Perfect Life ... ... ... 297 

PSALM XXXVIU. 

Conviction of Sin an Element of True 

Christian Life ... ... ... 300 

Sin stinging like an Adder ... 301 

Thoughts in Affliction ... ... 303 

A Fearful Picture of the Suffeiingi 

which a Great Sin can cause m. 303 

PSALM XXXIX. 

A Wise Prayer ... ... ... 806 

God, the Eefuge of the Soul ... 306 
Unburdening the Heart to God in a 
Time of Sore Affliction, when No- 
thing can be said to Man... ... 307 

Lessons from a Funeral ... ... 309 

Death deprecated ... ... 310 

The Afflicted Man ... m. 311 



PSALM XL. 



314 



The Song learned in Tribulation 
Out of the Pit and on the Book: a 

Song of Praise ... ... ... 314 

"Poor and Needy:" a Prayer and a 

Plea li" 315 

The Supreme Surrend«, and its Eter^ 

nal Value ... ... ••• 316 



IHEHK 

Grace and Gratitude 


rAOS 
... 318 


The Heart of Messiah 


^ 819 


God's Thoughts 


... 320 


Thanksgiviog and Prayer ... 


... 820 


Discipline Lifelong ... 


... 321 


PSALM XLL 





Considerate Sympathy ... ... 823 

The Poor Man's Charter; or, a Bless- 
ing pronounced on the Benevolent 324 
111 treated by Man, he flees to God ... 326 
The Harshness and Treachery of Men 326 
Very Special Treachery ... ... 326 

He prays against bis Enemies ... 327 

The Doxology of the Hebrew Church 327 

God's Poor ... ... ... 328 

Influence ... ... ... 329 

The Aggravation and Consolation of 

Bodily Affliction ... ... 330 

PSALM XLIL 

The Intense Longing of the Soul after 

God 832 

Athirst for God ... 833 

Spiritual Depression ... ... 335 

"The Hill Mizar" 336 

Bemonstrance of the Spiritual Man 

against the Natural Man ... 336 



PSALM XLIII. 



337 



"God my Exceeding Joy"... ... 

God the Salvation of the Countenance; 
or, a Light Heart makes a, Bright 
Face 338 

Strengthening the Heart in God ... 340 

PSALM XLIV. 

The Blessing of Memory: a Com- 
memoration Sermon ... ... 344 

God's Knowledge of Men's Hearts ... 345 
Martyr Churches, Hebrew and Chris- 
tian: a Contrast ... ... 345 

"In the Days of Old" 348 

A Prayer for Help against Foreign 
Enemies ... ... ... 349 

PSALM XLV. 

"Altogether Lovely" ... ... 358 

The Glories of the Eternal King ... 854 



DTOEX. 



nan 




XASX 


The Eingahip of Christ ». 


.•• 


356 


Fatheii and Ohildien 


... 


857 


PSALM XLVI. 






The ITnehangeableneBS of Ood 


... 


358 


"OnrEefuge" 


... 


359 


The Eiver of God 


■•• 


S60 


War 


..■ 


361 


The Saint's Stronghold ... 


... 


362 


Hope for the Troubled 


... 


864 


A Divine Befnge and Strength 


... 


861 


PSAT.M XLVn. 







The Faonlty and Duty of Praise ... 866 

UniTersal Dominion ... ... 867 

A Song for all the Peoples ! m. 867 

The UniTersal King 369 

Christianity the Faith of all Nations 370 

The Universal Sovereignty of God ... 371 

PSALM XLVra. 

Ch>d's Loving-kindness ... ... 373 

God's own Chnroh the Object of his 

Special Care ... ... ... 374 

The Chnroh and her Head... m. 376 

The Eternal City of God ... - ^ 377 

PSALM XLTX. 

Infinite Redemption ... ». 380 

"A Dark Saying:" Wealth In Bad 

Bands... ... ... ... 381 

A Contrast : Unseen Wealth ... 382 

A Vast Change : " in the Morning "... 383 

"Be not afraid" ... ... ... 383 

The Issnes of Life... »• ... 384 

PSALM L. 

Thoughts of God ... m m. 387 

ForgetfnlnesB of God ... ... 888 

The Jndge, the Judged, and the 

Eternal Judgment ... ,., 389 

Qoi the Bighteons Judge ... ... 391 

True Beligion and its Counterfeits ... 392 

"TheDayof Tronbto" 892 

False to Covenant ^ m. 393 

Hypoomy m. ^ ..893 



PSALM LL 

THEm rASB 

The Penitent's Plea for Pardon ... 396 

Prayer for a Pure Heart ... ... 397 

The Joy of God's Salvation 898, 406 

" The Saerifioes of God," etc. ... 400 

Belations of Ruler and People ... 401 

The Minister's Psalm ... ... 401 

A Portrait ... ... ... 402 

Secrets of the Heart ». ... 403 

"Whiter than Snow" 404 

True Prayer ... ... ... 404 

A Great Evil deprecated, and a Great 

Good desired ... ... ... 405 

Bepentance and Forgiveness ... 405 

Renewal and Elevation ... ... 406 

WorkmgforGod ... .» ... 407 

PSALM LIL 

The Man on whom God's Just Judg- 
ment descends ... ... ... 408 

The Olive an Emblem of the Gifts 

and Graces of the Holy Spirit ... 409 

A Betrayer ... 409 

The Testimony of a Saint, confirmed 

as " Good " by all the Saints ... 410 

A Stern Upbraiding ... m. 410 

PSALM LIIL 

Atheism contrasted with Godliness ... 411 



PSALM LIV. 

Peril and Prayer ... ... 

Prayer for Deliverance m. 

PSALM LV. 



413 

413 



A Pathetic Prayer ... .» 416 

Prayer ... ... '... ... 417 

The Godly Man in Three Aspects ... 418 
Seeking Rest ... ... ... 419 

The True and the False Way of en- 
countering the DifSculties of Life... 420 
A Picture of Corrupt City Life and 
Private Life, and a Denunciation of 
God's Judgments upon them ... 420 
Contrasts in the Character and Ex- 
perience of the Bighteons and the 
Wicked m. ... ... 481 



