RABBI     DAVID     KIMCHI'S 


COMMENTARY 


Tin. 


PROPHECIES  OF  ZECHARIAH 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  HEBRKU . 


WITH   NOTES,  AND  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  PASSAGES 
RELATING  TO  THE  MESSIAH. 


BY    THE    REV.  A.  M'CAUL,  A.M., 

OF    TRINITY    COLLEGE,    DUBLIN. 


LONDON : 
JAMES  DUNCAN,  37,  PATERNOSTER-ROW. 

MDCCCXXXVII. 


LOAN  STACK 


MACINTOSH,  PRINTER, 
20,  GREAT  NEW-STUEET,  LONDON, 


1337 

TO 

THE     PEOPLE    OF     ISRAEL, 

A     K  ATI  OH     NOT    MORE    REMARKABLE 

FUR 

THE    CALAMITIES     WHICH     THEY    HAVE    SURVIVED, 

i M  \\    run 
A    GENIUS    AND    LOVJE    OF    LEARNING 

WHICH      THOSE     CALAMITIES     COULD      NEVER     SUBDUE, 

3Tljte  Jbprnmrn 

OK 

ONE  OF  THEIR  COMMENTARIES 

14 
AFFECTIONATELY    INSCRIBED, 

k* 
THE  TRANSLATOR 


INTRODUCTION. 


RABBI  DAVID  KIMCHI,  commonly  called  by  the  Jews 
from  the  three  initial  letters  p"*n  RaDaK,  was  probably 
born  at  Narbonne,  where  his  father  lived.*  Relandf  con- 
siders it  doubtful,  because,  in  his  printed  and  manuscript 
works,  he  calls  himself,  "  David,  the  son  of  Joseph,  the 
son  of  Kimchi  the  Spaniard,"  whereas  Narbonne  is  in 
France.  But  the  vicinity  to  Spain,  and  the  fact  that  his 
family  was  Spanish,  and  that  he  himself  was  altogether 
identified  with  the  Spanish  school  of  Hebrew  learning-, 
would  fully  warrant  this  title.  J  But,  however  that  be, 
it  is  certain  that  his  life  and  labours  present  an  interesting 
incident  in  the  literary  history  of  an  eventful  period. 

•  Jost  (in  his  Geschichte  der  Israeliten,  vol.  vi.  104)  says  unhesi- 
tatingly, that  he  was  born  there,  but  the  only  authority  which  he  gives 
is  that  of  Wolfius,  who  does  not  speak  so  positively. 

f  Vitae  celeb.  Rab.  p.  81,  82,  in  his  Analecta. 

$  Wolfius,  in  his  account  of  Joseph  Kimchi,  the  father,  says,  "  His- 
panus,  Narbonae,  quac  turn  temporfs  Hispanis  parebat." — Bibliothec. 
Heb.  part  i.  p.  562. 

b 


vi  INTRODUCTION. 

He  flourished  about  the  time  of  the  third  Crusade,  A.D. 
1190,  and  lived  through  the  first  quarter  of  the  thirteenth 
century.  Whilst  the  laity  of  Christendom  were  engaged 
in  the  attempt  to  recover  the  Holy  City,  and  the  divines 
in  perfecting  and  systematising  the  Christian  oral  law, 
or  Popish  Rabbinism,  Kimchi,  and  other  distinguished 
rabbies  of  the  day,  were  zealously  and  laboriously  em- 
ployed in  the  grammatical  study  of  the  Old  Testament, 
and  in  the  improvement  of  biblical  interpretation.  Their 
countrymen  were  accustomed  then,  as  now,  wherever 
the  Talmud  is  much  studied,  to  follow  the  Talmudic 
method  of  interpretation,  and  to  pay  but  little  attention 
either  to  context  or  grammar,  of  which,  from  the  method 
of  instruction  pursued  in  Rabbinical  schools,  they  do  not 
so  readily  perceive  the  necessity  or  the  value.  It  would, 
however,  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  Kimchi  or  his 
cotemporaries  had  discovered  the  simple  and  rational 
method  of  exposition,  or  that  the  Jews,  in  the  long 
interval  between  the  dispersion  and  the  Crusades,  were 
either  ignorant  or  destitute  of  the  grammatical  principle. 
They  carried  with  them  from  their  country  Onkelos'a 
Chaldee  translation  *  of  the  Pentateuch,  as  a  model  of 
literal  interpretation  ;  and  the  labours  of  Jonathan,  t 
about  two  centuries  after  the  dispersion,  testify  that 
they  knew  how  to  profit  by  it.  The  Masora  J  furnishes 
another  instance  of  a  diligent  and  accurate  grammatical 
study  of  the  text.  "  It  is  evident,"  says  Gesenius,  § 

*  Known  by  (he  name  of  Targum  of  Onkelos. 

f  Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel's  Targum  on  the  Prophets. 

J  See  BuxtorPs  Tiberias,  or  Masoretic  Commentary. 

§  Geschichte  der  Heb.  Sprache.  p.  75.     On  the  following  page  he 


INTRODUCTION.  VII 

"  that  its  authors  were  guided  by  fixed  grammatical 
principles,  which,  though  never  collected  into  one  whole, 
they  had  deduced  for  themselves,  and  according  to  which 
they  conformed  the  text,  and  endeavoured  to  remove  its 
irregularities  and  supposed  errors.  In  doing  eo,  they 
manifest  a  great  accuracy  of  study." 

The  punctuation,  whenever  affixed,  presupposes  no 
scanty  measure  of  grammatical  study;  and  the  system  of 
the  accents  shows  the  most  accurate  and  delicate  per- 
ception of  the  relation  and  connexion  of  words  and 
sentences ;  and  these  two  together  must  have  ever  pre- 
served amongst  the  reflecting  Jews  a  correct  taste  for  the 
true  principles  of  interpretation.  These  works  attest  the 
continued  existence  of  grammatical  principles  amongst 
the  Jews  themselves,  but  it  is  probable  that  from  the 
Arabic  grammarians  they  learned  method  and  system ;  * 
and  soon  after  the  triumphs  of  Mahometan  ism,  and  the 
culture  of  Arabic,  the  series  of  professed  Jewish  gram- 
marians commenced,  f  About  the  beginning  of  the 
tenth  century,  Saadiah  Gaon  distinguished  himself  as  a 
grammarian,  translator,  and  commentator,  from  whom 
the  succeeding  commentators  often  make  useful  citations. 
In  the  latter  half  of  the  eleventh  century,  R.  Solomon, 
commonly  called  Rashi,  furnished  a  commentary  to  the 

states  his  opinion  that  this  work  was  diligently  carried  on  in  the  sixth 
century,  and  finished  about  the  eighth  or  ninth. 

•  It  may,  however,  be  doubted  whether  the  benefit  was  an  unmixed 
good;  and  whether,  if  the  Jews  had  worked  out  their  own  principles  to 
a  system,  that  system  would  not  have  been  more  purely  Hebrew,  and 
therefore  more  correct. 

f  Gesen.  Geschichte,  p.  U4. 


viii  INTRODUCTION. 

whole  Bible,  which,  though  full  of  Talmudisms,  manifests 
diligence,  acuteness,  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the 
language  of  Scripture,  and  a  desire  to  rise  above  Talmudic 
interpretation.  He  was  succeeded  in  the  next  century  by 
Aben  Ezra,  who  far  surpassed  him  in  power  and  freedom 
of  judgment.  And  a  little  later  came  David  Kimchi,  who, 
diligently  using  the  labours  of  his  predecessors,  and 
possessing  no  ordinary  resources  of  his  own,  has,  besides 
a  grammar  and  lexicon,  left  a  commentary  on  most  of  the 
books  of  Scripture,  which,  though  written  six  hundred 
years  ago,  will  bear  a  comparison  with  any  that  has 
appeared  even  in  the  nineteenth  century.  Valuable  in 
itself,  it  has  other  points  of  attraction  for  the  Christian 
student.  It  is  the  work  of  one  to  whom  the  Christian 
world  has  been  much  indebted ;  for  his  grammar  and 
lexicon  have,  until  very  lately,  contributed  the  main 
portion  of  all  similar  productions,  and  his  commentary 
has  been  one  of  the  sources  from  which  commentators 
since  the  Reformation  have  drawn  most  valuable  mate- 
rials. What  Gesenius  says  generally  of  the  Jewish  com- 
mentators is  particularly  true  of  Kimchi.  "The  judicious 
commentator  will  know  how  to  use  much  in  them  that  is 
indisputably  true  and  good;  and  a  facility  in  under- 
standing these  sources  is  indispensably  necessary  to  every 
respectable  interpreter."  *  To  the  reader  of  the  English 
Bible,  Kimchi  is  also  of  value,  as  he  will  find  the  transla- 
tions generally  confirmed,  and  see  how  very  little  that 
rabbi  would  have  altered.  Indeed,  a  comparison  with 
the  rabbies  would  show  that  our  translators  were  deeply 
read  in,  and  diligent  in  consulting  the  best  Jewish  autho- 

*  Gesen.  Geschichte,  p.  102. 


INTRODUCTION.  x 

rities,  and  would  go  far  towards  proving  that  we  have 
great  reason  to  be  satisfied  with,  and  thankful  for,  our 
English  translation.     To  the  student  of  divinity,  Kimchi 
and  his  cotemporaries  are  of  great  importance,  inasmuch 
as  they  may  be  regarded  as  the  founders  of  a  new  school 
in   Jewish   theology.     The   violent   persecutions   of    the 
Crusaders,  the  jealousy  excited  by  the  Christian  attempt 
upon  the  Holy  Land,  and  the  influence  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  Mahometans,  amongst  whom  they  lived,   produced  a 
sensible  change  in  Jewish  opinions  and  interpretations, 
which  is  plainly  marked  in  Kimchi,  and  other  writers  of 
the  day,  and  without  a  knowledge  of  which,  the  phaeno- 
mena   of  modern  Judaism  connot  be   fully   understood. 
Rashi,   Aben  Ezra,  and  Kimchi  endeavoured  to  get  rid  of 
the  Christian  interpretations,   and  Maimonides   to   root 
out  the  Christian  doctrines  which  had  descended    from 
the  ancient  Jewish  Church.     The  writings  of  the  com- 
mentators passed  without  notice,  but  Maimonides'  attack 
on  Jewish  doctrines  drew  down  the  sentence  of  excom- 
munication, and  led  to  a  serious  feud,  in  which  Kimchi 
appeared  as  the  friend  of  Maimonides,  and  endeavoured 
to  make   peace.     In    the  course  of  time,   however,   the 
opinions  of  all  gained  ground,  and  have  now  an  almost 
universal  influence  on  Jewish  habits  of  thought,  which 
makes  a  knowledge  of  their  writings  desirable. 

A  specimen  of  Kimchi's  Commentary  is  now  presented 
to  the  public,  as  a  small  contribution  towards  this  object. 
It  is  hoped  that  even  this  may  be  useful,  not  only  in 
exhibiting  Jewish  interpretation,  but  in  helping  Christians 
to  form  a  more  correct  estimate  of  the  Jewish  mind.  The 
controversialist  is  compelled  to  attack  that  which  is 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

erroneous,  or  even  absurd  in  the  oral  law,  and  the  igno- 
rant or  unthinking  hastily  conclude  that  all  the  Jewish 
writings  are  of  the  same  character.  The  translation  of 
Kimchi  or  Aben  Ezra  would  speedily  undeceive  the 
world.  In  the  mean  while  it  is  hoped  that  the  patient 
reader  of  even  this  specimen,  will  rise  with  a  different 
idea  of  Jewish  talent  and  learning.  It  may  also  facilitate 
the  study  of  Rabbinical  literature  to  some  who  have 
commenced,  and  induce  others  to  begin.  The  controversy 
with  the  Jews  is  an  important  branch  of  Christian  divinity, 
which  is  comparatively  overlooked,  and  cannot  be  effectu- 
ally cultivated  without  some  knowledge  of  the  rabbies, 
It  was  principally  for  the  conversion  of  the  Jews,  that  the 
oriental  professorships  were  determined  on  at  the  Council 
of  Vienna,  in  1311,*  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  those  who 
appreciate  the  value  of  Christianity  now,  will  also  re- 
member that  this  is  one  use  of  knowing  the  original 
language  of  the  Old  Testament.  To  those  whose  other 
avocations  do  not  permit  them  to  study  Rabbinical  writers 
this  translation  may  prove  useful,  especially  as  constant 
regard  has  been  had  to  the  Jewish  controversies,  and  the 
chief  passages  relating  to  the  Messiah  have  been  con- 
sidered, somewhat  at  length,  in  observations  appended  to 
the  chapters  in  which  they  occur. 

The  present  translation  was  made  from  the  text  in 
Buxtorf 's  Bible,  but  it  is  much  to  be  wished  that  one  of 
the  Universities  would  furnish  students  with  a  more 
correct  and  cheaper  edition.  Wolfius  mentions  that  this 
portion  of  Kimchi  was  translated  into  Latin  by  Robert 

*  Gesen.  Geschichte,  p.  104. 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

Neal,  and  published  in  Paris  in  1577?  but  I  have  never 
had  the  good  fortune  to  see  it,  or  I  should  have  gladly 
availed  myself  of  its  assistance.  Buxtorf  's  text  has  been 
compared,  so  far  as  that  abridgement  will  allow,  with 
Solomon  Ben  Melech's  tQV  bbDE  Perfection  of  Beauty, 
and  the  passages  of  the  Talmud,  &c.,  cited  by  Kimchi, 
are  pointed  out  in  the  notes.'  Should  this  specimen  of 
Rabbinic  comment  be  approved  by  students,  the  Trans- 
lator hopes,  at  some  future  period,  to  present  them  with 
another.  The  next  would  probably  be  Saadiah  Gaon's 
Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Daniel,  of  parts  of  which  he 
has  had  a  translation  lying  by  for  some  years.  His  wish, 
however,  would  be,  in  course  of  time,  to  furnish  Kimchi's 
Commentary  on  the  Prophets  complete,  with  observations 
on  all  the  passages  relating  to  the  Messiah.  There  is  in 
English  no  book  that  fully  considers  the  Jewish  objections, 
and  to  meet  this  want  the  Translator  originally  intended 
an  English  translation  of  the  Chizzuk  Emunah,  with  notes. 
But  on  considering  that  a  large  part  of  that  book  is  occu- 
pied with  objections  common  to  all  who  reject  the  New 
Testament,  and  which  have,  therefore,  been  answered 
already  elsewhere ;  and  that  his  interpretation  of  the  pro- 
phecies are  drawn  chiefly  from  Kimchi,  he  thought  that 
the  Commentary  of  the  original  objector  would  be  more 
useful.  But,  perhaps,  he  was  influenced  still  more  by 
the  consideration  that  the  magnitude  of  a  detailed  answer 
to  the  Chizzuk  Emunah  would  make  the  undertaking  too 
great  a  pecuniary  risk. 


ERRATA. 


Page    ,'J,  line  24,  insert  a  dagesh  in  the  *> . 

8,  --   23,  fornpn,  readrng. 

9,  -  -   15,  for  *|Mja,  read  TJ$Q. 

-  55,  —  18,  for  oVcrr,  read  qWv. 

—    ib.,  —  20,  for  ViNfc  ,  Uvice,  read  Vw^ . 

-  56,  —  34,  for  rhj*,  read  rnp$ . 

-  64,  last  line  but  two,  for  vnnnp ,  read  vnrrnp 

-  70,  last  line  but  seven,  for  TW  read  TW. 

-  77,  line  27,  for  rrTO,  read  rrren. 


KIMCHFS 
COMMENTARY  ON   ZECHARIAH. 


CHAPTER  I. 

1  "  In  the  eighth  month,  in  the  second  year  of  Darius, 
was  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Zechariah,  the  son  of 
Berechiah,  the  son  of  Iddo,  the  prophet,  saying" 

"  The  prophet]*  is  to  be  referred  to  Zechariah,  though 
perhaps  Iddo  may  also  have  been  a  prophet,  for  it  is  said 
that  he  is  the  same  as  Iddo,  the  seer.  (2  Chron.  ix.  29.) 
We  have  also  found  in  the  Midrash*  the  words,  "  Iddo, 
the  prophet." 

"  Saying"  to  Israel,  as  is  immediately  added,  "  And 
thou  shalt  say  unto  them."  Say  unto  them,  that  they 
should  remember  the  displeasure  wherewith  the  Lord  was 
displeased  with  the  fathers,  that  is,  with  the  generation 
in  whose  time  the  temple  was  desolated ;  they  should 
also  remember  that  it  was  on  account  of  their  deeds  that 
the  Lord  was  displeased  with  them,  they  should  therefore 
return  to  the  Lord,  and  not  be  like  their  fathers.  They 
were  at  this  time  slothful  in  building  the  temple,  for  they 
did  not  begin  to  build  until  the  ninth  month,  and  evil 
deeds  were  still  in  their  hands,  as  is  written  in  the  book 
of  Ezra. 

*  Medrash,  or  Midrash,  is  the  title  of  several  compilations  of  tra- 
ional  expositions  of  the  Scripture.     The  most  famous  are  the  Midrash 
bba  on  the  Pentateuch,  Esther,  Lamentations,  &c.,  and  the  Midrash 
Irillim  on  the  Psalms. 


KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 


3.  "  Therefore  say."—  This  is  plain. 

4.  "  Be  not:'—  This  is  plain. 

5.  "  Your  fathers,  where  are  they  ?**  —  Do  ye  not  see 
(hat  they  have  been  consumed  by  the  sword,  the  famine, 
and  the  pestilence,  as  the  prophets  said  to  them  ? 

"  And  the  prophets,  do  they  live  for  ever  ?''  The  pro- 
phets, who  reproved  them,  could  they  live  for  ever,  and 
reprove  them  ?  He  reproved  them  already,  and  they  did 
not  hearken.  But  see  how  every  thing  has  happened  to 
them,  as  the  prophets  announced,  and  as  is  said  (in  the 
following  verse),  c(  But  my  words  and  statutes,"  £c. 
Our  Rabbies,  of  blessed  memory,  have  interpreted  *  the 
words,  "The  prophets,  where  are  they,"  as  the  answer 
of  the  people.  They  say  that  the  congregation  of  Israel 
gave  a  controversial  reply  to  the  prophet.  He  said  to 
them,  Return  in  true  repentance,  for  your  fathers  sinned, 
and  where  are  they?  The  people  answered  him,  And 
the  prophets  who  did  not  sin,  where  are  they  ?  But  they 
afterwards  repented  and  made  confession  to  him. 

6.  "  But  my  words  and  statutes"  —  My  statutes,  i.  e. 
my  evil  decrees  which  I  decreed  concerning  them,  that 
they  should  die  by  the  sword,  and  by  famine,  and  by 
pestilence,   and  that  the  survivors   should  be  led  away 
captive,   do   ye  not  see  that   they  have  overtaken  your 
fathers,  and  have  all  come  upon  them,  as  I  commanded 
my  servants  the  prophets  to  announce  to  them  ?  and  they 
themselves  repented  and  confessed  this  in  the  time  of  the 
desolation,  as  is  said  in  the  following  verse,  "  And  they 
returned  and  said." 

7.  "  Upon  the  four^  and  twentieth  day  of  the  eleventh 
month)'  that  is,  the  month  Shevat.  —  As  to  the  names  of 
the  months,  as  they  are  written  in  the  roll  of  Esther,  and 
in  this  book  we  do  not  know  whether  they  are  Chaldee  or 
not,  for  we  do  not  find  them  in  the  other  holy  books. 

"  The  word  of  the  Lord  was  to  Zechariah."  —  An  angel 

*  In  the  Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  105.  1. 


ON    ZECHARIAIT,    CHAP.    I. 

came  to  him,  and  spake  with  him,  and  showed  him  this 
vision,  which  he  is  now  narrating. 

8.  "  /  saw  by  night." — The  visions  of  Zechariah  are 
very  obscure,  like  those  of  Daniel,  but  the  visions  of  the 
other  prophets  are  not  so ;  the  reason  is,  that  the  power 
of  prophecy  had  been  gradually  exhausting  from  the  days 
of  the  captivity ;  therefore,  they  did  not  make  their 
words  clear,  and  did  not  understand  the  visions  as  they 
were.  He  says,  "  I  saw  by  night,"  i.  e.,  in  the  visions 
of  the  night  I  saw  this  vision,  in  which  I  beheld  "  a  man 
riding  upon  a  red  horse."  We  have  found  in  the  words  * 
of  our  rabbies  of  blessed  memory,  the  following  expo- 
sition of  this  verse  : — "  I  saw  in  the  night,  that  the  Holy 
One,  blessed  be  He,  sought  to  turn  the  whole  world  into 
night,  and  behold  a  man  riding.  This  man  is  no  other 
than  the  Holy  One,  blessed  be  He,  for  it  is  said,  (  The 
Lord  is  a  man  of  war.'  f  c  Upon  a  red  horse.'  The  Holy 
One,  blessed  be  He,  sought  to  turn  the  whole  world  into 
blood,  but  when  he  looked  upon  Hannaniah,  Mishael,  and 
Azariah,  his  anger  was  cooled,  for  it  is  said,  '  And  he 
stood  among  the  myrtle-trees,  D>E)%!n.  (hadassim.')  The 
myrtle- trees  can  mean  nothing  else  but  the  righteous,  for 
it  is  said,  '  He  brought  up  Hadassah.'  J  (Esther  ii.  70 
In  like  manner,  *  In  the  bottom,'  nb^E2,  means  nothing 
else  but  Babylon,  for  it  is  said,  cThat  saith  to  the 
deep,  nb^2,  be  dry.'  (Isaiah  xliv.  27.)  Immediately  the 
black  horses  became  speckled,  and  the  red  horses  white, 
for  it  is  said,  (  And  behind  him  red  horses,  speckled  and 
white.'  (Verse  8.)"  But  we  shall  endeavour  to  interpret 
the  vision  as  well  as  we  can. 

•  Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  93,  col.  1. 

t  This  is  a  remarkable  testimony  to  the  belief  of  the  ancient  Jews, 
that  He,  who  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  man,  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord, 
was  the  God  of  Israel. 

£  Esther's  name  xvas  Hadassah,  a  myrtle-tree,  and  as  she  was  righteous, 
the  rabbies  conclude  that  "myrtle-trees"  in  Zechariah,  also  stands  for 
righteous  persons. 

n2 


4  KIMCHIS    COMMENTARY 

"  A  man." — That  is,  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  as  in  Dan. 
ix.  21 ,  "  The  man  Gabriel;  "  and  so  we  read  further  on, 
"  The  angel  of  the  Lord  that  stood  between  the  myrtle- 
trees."  He  saw  him  riding  upon  a  horse,  to  denote  his 
speed  in  embassy.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  red,'* 
and  the  other  colours,  it  may  be  that  some  definite  meaning 
was  intended  by  them ;  and  my  lord  my  father,  of  blessed 
memory,  has  written,  that  the  red  horse  is  typical  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  who  is  called  the  head  of  gold,  and 
gold  is  red;  for  this  prophecy  refers  to  the  four  king- 
doms, like  the  dream  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  visions 
of  Daniel.  And  although  the  horses  figuratively  re- 
present the  angels  the  messengers  of  God,  there  is,  ne- 
vertheless, a  reference  to  the  four  kingdoms.  The  vision 
of  "  a  man  riding,"  signifies  that  the  angels  rule  over 
the  lower  world,  and  that  all  the  work  of  God  on  earth 
is  done  by  them  and  through  their  mediation.  The  object 
of  the  man's  mission  was  to  root  up  the  kingdom  of 
Babylon ;  and  although  at  the  time  of  this  vision  the 
Babylonian  monarchy  had  been  already  rooted  out,  the 
vision  was  exhibited  to  him  complete,  as  it  had  been,  on 
account  of  the  three  kingdoms  that  were  still  future.  The 
vision  happened  in  the  time  of  the  Persian  monarchy,  as 
is  said,  "  In  the  second  year  of  Darius." 

"  And  he  stood  amongst  the  myrtle-trees  that  were  in 
the  bottom." — These  signify  Israel,  and  he  compares 
them  to  myrtle-trees ;  for  as  these  have  a  good  odour,  so 
the  Israelites  in  Babylon  had  the  good  odour  of  the  com- 
mandments. He  is  represented  as  standing  among  them 
to  help  them,  and  deliver  them  from  captivity. 

"  In  the  bottom"— This  is  Babylon. 

"  And  behind  him  red  horses,  specified  and  white." — 
"  Speckled,"  a  species  of  colour,  but  what  colour  is  not 
clear  to  us.  There  are  some  who  say,  that  it  means, 
coloured  with  colouring  stuff,  but  this  is  nonsense.  The 
speckled  horses  in  this  vision,  are  instead  of  the  black 


CHAP.    I.  5 

horses  in  the  other  vision  of  the  four  chariots.  (Chap,  vi.) 
The  Targum  of  Jonathan  renders  "  speckled"  by  JVinD, 
and  according  to  another  reading,  ^rmp>  "  bay."  *  So 
far  as  appears,  these  horses  had  no  riders  upon  them :  he 
that  was  riding  was  the  prince  or  captain  over  the  other 
angels,  and  therefore  he  saw  him  riding.  "  And  behind 
him  red  horses." — If  we  interpret  "  a  red  horse,"  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, then  we  should  interpret  the  "  red  horses," 
of  his  son  and  grandson ;  and,  behold  !  these  answer  to 
the  first  chariot  (in  chap.  vi.).  "  Speckled  and  white.'" 
As  if  he  had  said.  Behind  them  were  speckled  horses, 
and  behind  them  again  white.  And,  behold !  he  does 
not  mention  any  thing  to  answer  to  the  fourth  chariot, 
for  he  did  not  see  it  in  this  vision,  on  account  of  its 
distance,  but  in  the  other  vision  he  did  see  it. 

9.  "  And  I  said he  that  spake  with  ?ne,  said." 

— This  answers  ,to  what  is  said  above,  "  The  word  of  the 
Lord  was  to  Zechariah." 

"  I  will  show  thee"  (literally,  I  will  cause  thee  to  see). 
— He  ought  to  have  said,  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear,  for  he 
did  not  show  him  any  thing  more  than  the  vision  of  the 
horses,  which  he  had  shown  him  from  the  beginning.  "  I 
will  show  thee,"  may  mean,  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear ; 
for  the  sense  of  seeing  is  employed  figuratively  for  the 
other  senses,  as  it  is  said,  "  And  all  the  people  sa\v  the 
thunderings."  (Exod.  xx.  18.)  "  See  the  smell  of  my 
son."  (Gen.  xxvii.  27.)  But  the  literal  interpretation  of 
"  I  will  show  thee,"  is  also  good,  for  it  may  refer  to  the 
other  vision  of  the  four  horns,  which  is  clearer  than  this, 
though  he  did  not  understand  it  until  it  was  explained  to 
him. 

10.  "  And  he  answered.'3     He  that  was  riding  upon  the 
horse. — The  prophet  heard  the  angel  riding  on  the  horse 
answer,  although  he  had  not  asked  him  anything;  and 
he  said  to  him,  These  horses  arc  the  messengers  of  God, 

*  This  is  the  present  reading. 


O  KIMCHI  S    COMMENTARY 

whom  he  hath  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth, 
in  the  same  way  as  Satan  said,  "  From  going  to  and  fro  in 
the  earth,  and  from  walking  up  and  down  in  it."  (Job  i.  7-) 
But,  perhaps,  the  angel  that  was  riding,  did  not  answer 
the  prophet  at  all,  but  the  word  "  answer,"  is  to  be  taken, 
as  in  Deut.  xxvi.  5,  "  Thou  shalt  answer,  and  say ; " 
and  again,  in  Job  iii.  2,  "  And  Job  answered  and  said," 
where  it  occurs  the  first  time.  And  then  the  sense  may 
be,  that  the  prophet  heard  the  rider  on  the  horse  speaking 
to,  and  asking  those  horses,  which  the  Lord  had  sent  to 
walk  to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  what  was  the  state  of 
the  earth :  *  and  they  answered  and  said,  "  We  have 
walked  to  and  fro  through  the  earth,  and  have  seen  it 
sitting  still,  and  at  rest."  "  These,"  may  signify  "  to 
these;"  and  thus  (the  preposition  is  omitted  in  the  fol- 
lowing cases),  "  One  told  David,  saying,  Ahitophel  is 
among  the  conspirators."  Here  David  is  the  same  as  "  to 
David."  (2  Sam.  xv.  31.)  And  again,  "  And  two  men, 
captains  of  bands,  were  the  son  of  Saul,"  i.  e.,  to  the 
son  of  Saul;  and  there  are  other  similar  passages. 

1 1 .  "  And  they  answered." — This  is  plain. 

"  Sitteth  still9  and  is  at  rest"  i.  e.,  We  have  seen  the 
peace  of  the  Gentile  nations,  and  Israel  in  trouble,  there- 
fore the  angel  answered  and  said,  "  How  long  wilt  thou 
not  have  mercy  upon  Jerusalem  ?  " 

12.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  answered"  i.  e.,  either 
he  who  was  standing  among  the  myrtle-trees,  who  was 
for  the  help  of   Israel,  or  the  angel   that  was  speaking 

*  Kimchi  thinks,  for  certain  reasons  which  he  immediately  subjoins, 
that  the  Hebrew  words  may  also  be  translated  thus,  "  The  man  that  stood 
between  the  myrtle-trees  answered  and  said  to  those  whom  the  Lord 
sent  forth  to  walk  through  the  earth."  But  though  he  shows  that,  in 
some  other  cases,  the  preposition  "to"  is  omitted,  this  translation 
cannot  be  justified ;  first,  because  the  Athnach  under  "rafri  separates  it 
from  n)«j  and,  secondly,  because  after  the  verb  "VON,  the  words  spoken 
almost  always  follow,  which  is  not  the  case  here. 


ON     ZKCIIAUIAH,    CHAP.    I,  / 

with  the  prophet ;  mid  this  last  is  the  true  (inter- 
pretation).* 

"  How  long  wilt  thou  not  have  mercy  upon  Jerusalem  ?" 
— As  long  as  the  Gentile  nations  are  at  rest,  (Israel) 
cannot  go  forth  from  captivity,  nor,  until  the  destruction 
of  Babylon.  And,  behold!  the  subject  of  this  vision  was 
long  past  at  the  time  when  he  saw  it;  but  the  angel 
shows  him  the  past,  in  order  to  let  him  see  that  the 
prosperity  of  Babylon  and  its  desolation  were  all  from 
God,  blessed  be  He,  through  the  mediation  of  the  con- 
ducting angels,t  and  that  they  were  employed  in  pro- 
moting the  welfare  of  Israel ;  and  that  the  three  remaining 
kingdoms  and  their  fall  should  also  be  from  God,  according 
to  what  he  had  shown  him  of  the  Babylonian  monarchy, 
which  was  past. 

"  dgainst  which  thou  hast  had  just  indignation  these 
threescore  and  ten  years." — If  these  words  refer  to  the 
past,  as  we  have  interpreted,  then  the  seventy  years  refer 
to  the  kingdom  of  Babylon,  and  the  indignation  was  that 
which  existed  during  the  whole  time  of  Nebuchadnezzar. 
Or,  the  seventy  years  may  have  been  mentioned  in  re- 
ference to  the  time  of  the  vision,  which  was  in  the  second 
year  of  Darius;  at  which  time  the  seventy  years  were 
complete  for  the  desolation  of  Jerusalem.  For  although 
this  vision  was  in  the  month  Shevat,]:  and  they  had  begun 
to  build  in  Kislev,  §  nevertheless  the  indignation  still 
continued,  and  during  all  the  time  of  the  building  the 
city,  they  were  at  war  with  their  enemies. 

*  Kimchi  is  here  wrong  in  supposing  that  the  angel  who  spake  with 
Xechariah  is  called  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord."  But  this  interpretation, 
though  wrong,  is  very  important,  as  showing  Kimchi's  decided  opinion, 
that  the  angel  who  stood  among  the  myrtle-trees,  is  not  identical  with 
the  angelus  interpres  who  speaks  with  him.  (Compare  Hengsben- 
's  Christologie,  part  ii.,  p.  22.) 

f  Compare  what  is  said  in  verse  8,  and  also  chap.  ii.  :},  ami  the 
note. 

\  About  our  January.  \  -out  our  November. 


8  KIMCHl's   COMMENTARY,   &C. 

13.  "  And  the  Lord  answered  ....  words,  comforts," 
D^arp  D'Ha^. — The  governing  word  is  omitted.     The  ab- 
solute form  E^yi,  is  to  be  interpreted  as  if  it  were  ^5^. 
D^n?,  "  words  of  comfort ; "  or  D^^J3   may  be  an  ad- 
jective, and  this  is  the  fact.* 

14.  "  And  the  angel  said  to  me"  —The  good  words 
which  God,  blessed  be  He,  spake  to  him,  he  spake  to 
me,  that  I  might  proclaim  them  in  the  ears  of  Israel  to 
comfort  them. 

15.  "  /  am  sore  displeased  heathen  at  ease" 

that  is,  as  is  said  above,  "  Sitteth  still,  and  is  at  rest." 

"  I  was  a  little  displeased" — I  was  a  little  displeased 
with  Israel,  so  as  to  carry  them  captive  from  their  land, 
and  this  word,  a  "  little/'  is  put  in  contrast  to  what  they 
(the  Gentiles)  had  done  to  Israel  after  their  captivity. 

c(  Helped  fonvard  the  affliction  "  by  doing  them  evil, 
more  than  enough,  and  so  it  is  said  in  Isaiah,  "  I  was 
wroth  with  my  people,  I  profaned  my  inheritance,  and 
delivered  them  into  thy  hand,  but  thou  showedst  them  no 
mercy ;  upon  the  ancient  hast  thou  heavily  laid  thy 
yoke."  (Isaiah  xlvii.  6.) 

16.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord" and  a  line 

nj?')'],  the  Kethib  has  a  n  at  the  end,  like  ro.3  (a  dwelling). 
The  Keri  is  without  the  n  (ip).     The  word  signifies  a 
building  line,  a  cord,  which  they  stretch  over  the  row  of 
bricks. 

17.  "  Cry   yet through  good  shall  be   spread 

abroad" — On   account  of  the   abundance   of  good  and 
prosperity  that   they   shall   have,   they  shall   be   spread 
abroad ;  that  is  to  say,  the  inhabited  part  shall  increase. 
En?*]  has  pathach,  and  is  from  a  dageshed  conjugation. f 

*  And  so  our  translators  have  rendered  it.  Michaelis,  in  the  notes  to 
his  Hebrew  Bible,  leaves  the  matter  doubtful.  Gesenius,  in  his  Lexicon, 
decides  that  D^na  is  a  substantive,  and  refers  to  Isaiah  Ivii.  18; 
V?  D'nnp  DVcw,  "And  I  will  restore  comforts  unto  him."  To  which  opinion 
Rosenmiiller  also  subscribes  in  his  Scholia.  The  Septuagint  agrees  with 
Kimchi  and  the  English ;  it  has  Aoyovs 

t  It  is  Pihel. 


9 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  CHAPTER  I. 

mrp  "[Mbtt,  TUB  ANGEL,  OR  MESSENGER  OF  THE  LORD. 


FROM  Kimchi's  commentary  on  the  8th  and  12th 
verses  of  this  chapter,  it  appears  that  he  considered  the 
person  designated  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord/'  as  nothing 
more  than  one  of  the  many  angels  to  whom  he  supposes 
that  the  governance  and  guidance  of  this  lower  world  is 
committed.  It  has  been  repeatedly  proved  by  Christian 
writers  that  this  Being  is  none  other  than  the  Son  of 
God.  The  latest  writers  in  this  country  are  Mr.  Faber 
in  his  "  Horae  Mosaicae,"*  and  Dr.  Pye  Smith,  in  his 
work  on  the  Messiah;  but  as  their  works  were  not  written 
with  a  special  reference  to  the  Jewish  controversy,  and  as 
the  question  is  one  of  general  importance,  it  may  not  be 
out  of  place  to  offer  a  few  remarks  on  the  character  of 
the  angel  or  messenger  of  the  Lord. 

Kimchi  evidently  took  the  word  *!*&*?,  as  signifying 
"  angel,"  and  therefore  decides  that  he  is  one  of  that  class 
of  heavenly  beings  commonly  designated  by  that  name. 
But  the  first  and  original  meaning  of  the  word  is  "  mes- 
senger," in  which  sense  it  is  frequently  applied  to  men  as 
well  as  to  heavenly  beings.  In  Gen.  xxxii.  I.  3  (Heb. 
ii.  4)  it  occurs  in  both  senses.  "  And  Jacob  went  on  his 
way,  and  the  angels  of  God,  D^nb^  <*3&h'Q9  met  him." 
"  And  Jacob  sent  messengers,  O^M^E,  before  him  to  Esau 
his  brother."  The  word  itself,  therefore,  decides  nothing 
as  to  the  nature  of  the  messenger  ;  so  far  as  that  is  con- 
cerned, he  may  be  a  man,  or  he  may  be  a  heavenly  being, 
but  if  a  heavenly  being,  it  decides  nothing  as  to  the  order 
to  which  he  belongs,  whether  to  the  living  creatures  de- 

*  Not  having  access  to  this  work,  I  cannot  give  the  reference.  Dr. 
Pye  Smith  treats  this  subject  in  vol.  i.  pp.  333. 


10  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    I. 

scribed   in  Ezekiel,   or   to  the  Seraphim   mentioned   in 
Isaiah,  or  to  others. 

The  next  question  is,  How  are  the  two  words  njrp  "t 
to  be  translated  ?  Some  Christians  wish  to  translate 
"  The  angel  Jehovah."  But  this  is  plainly  against  the 
punctuation,  and  if  persons  pretend  to  disregard  the 
points,  then  we  must  add  against  the  consonants  also. 
If  the  two  words  are  to  be  taken  in  apposition,  without 
regard  to  the  points,  the  translation  must  be  "  An  angel 
or  a  messenger,  Jehovah."  If  TfW^p  were  used  in  the 
absolute  form  with  reference  to  THE  LORD,  we  should 
expect  that  it  would  have  the  article  n  before  it,  as 
TH?  has  uniformly,  so  that  the  form  7'™vf,  the  Lord,  is 
never  applied  to  any  created  being.  Besides,  the  words 
do  occur  in  Scripture  elsewhere,  where  njrp  must  be 
taken  as  the  genitive  case,  as  "  The  priest's  lips  should 
keep  knowledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his 
mouth,  fcWl  rvisnrnjrp  TJS^  '?,  for  he  is  the  mes- 
senger of  the  Lord  of  Hosts."  (Mai.  iii.  7.) 

The  modern  Jews,  on  the  other  hand,  translate  "  An 
angel  of  the  Lord,"  and  in  this  our  translators  have 
occasionally  followed  them,  as  in  Judges  ii.  1,  "  An 
angel  of  the  Lord,  rnrv  fWbEj  came  up  from  Gilgal :  " 
but  there  is  nothing  in  the  words  to  compel  us  to  adopt 
this  translation.  As  far  as  they  are  concerned,  we  may 
with  equal  propriety  translate  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord." 
It  cannot  be  urged  that  'JjrfpB  has  not  got  the  article,  for 
it  is  in  regimen,  and  the  general  rule  is,  that  nouns  in 
regimen  do  not  take  the  article,  but  are  made  definite  by 
the  following  genitive,  and  the  Jews  themselves  will 
admit  that  bsntp'i  >n'b^  must  be  translated  "  The  God 
of  Israel;"  and  fi??n  "in,  "The  mountain  of  the  house ; ' 
mYn  b^n,  «  The  temple  of  the  Lord."  It  is  true  that 
in  this  case  the  general  rule  is,  that  the  definite  article 
should  be  prefixed  to  the  genitive ;  but  here  that  cannot 
be  the  case,  for  Hirr*  never,  in  any  case,  receives  an 


THE    ANGEL    OF    TIJE    LORD.  11 

article.  Suppose,  then,  that  the  sacred  writers  wished  to 
express  that  njrp  IT^P  is  to  be  translated  definitely, 
"  The  angel  of  the  Lord/'  what  means  could  they  have 
taken  ?  They  could  not  have  put  the  article  before 
^T^P^j  for  that  would  have  made  "  The  angel  Jehovah." 
They  could  not  prefix  it  to  n*jn?,  for,  as  we  have  said, 
that  does  not  admit  of  it.  There  remained  one  other 
course  possible,  and  that  was,  never  to  use  the  expression 
in  the  plural  of  angels,  but  always  in  the  singular,  so  as 
to  indicate  that  one  person,  and  one  only,  is  intended. 
But  have  they  done  this  ?  Yes,  uniformly:  in  the  whole 
Bible,  and  in  the  great  variety  of  styles  which  occurs,  we 
never  once  find  the  expression  Him.  \?^B,  "  Angels  of 
the  Lord,"  but  uniformly  the  singular,  nirp  TJSibtt,  to 
point  out  that  there  is  only  one  of  heavenly  beings  to 
whom  this  title  belongs.  It  would  be  folly,  or  something 
worse,  to  say  that  this  is  fortuitous.  The  uniformity  of  the 
practice  by  all  the  sacred  writers  implies  design,  and 
teaches  that  there  is  but  one  person  thus  called,  and  that 
therefore  the  true  translation  is,  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord." 
The  only  plausible  objection  that  can  be  urged  is,  that 
though  we  do  not  find  in  the  plural  "  The  angels  of  the 
Lord,"  we  do  find  the  expression,  "  Angels  of  God/'  We 
might  urge  in  reply,  that  there  is  a  great  difference 
between  the  words  D>nb«  and  Him?  but  this  is  not  ne- 
cessary, as  this  very  objection  will  serve  as  an  additional 
confirmation  to  the  foregoing  argument.  We  have  already 
said,  that  a  word  governing  a  genitive  case  docs  not  take 
the  article,  and  that  the  rule  therefore  is,  if  the  article  is 
wanted,  to  prefix  it  to  the  genitive  case,  if  the  genitive  be 
a  word  that  admits  of  the  article.  Now  DTib$  is  a 
word  that  admits  the  article.  When,  therefore,  the  sacred 
writers  wished  to  say  definitely  "  The  angel  of  God," 
they  could  express  it  by  D^ribwn  TJN^tt,  and  this  they 
have  done,  as  in  Cen.  xx.xi.  11,  "  And  the  angel  of  (iod. 
C^H'Vgn  Tjsbp,  spake  unto  me  in  a  dream."  And  again, 


12  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    I. 

in  Exod.  xiv.  19,  "  And  the  angel  of  God, 
which  went  before  the  camp/'  &c. ;  and  so  in  very  many 
other  cases.  As,  therefore,  when  they  wished  to  use  a 
definite  expression,  they  had  it  in  their  power,  it  was  not 
necessary  to  confine  the  expression,  "  Angel  of  God,"  to 
the  singular.  But  now  mark  the  care  and  accuracy  of 
the  sacred  writers ;  when  they  use  angels  of  God  in  the 
plural,  they  do  not  use  the  article  before  DTTb$  :  that  is, 
they  do  not  make  it  definite.  It  occurs  only  twice  in  the 
Bible,  but  each  time  without  the  article.  First,  in  Jacob's 
dream  of  the  ladder,  "  And,  behold,  angels  of  God 
D^n'b^  ^bp,  ascending  and  descending  on  it."  (Genesis 
xxviii.  12.)  And  again  in  the  instance  quoted  above, 
"  And  Jacob  went  on  his  way,  and  angels  of  God, 
nrrrb^  ^W^E,  met  him."  (Genesis  xxxii.  1,  Hebrew  2.) 
This  expression,  therefore,  "  Angels  of  God,"  is  so  far 
from  weakening  our  former  argument,  that  it  shows  us 
that  there  is  one  peculiar  being,  who  is  distinguished 
from  all  other  heavenly  beings,  by  the  title,  "  The  angel 
of  the  Lord; "  and  that,  therefore,  the  analogy  of  Scrip- 
ture confirms  us  in  the  faith,  that  there  is  only  one  person 
who  is  called  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord." 

It  may  be  thought  needful  to  prove  that  He  who  is 
called  '*  The  angel  of  the  Lord,"  is  identical  with 
him  who  is  named  a  The  angel  of  God ; "  but  this  is 
easily  done.  In  Judges  vi.  20,  21,  we  find  both  ex- 
pressions indifferently  applied  to  one  and  the  same  person, 
ce  And  the  angel  of  God  said  unto  him,  Take  the  flesh 
and  the  unleavened  cakes,  and  lay  them  upon  this  rock, 
and  pour  the  broth.  And  he  did  so.  Then  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  put  forth  the  end  of  his  staff,"  &c.  And  again, 
Judges  xiii.  3 — 9,  "  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared 

unto  the  woman And  God  hearkened  to  the  voice 

of  Manoah ;  and  the  angel  of  God  came  again  unto  the 
woman."  Here  the  identity  is  fully  proved,  and  we  have 
got  thus  far  in  our  inquiry,  that  there  is  but  one  heavenly 


THE  ANGEL  OF  THE  LORD.  13 

being  who  is  called  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord"  and  "  The 
angel  of  God,"  and  consequently  that  He  is  some  way 
peculiar  from  those  other  heavenly  beings,  who  have  not 
these  titles,  but  are  called  "  Angels  of  God."  Wherein 
that  peculiarity  consists,  we  now  proceed  to  inquire. 

It  is  not  possible  in  the  limited  space,  to  which  we  pro- 
pose to  extend  these  observations,  to  go  through  all  the 
passages  on  this  subject,  we,  therefore,  select  a  few  plain 
ones,  sufficient  to  establish  what  is  advanced.  The  first 
peculiarity,  then,  in  the  character  of  this  personage  is, 
that  he  is  called  by  the  proper  name  of  God,  nirp.  We 
read  in  the  law,  that  He  appeared  to  Hagar,  when  she 
fled  from  her  mistress ;  and  after  relating  the  vision,  the 
the  sacred  history  adds,  "  And  she  called  the  name  of  the 
LORD,  nirp,  who  spake  with  her,"  so  that  He  who  was 
before  called  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  is  here  called  Jehovah. 
Rashi,  Aben  Ezra,  Solomon  ben  Melech,  and  Nachmanides, 
all  pass  this  over  in  silence.  Individual  Jews  to  whom 
I  have  proposed  the  passage,  have  almost  always  replied, 
that  Hagar  was  mistaken,  and  from  ignorance  applied  the 
name  Jehovah  to  the  angel.  But  this  is  not  the  fact, 
Hagar  did  not  call  the  angel  Jehovah ;  she  called  him 
^•n  btf,  or  as  our  translation  has  it,  "  Thou  God  seest  me." 
It  is  the  historian,  in  the  course  of  his  narrative,  who 
applies  to  the  angel  the  name  Jehovah,  and  this  is 
acknowledged  by  Abarbanel,  who  says  that  this  is  an 
exceedingly  difficult  passage,  particularly  "  Because  the 
peculiar  name  of  God  is  employed,  '  She  called  the  name 
of  the  LORD  who  spake  with  her ; '  and  how  can  it 
possibly  be,  that  the  First  Cause,  blessed  be  He,  should 
speak  with  Hagar ;  when  the  law  itself  testifies  and  says, 
that  it  was  the  angel  of  the  Lord  who  appeared  unto  her, 
and  not  the  Lord  himself?"  A  little  lower  down  He 
gives  his  solution  of  the  difficulty  thus ;  "  The  right 
answer  here  is,  that  all  prophetic  vision,  whether  mediate 
or  immediate,  is  always  attributed  to  God,  blessed  be  He, 


14  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    I. 

for  it  is  from  Him  and  by  His  will,  and  on  this  account 
also  the  Messenger  is  sometimes  called  by  the  name  of 
Him  that  sends  him.  In  this  point  of  view  it  is  that  the 
Scripture  here  says,  '  And  she  called  the  name  of  the 
LORD  that  spake  to  her/"  (Abarbanel  in  loc.)*  His 
solution  we  shall  consider  presently,  but  now  only  remark 
that  he  admits  that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  is  here  called 
Jehovah,  and  proceed 

To  take  a  similar  instance  from  the  historical  books. 
In  the  Book  of  Judges,  vi.  11,  we  read  that  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  appeared  to  Gideon.  At  verse  14,  we  suddenly 
find  this  person  called  Jehovah  the  LORD.  "  And  the 
LORD,  rnrP>  looked  upon  him,  and  said.  Go  in  this  thy 
might."  And  again,  verse  16,  "  And  the  LORD,  JTKT 
said  unto  him,  Surely  I  will  be  with  thee."  We  refer  to 
this  passage,  because  the  fact  is  admitted  by  the  rabbies. 
Kimchi  says,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  last  quoted 
verse,  "  In  the  words,  '  The  LORD  said  unto  him,'  the 
angel  is  called  by  the  name  of  the  Lord,  as  is  the  case 
also  with  the  angel  who  appeared  to  Joshua,  of  whom  it 
is  written,  (  And  the  LORD,  nw»  sa^  unto  Joshua/" 
(Josh.  vi.  2.)f  And  in  this  passage  of  Joshua  to  which  he 
refers,  he  says,  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  that  is, 
through  the  angel  who  appeared  to  him,  and  he  is  called 
by  the  name  of  the  LORD  who  sent  him.  And  we  find  a 
similar  instance  in  the  angel  who  appeared  to  Gideon, 
of  whom  it  is  written,  '  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him, 
Surely,  I  will  be  with  thee/  Our  rabbies  of  blessed 
memory  have  said,  '  My  name  is  in  him/  R.  Simeon  ben 
Lakish  says,  e  This  teaches  us,  that  the  Holy  One,  blessed 
be  He,  associates  his  name  to  each  of  the  angels."  J  We 


*  Edit.  Venice,  1584,  fol.  61,  col.  4. 

rwruw       m  airow  TOD  '«  orca  "juton  *np  '«  vto  iwi  ^QWD  noi  f 


i  WIN  nViton  V  atm  «TJ»  ^im  ^  wwr  •Ntorr  v$  S"cnrr  to  '» 


THE    ANGEL    OF    THE    LORD.  15 

have  here  the  same  admission  made,  and  the  same  solution 
proposed,  as  in  the  former  case  by  Abarbanel. 

We  now  take  a  similar  instance  from  the  prophets. 
In  the  third  chapter  of  Zechariah,  Joshua  the  high-priest, 
is  represented  as  standing  before  the  angel  of  the  Lord, 
and  then  it  is  added,  "  And  the  LORD,  nins  said  unto 
Satan,  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  'O  Satan."  The  person 
called  in  the  first  verse  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  is  in  the 
second  verse  called  the  LORD,  as  Kimchi  himself  ac- 
knowledges ;  "  This  is  said  of  the  angel,  who  is  called  by 
the  name  of  his  master,  and  so  in  the  history  of  Gideon, 
and  other  places." 

From  these  three  passages,  selected  from  the  law,  the 
historical  books,  and  the  Prophets,  it  appears,  that  the 
Being  designated  by  the  title  "  The  angel  of  the  Lord," 
is  also  called  niTTS  Jehovah,  the  proper  name  of  God; 
and  from  the  Rabbinical  .  Commentaries  it  appears,  that 
this  inference  is  not  peculiar  to  Christians,  nor  forced 
from  the  text  in  order  to  suit  their  doctrinal  views,  but 
that  those  rabbies  who  made  it  their  peculiar  care  to 
overthrow  every  interpretation  favourable  to  Christianity, 
were  nevertheless  constrained  by  the  plainness  and  fre- 
quency of  such  passages,  to  come  to  the  same  conclusion. 
They  did  not  make  this  admission  in  ignorance,  they 
evidently  foresaw  the  use  that  would  be  made  of  it,  and, 
therefore,  endeavour  to  guard  against  it  by  saying,  "  that 
the  messenger  is  called  by  the  name  of  Him  that  sends 
him."  But  this  explanation,  taken  as  a  general  assertion, 
is,  in  the  first  place,  contrary  to  fact.  In  the  eighth  and 
ninth  chapters  of  Daniel,  an  angel  is  sent  to  Daniel,  but 
he  is  not  called  by  the  name  of  Him  that  sent  him,  but 
is  called  Gabriel.  In  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah  we 
read  of  many  angels  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  These  are  they 


inpa  ram  »a  V'n  w»n  -pr  rrrw  o  '»  vte  no»n  pnri  rwram 

to  Vy  lorc  rpco  n3"prrcj  -ratio  srp1?  p  prow 


16  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    I. 

whom  the  Lord  hath  sent  to  walk  to  and  fro  through  the 
earth,"  but  they  are  not  called  by  the  name  of  their  Lord. 
In  like  manner  Isaiah  saw  an  angel  sent  to  him  to  remove 
his  iniquity,  but  this  angel  is  not  called  by  the  name  of 
his  master,  but  "  one  of  the  Seraphim."  In  the  second 
place,  if  taken  with  special  reference  to  the  particular 
case  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  this  explanation  is  no  ex- 
planation at  all,  but  a  mere  identical  proposition  in  some- 
what different  words.  When  I  say  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
is  called  Jehovah,  what  else  is  intended  but  this,  "  That 
the  messenger  is  called  by  the  name  of  Him  that  sends 
him  ?  "  This  last  sentence  is,  therefore,  no  explanation  of 
the  first,  and  still  less  a  removal  of  the  difficulty.  The 
difficulty  is.  why,  for  what  reasons  is  the  Messenger  called 
by  the  name  of  Him  who  sends  him  ?  If  this  were  the 
universal  practice,  if  every  angel  were  called  Jehovah,  we 
might  say,  it  is  the  style  of  Scripture  to  ascribe  the 
peculiar  name  of  God  to  all  his  messengers,  but  this 
cannot  be  pretended.  There  are  many  instances  where 
the  angels  have  no  names,  and  others,  where  a  peculiar 
name  is  ascribed ;  the  question  then  is,  Why  is  the  angel 
of  the  Lord  called  by  His  name?  And  this  question 
acquires  double  force  from  what  we  have  proved  above, 
that  there  is  but  one  Being  who  is  called  the  Angel  of  the 
Lord,  or  The  Angel  of  God.  Why,  then,  is  this  one 
individual  called  by  that  august  name,  Jehovah,  and  the 
others  not?  And,  observe,  that  it  has  not  only  been 
proved  from  the  Scripture  that  the  name  Jehovah  is 
ascribed  to  only  one  angel,  but  that  it  can  be  proved 
also  that  this  was  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  Jews.  The 
Talmud  has  the  following  passage,  "  The  same  heretic 
said  to  Rav  Idith,  It  is  written, f  And  he  said  unto  Moses, 
Come  up  unto  the  LORD  '  (Exod.  xxiv.  1),  but  it  ought 
to  have  been  written,  '  Come  up  unto  me/  The  rabbi 
answered,  The  speaker  here  is  Metatron,  whose  name 


THE  ANGEL  OF  THE  LORD.  17 

is  the  same  as  that  of  his  master,  for  it  is  written,  '  For 
my  name  is  in  him/  (Exod.  xxiii.  21.)  "*  This  passage 
is  obviously  the  source  whence  Kimchi  and  Abarbanel 
borrowed  the  above  explanation,  but  here  the  explanation 
is  not  general,  applying  to  all  angels,  but  only  to  one, 
whose  name  is  Metatron.  And  the  occasion  of  this  reply 
plainly  shows  that  the  other  opinion,  that  the  name 
Jehovah  is  ascribed  indiscriminately  to  all  angels  was 
then  unknown,  for,  if  it  had  been,  it  would  have  been  a 
more  plausible  answer  to  the  heretic's  objection.  The 
real  difficulty,  therefore,  remains  in  all  its  force,  why 
is  the  peculiar  and  proper  name  of  God  applied  to  the 
angel  of  the  Lord  ? 

That  there  is  in  the  name  niPTS  Jehovah,  a  peculiarity 
which  distinguishes  it  from  all  the  other  names  of  God, 
is  expressly  asserted  by  God  himself,  and  is  the  uniform 
doctrine  both  of  Jews  and  Christians.     God  says, 
*£t£?  «s»n  nirn  ^ 

"  I  am  Jehovah  ;  that  is  my  name  :  and  my  glory  will 
I  not  give  to  another,  neither  my  praise  to  graven 
images"  (Isaiah  xlii.  8);  which  Kimchi  thus  paraphrases, 
"  That  is  my  name,  which  is  appropriated  to  myself 
alone,  not  like  the  name  of  the  graven  images  ;  for 
although  their  worshippers  associate  them  with  me  in  the 
application  of  the  name  DTxbfc?,  God,  they  cannot  as- 
sociate them  with  me  in  this  name  ;  for  I  am  Lord  over 
all."  f  Again  we  read  in  Hosea  xii.  5,  (Heb.  6), 


<4  Even  Jehovah  the  God  of  Hosts  ;  Jehovah  is  his 
memorial."  Upon  which  passage  Kimchi  speaks  still 
more  decidedly  in  the  following  words  :  "  Although  he 


N  rrto  'n  •?«  rrto  -no«  mro  b«i  rro 
Sanhedrim,  fol.  38,  col.  2.  —  i  impa  TD«?  '3  UTOI  in  D«?3  vow?  pi-^o  im 
cur:  "or  cm«  iDnnur  Drr-niyrc  'D  to  ^N  n^ccn  nrcs  vb  ^  -rmtsn  nat?  wn  f 
•  ton  to  piM  Min  '3«  >3  DOT  nm  *M?  ccnt^  itov  «Vi  '-nS* 
c 


18  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  I. 

was  revealed  to  your  fathers  in  the  name  God  Almighty, 
saying  to  him,  '  I  am  God  Almighty,  increase  and  mul- 
tiply '  (Gen.  xxxv.  11);  yet  to  Moses  he  renewed  his 
fearful  name,  and  all  this  for  your  sakes,  by  means  of  it 
to  renew  signs  and  wonders,  to  bring  you  forth  from 
slavery  to  liberty,  and  this-  new  name  is  Jehovah,  mrp, 
and  he  is  the  God  of  Hosts.  God  of  Hosts  expresses 
that  degree,  in  which  stand  the  angels,  and  the  orbs  with 
their  stars,  for  in  the  names  btf  and  n^H'b^,  he  (God)  is 
associated  with  them  ;  but  in  this  name  He  is  associated 
with  none  but  himself."  *  These  two  passages  show  that 
Jehovah  is  the  proper  name  of  God,  and  that  this  was 
Kimchi's  decided  opinion.  His  Comment  on  the  last 
passage  shows,  how  little  he  believed  in  his  own  ex- 
planation, "  that  the  messenger  is  called  by  the  name  of 
Him  that  sends  him,"  for  he  plainly  says,  that  in  the 
name  Jehovah  God  has  no  partner  whatever.  But  this 
opinion  is  not  peculiar  to  Kimchi,  it  is  the  ancient  and 
received  Jewish  doctrine.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  the 
opinion  of  the  Talmud,  where  on  the  verse,  "  On  this 
wise  shall  ye  bless  the  children  of  Israel,"  it  is  said,  that 
is,  with  the  name  Jehovah.  If  you  object,  that  it  may 
be  with  the  name  Jehovah,  or  it  may  not  be,  but  with  the 
cognomen  Lord;  the  objection  is  answered  by  the  fol- 
lowing words,  *  And  they  shall  put  my  name.'  (Numb.vi.2/.) 
My  name,  the  name  that  is  appropriated  to  me  alone.  "f 

In  like  manner  the  book  of  Kosri,  "  The  Deity  is  called 
DNn'b$  in  genere,  but  is  called  Jehovah  in  his  indi- 
viduality; for  if  any  one  should  ask,  What  God  ought 
we  to  worship  ?  the  sun,  or  the  moon,  or  the  heavens,  or 
the  constellations,  or  one  of  the  stars,  or  the  fire,  or  the 


TU?  rrm  me  nw  fo  *3K  rt  io«b  nw  too  Dywk 
Y'v  N"H  TI"'  Kim  m'nb  rvnasn  M^sirrb  DWIOI  mm»  11  snnb  DSTiiyi  torn  r 
b»  own  Dpraila  DS-  D^jfom  D*3*toi  Dmu  nfro  nitas?  TI^N  ru 

•  inbn  ny  r]nnwo  iy»  DTOH  rra  ba«  onoy  t\ 
y'n  '13DS  N^M  IVN  w  ttmoo  D^ni  nai«  nns  WTIDQ  oca  btntD'  »:a  n»  i3ian  p  f 
;  '1:1  ^  nnron  naw  *om  n»  lottn—  Sotah.  fol.  38.  1  . 


THE  ANGEL  OF  THE  LORD.  19 

wind,  or  the  spiritual  angels,  for  each  of  these  has  a 
certain  work  and  dominion,  and  each  of  them  is  a  cause 
in  existence  and  in  destruction  ?  The  answer  would  be, 
Jehovah,  just  as  you  call  a  certain  person  by  a  known 
name,  as  Reuben,  Simeon,  &c."*  Maimonides  devotes  a 
whole  chapter  to  the  discussion  of  this  one  point,  from 
which  we  quote  as  follows :  "  All  the  names  of  God 
which  occur  in  Scripture  are  all  deriVed  from  the  works, 
as  is  well  known,  except  one  name,  and  that  is,  ntnN 
which  is  the  name  appropriated  to  God  alone.  And  this 
is  called  the  plain  name  (Shem  hammephorash),  because  it 
teaches  plainly  and  unequivocally  of  the  substance  of 
God."  f  "  The  sum  of  the  whole  matter  is,  the  dignity  of 
this  name,  and  the  prohibition  to  read  it,  is  to  be  ascribed 
to  this,  that  it  points  directly  to  the  substance  of  God, 
and  on  this  account,  not  one  of  the  creatures  has  a  share 
in  the  teaching  of  this  name,  as  our  rabbies  of  blessed 
memory  have  said  :  *  My  name,  the  name  that  is  appro- 
priated to  me  alone.' "  The  author  of  the  Kosri  and 
Maimonides  were  controversialists,  and  had  the  Christian 
controversy  constantly  in  view,  their  testimony  is,  therefore, 
doubly  valuable ;  and  when  we  combine  the  admissions  of 
opponents  with  the  plain  words  of  Scripture,  there  can  be 
no  doubt  of  these  two  things,  first,  that  the  name  Je- 
hovah is  the  peculiar  name  of  God;  and,  secondly,  that 
God  has  claimed  it  for  himself,  because  it  has  reference  to 
that  substance  and  essence  peculiar  to  himself.  Why,  then, 
is  it  communicated  to  the  angel  of  the  Lord  ?  There  can 
be  but  one  answer :  because  He  partakes  of  that  substance 
and  essence  which  makes  the  communication  of  the  name 
suitable;  or,  in  other  words,  because  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  is  very  God.  And  this  conclusion  is  confirmed 

By  the  second  peculiarity  in  the   Scripture  delineation 
of  his  character,  and  that  is,  that  He  not  only  has  the 

*  Part  iv.  1 .     Buxtorf 's  edition,  page  257,  258. 
|    Part  i.  cap.  61. 

c2 


20  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  I. 

incommunicable  name  of  God,  but  is  represented  as 
having  the  divine  nature,  and  as  being  the  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 

The  first  proof  to  be  adduced  on  this  subject,  is 
from  the  xxxist  chapter  of  Genesis.  The  angel  of  God, 
DTrb^n  lyM^pp,  appeared  to  Jacob  in  a  dream,  and  said  to 
him,  "  I  am  the  God  of  Bethel,  where  thou  anointedst 
the  pillar,  and  where  thou  vowedst  a  vow  unto  me."  (Gen. 
xxxi.  13.)  Here  this  Being  first  says  of  himself,  "  I  am 
the  God  of  Bethel."  Some  modern  Jews  may  and  do 
quibble  about  the  word  ^^;  we  shall  not,  therefore,  in 
this  short  Essay,  enter  into  that  question,  and  the  rather 
as  it  is  here  unnecessary.  The  angel  not  only  says  that 
He  is  God,  but  that  Jacob  had  worshipped  him  as  such ; 
"  Where  thou  anointedst  the  pillar,  and  where  thou 
vowedst  the  vow  TO  ME."  Then  beyond  all  doubt  He 
was  God,  the  true  object  of  worship,  for  if  Jacob  had  made  a 
mistake,  neither  the  angel  nor  the  sacred  historian  would 
have  passed  by  the  sin  of  idolatry  unnoticed  and  un- 
reproved.  Besides,  if  we  turn  to  the  passage  relating  to 
the  circumstance  of  this  vow,  we  find  that  it  was  made 
to  the  God  of  his  fathers  :  "  The  Lord  stood  above  the 
ladder,  and  said,  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  thy  father, 
and  the  God  of  Isaac."  (Gen.  xxviii.  13.)  If,  then,  the 
Scripture  is  to  be  taken  in  its  plain  grammatical  sense, 
this  angel  was  the  God  of  Bethel,  the  God  of  Abraham, 
and  Isaac,  and  the  God  whom  Jacob  worshipped,  and  to 
whom  he  vowed  the  vow. 

But  now  let  us  hear  the  rabbies.  Rashi  and  Aben 
Ezra  pass  the  passage  without  remarking  on  the  nature 
of  the  angel.  Ramban  *  says,  "  The  angel  speaks  in  the 
name  of  Him  that  sent  him,  but  this  angel  might  truly 
say,  '  I  am  the  God  of  Bethel ;  '  for  it  is  said  in  like 
manner,  '  He  called  the  place  El  Bethel,  the  God  of 

*  R.  Moses  ben  Nachman,  commonly  called  by  Christian  writers 
Nachmanides. 


THE    ANCKL    OF    THE    LORI).  21 

Bethel'  (Gen.  xxxv.  7)>  according  as  it  is  said,  (  Zion, 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel.'  (Isa.  Ix.  14.)     But  Jonathan,  the 
son  of  Uzziel  says,  The  Holy  One,  in  the  heavens  of  the 
highest  height,  the  house  of  his  Shechinah,  and  this  is  'the 
angel  the  Redeemer;'  and  in  like  manner  it  is  written, 
'  Who  is  faithful  in  all  my  house.'  (Numb.  xii.  7.)     The 
wise  will  understand.0  *  (Comment,  in  loc.)    Nachmanides 
here  gives  two   interpretations;    first,   he  says,    that   he 
is  called  the  God  of  Bethel,  because  He  is  the  messenger 
of  the  God  of  Bethel,  but  this  is  a  pure  assertion,  without 
any  proof,  as  we  have  seen  above.     Secondly,  he  says, 
that  he  may  have  this  title  in  truth,  just  as  the  place  was 
called  the  God  of  Bethel,  and  as  Zion  is  called  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel.     If  this  be  taken  to  mean,  that  this  angel 
was  no  more  God  than  Bethel  itself  was,  this  explanation 
will  not  solve  the  difficulty,  for  it  is  said,  not  only  that 
He  was  called  God?  but  that  he  was  worshipped  as  God, 
which  is  not  said  either  of  Bethel  or  of  Zion,  so  that  the 
passages  are  not  parallel  ;  and  further,  the  instance  from 
Isaiah   rests   upon   a   false  translation.      Zion,    psv,   is 
feminine,  as  may  be  seen  in  Isaiah  i.  2,  so  that  ttmp  jvs 
bhniPS  cannot  be  translated  otherwise  than  it  is  in  the 
English  translation.     But  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether 
this  was  his    meaning.      Nachmanides   was  a  cabbalist, 
and  most  probably  alluded  to  the  mystical  interpretation 
of  Beth  (house)  in  the  words,  El  Bethel,  as  he  certainly 
does,  when  he  quotes  the  words,  "  Who  was  faithful  in  all 
my  house."     He    did  not  choose  to  speak  plainly,   and 
therefore  says,   "  The  wise  will  understand  :  "    and  this 
supposition  will  be  much  confirmed  by  the  very  similar 
comment  of  Bechai,  which  shall  be  given  presently.    But 
whether  this  supposition  be  founded  or  not,  it  is  plain 


top  pi  ^N  m  'wn  '3:«  mn  f^on  "TON  noun  -TV  tei  inVra  psto  *UT 

cnp  -TON  ^niy  p  jrwi  Vfrosr  «mp  p's  ^NTB  102  to  n'3  to 

•  pa'  towm  win  pm  TQ  ton  pt  Vwun  -jvfa  Him  rrnrsu?  m  nw^r  HTDITO 


22  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  I. 

that  Nachmanides  considered  the  words,  "  I  am  the  God 
of  Bethel,  &c.,"  as  applying  to  the  angel. 

Bechai  says,  "  If  interpreted  literally,  the  words,  '  I  am 
the  God  of  Bethel,'  mean,  The  God  that  appeared  to  thee 
in  Bethel.  But  according  to  cabbalistic  interpretation, 
this  angel  who  calls  himself  the  God  of  Bethel,  is  the 
goodness  spoken  of  in  the  words,  '  I  will  make  all  my 
goodness  pass  before  thee '  (Exod.  xxxiii.  19),  and  he  is 
the  house  mentioned  in  the  words,  (  Who  was  faithful  in 
all  my  house,'  for  a  man's  goodness  is  his  house,  and, 
therefore,  he  says  of  himself,  I  am  the  God  of  Bethel. 
And  so  it  is  said  of  Jacob, '  He  called  the  place  El  Bethel.' 
But,  behold,  even  according  to  the  literal  interpretation 
of  the  verse,  it  is  certain  that  this  angel  is  the  God  of 
Bethel,  and  understand  this."*  (Comment,  in  loc.)  Bechai 
also  fully  agrees  to  the  fact  that  the  angel  is  called  the 
God  of  Bethel,  and  the  reasons  which  he  assigns,  evi- 
dently point  to  the  Shechinah  or  habitation  which  he  calls 
"  The  house ;  "  and,  further,  "  The  goodness  of  the  Lord ; " 
so  that  from  this  Commentary  it  would  appear  that  the 
Shechinah  is  the  Being  here  alluded  to. 

In  the  Commentary  of  Menachem  of  Rekanata,  the 
same  opinion  is  expressed  still  more  clearly.  He  says, 
"  The  angel  mentioned  above,  said  to  him,  I  am  the  God 
of  Bethel,  by  which  is  intended  the  Shechinah,  who  is 
called  angel,  for  she  f  appeared  to  the  fathers,  and  to 
her  the  vow  was  made,  and,  therefore,  it  is  said,  Where 
thou  vowedst  the  vow  to  me,  as  is  explained  above.  She 
is  called  angel,  because  the  government  of  this  world  is 
by  her  mouth.  And  understand  that  she  is  called 

TOSS>  *op\n  mrr  -jNton  "?apn  Y's-1  -  fa  '»aa  "jb  rfara  E^crr  Y'y  •  fa  rva  fan  »33»  * 
^  Nin  p»3  »rn  tea  i^y  'ma  rvan  Nim  -pc  to  ^aia  to  Taw*  »3»  'VOID  aiton  sir?  fa 
rva  fa  'ipoV  *njn  apra  pi  •  fa  ro  farr  >32N  -ross  *&  -TON  p  tei  •  wa  DIMH  ait: 
•  m  pm  fann  fa  NVTO  nn  •yfmn  ^  TOIWDD  pas  nin  ainan  rem  fa 
f  Shechinab,   which  means  habitation,  is  feminine,  and,  therefore^ 
the  pronouns  and  verbs  are  feminine. 


THE    ANftEL    OK  THE    LORD.  L','5 


"7  «b)2»  where  QTrbwri  is  by  Gicmatr'ui  equivalent 
to  ^fNbtt;  and  Q>nbw  (God)  is  here  used,  because  she 
proceeds  from  the  sphera,  rrrna  (might)."* 

Here  also  it  is  plainly  admitted  that  the  angel  calls 
himself  the  God  of  Bethel,  and  to  this  Being  the  vow  was 
made.  The  fact  therefore  is  not  disputed,  and  therefore 
this  one  passage  is  sufficient  to  prove  that  this  angel  is 
very  God.  Indeed  the  commentators  quoted  do  not  deny 
the  inference,  for  when  they  say  that  this  Being  was  the 
Shechinah,  or  habitation,  they  employ  the  same  language 
used  in  the  New  Testament,  as  for  instance,  "  In  Him 
dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  (Coloss. 
ii.  9.)  When  the  law  of  Moses  sets  before  us  a  being  who 
says  of  himself  that  He  is  the  God  of  Bethel,  and  that 
He  is  the  object  of  Jacob's  worship,  what  else  can  we 
conclude  but  that  He  is  very  God,  especially  as  the  great 
object  of  this  law,  throughout,  is  to  enforce  the  unity  of 
God  ?  But  it  is  to  be  observed  that  this  passage  does  not 
stand  alone,  there  are  other  similar  assertions,  equally 
plain  and  strong.  In  the  third  chapter  of  Exodus,  this 
same  Being  is  said  to  have  appeared  to  Moses  in  the  bush, 
and  then  without  any  intimation  of  a  change  of  person, 
the  text  says,  "  And  when  the  Lord,  ninN  saw  that  he 
turned  aside  to  see,  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the  midst 
of  the  bush,  and  said,  Moses,  Moses  !  And  he  said,  Here 
am  1.  And  he  said,  Draw  not  nigh  hither:  put  off  thy 
shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground.  Moreover,  he  said,  1  am  the 
God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of 
Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  And  Moses  hid  his  face  ; 
for  he  was  afraid  to  look  upon  God."  (Exod.  iii.  4  —  6.) 


ntnpan  nrasrt  ravn  •  to  rva  tor?  '32N  ib  ION  rVrro1?  -oun 
'-DIE  ins  TO  Dto  ^  nvu  TON  TOM  3"n  von  rpH  rrtoi  miN1?  ;v*n:n 
D'nton  IN^D  ntnptt)  pm  •  rro  to?  mn  oVirn  run:n  nvn  jr 
•  D7»to  "VDN  rrrajn  p  nnp^:1  Turn  "j^Vo  «n^o;n  cviton  —  Kdit.  \Vnicr, 
1523,  fol.  45,  col.  1.  The  folio-  ar«  m«t  nuinbcrcd,  but  1  liuve  count..! 
them,  reckoning  the  title  folio  as  fol.  1. 


24  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  I. 

To  a  plain  reader,  abiding  by  the  common  rules  of 
grammar  and  the  usage  of  all  languages,  it  would  appear, 
that  the  angel  of  the  Lord  here  calls  himself  the  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  But  it  has  been  said  that 
this  is  a  Trinitarian  prejudice;  let  us  see,  then,  how  the 
Jews,  who  are  supposed  to  be  free  from  this  prejudice, 
understood  the  passage  :  — 

Aben  Ezra  expresses  his  opinion  thus:  "  And  when  the 
Lord  saw"  —  "  These  are  also  the  words  of  Moses,  after- 
wards, and  the  angel  is  called  by  the  glorious  name  in  the 
same  way  as  in  the  passage,  6  For  my  name  is  in  him,' 
and  there  I  shall  explain  it.  And  this  is  also  done  with 
respect  to  the  angel  who  appeared  to  Gideon,  where  it  is 
written,  f  And  the  LOUD  said  to  him.'  Or  the  meaning 
may  be  thus,  The  Lord  saw  that  he  turned  aside  to  see, 
and  commanded  the  angel  to  call  to  him,  and,  therefore, 
the  word  DTfVtf  (God)  is  used.  [God  called  unto  him  out 
of  the  bush.]  And  this  name  [o^nbs]  is  not  a  noun  of 
substance,  but  a  noun  of  quality,  as  I  will  explain  : 
and  it  comprehends  all  holy  beings,  which  are  not  cor- 
poreal, and  whose  power  is  not  corporeal,  as  it  is  written, 
(  The  Gods,  "pnbNj  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  flesh/ 
which  is  corporeal.  And,  behold,  QTrbs  (God)  in  this 
passage,  is  the  angel  mentioned  above."  *  (Comment,  in 
loc.)  Aben  Ezra  here  offers  two  ways  of  interpreting 
the  fourth  verse;  according  to  the  first,  there  is  no 
change  of  person.  The  angel  is,  therefore,  the  only 
agent  throughout,  and  consequently  says,  "  I  am  the  God 
of  Abraham,  &c."  According  to  the  other  interpretation 
there  are  two  agents,  Jehovah  and  the  angel.  The  sense 
of  the  verse  on  this  view  would  be,  "  When  the  Lord 


owi  iiipa  naw   ^  *]ro  *m:rT  osa  ^ten  »np3T  qim  rroo  nan  rrtw  DJ 

era  -i33»N  D^n  IN  '"  -ft  TQN*i  airo  OBI  pyrft  rrNi3tJ  -[Nterr  -pi 
airoa  nm  na  vfa  rpa  mw  tjinp  ft  fro  w»m  STIDN  ixwo  -wi  DIB  p 
n  win  rnn  mpm  D'rfw  rnm  rp:n  NITO  >mrvN  N1?  N-IITQ  DJ?  pnvro  n 


THE    AN  GEL    OF    THE    LORD.  25 

saw  that  he  turned  aside  to  see,  the  angel  called  unto  him 
out  of  the  midst  of  the  bush."  We  do  not  stop  to  show 
the  untenableness  of  this  interpretation  at  present,  for 
it  does  not  alter  the  argument.  Aben  Ezra  grants  that 
the  angel  is  the  speaker,  and  that  is  all  that  we  require. 
We  only  wish  at  present  to  establish  the  fact,  not  to 
explain  it. 

R.  Bechai  testifies  unreservedly  to  the  fact,  that  the 
angel  here  calls  himself  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob.     "  Ask  not,"  he  says,  "  how  Moses  could  hide 
his  face  before  the  angel,  for  the  angel  mentioned  here  is 
the  angel,  the   Redeemer,  of  whom  it  is  written,  '  I  am 
the  God  of  Bethel.'     And  in  like  manner  it  is  said  here, 
6  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the 
God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,'  and  he  it  is  of 
whom  it  is  said,  '  My  name  is  in  him.'"  (Comment,  in  loc.) 
R.  Moses  ben  Nachman  goes  a  step  farther  ;  he  not 
only  confirms  the  fact,  but  rejects  the  explanation,  that 
the  angel  was  speaking  in  the  name  of  him  that  sent  him. 
His  words  are,    "  The  explanation,   that   in  the  words, 
'  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father,'  the  messenger  spoke  in  the 
language  of  him  that  sent  him  is  not  correct,  for  Moses's 
degree  in  prophecy  was  too  high  for  him  to  hide  his  face 
before  the  angel.      Our  rabbies  have  said  in  Bereshith 
Rabba,    '  This   angel   is   Michael.      As   in  the   case   of 
R.  Jose,  the  Patient,  wherever  he  was  seen,  they  said, 
There  is  our  holy  rabbi  ;  so  wherever  Michael  is  seen, 
there  is  the  glory  of  the  Shechinah.'      They  meant  to 
guy,  that  at  first  Michael  appeared  to  him,  and  that  the 
glory  of  the  Shechinah  was  there,  but  he  did  not  see  the 
glory,    for  he  did  not  apply  his  mind  to  the  prophetic 
vision  ;  but,  when  he  applied  his  mind  and  turned  aside 
to  see,  then  the  appearance  of  the  Shechinah  was  revealed 


ton  JNM  -own  futon  o  -pta-i  p  v:c  rrro  -we'  fx  nonn  So 
?N  -p«   vrtN  O2N  j»3a  TDN  pi  bw  rva  Vwrr  ^:« 


26  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  I. 

unto  him,  and  God  called  unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of 
the  bush.  Arid  in  the  way  of  truth,  this  angel  was  the 
angel,  the  Redeemer,  for  it  is  said,  (  My  name  is  in  him.' 
He  it  is  who  said  to  Jacob,  '  1  am  the  God  of  Bethel ; J 
and  of  him  it  is  said,  '  And  God  called  to  him/  But  he 
is  called  angel,  ^fsbBj  with  reference  to  the  government 
of  the  world;  and  thus  it  is  written  [in  one  place], 
'  And  the  LORD  brought  us  out  of  Egypt'  (Deut.  vi.  21); 
and  [in  another  place]  it  is  written,  f  And  he  sent  an 
angel,  and  hath  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt/  (Numb, 
xx.  16.)  Again,  it  is  said,  '  The  angel  of  his  presence 
saved  them/  that  is  to  say,  The  angel  who  is  his  presence. 
(Isaiah  Ixiii.  9.)  For  it  is  written,  *  My  presence  shall 
go,  and  I  will  give  thee  rest/  (Exod.  xxxiii.  14.)  And 
this  is  what  is  said,  '  The  Lord  whom  ye  seek  shall 
suddenly  come  to  his  temple,  even  the  messenger  of  the 
covenant  whom  ye  delight  in  :  behold,  he  shall  come. 
(Mai.  iii.  1.) '  And  thou  wilt  understand  this  further  in 
other  verses  yet  to  come,  which  treat  of  the  same 
matter/' 

We  have  here  the  confession  of  Jews,  that  that  Being 
who  is  called  the  angel  of  the  Lord  says  of  himself,  that 
he  is  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob ;  that  this  is 
the  plain  meaning  of  the  text,  what,  then,  is  the  con- 
clusion ?  What  can  it  be,  but  that  He  is  what  he  claimed 
to  be?  We  have  seen  that  there  is  but  one  being  who 
is  called  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  Secondly,  That  the 
name  of  this  one  Being  is  Jehovah,  the  incommunicable 
name  of  God:  and,  Thirdly,  That  this  Being  says  of 
himself,  distinctly  and  unequivocally,  that  He  is  the  God 
whom  Jacob  worshipped,  the  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
and  Jacob  ;  and  we  have  seen,  Fourthly,  That  this  is  as 
plainly  asserted  by  the  Jews  us  by  us.  There  is  but  one 
possible  conclusion,  and  that  is,  that  this  Being  is  very 
God. 

Enough,  I  trust,  has  been  here  said,  to  establish  the 


THE    ANGEL    OF    THE    LORD. 


27 


fact :  it  would  take  a  volume  to  go  through  all  the  pas- 
sages of  the  Bible,  and  more  than  one  volume,  to  collate 
the  passages  of  the  rabbies.  Schottgen  has  given  many 
more  from  more  ancient  books,  but  I  have  quoted  com- 
mentators, who  were  almost  cotemporary  with  Kimchi, 
to  show  what  was  the  Jewish  opinion  of  his  time. 


28 


CHAPTER  If. 

(In  the  English  Bible,  chap.  i.  18.) 

1.  (i.  18.)  "  Then  I  lifted  up"— In  this  vision  he 
turned  to  behold  another  vision,  clearer  than  the  first,  for 
he  understood  from  it,  that  the  horns  were  to  push  with, 
as  (Deut.  xxxiii.  17),  "  His  horns  are  like  the  horns  of 
an  unicorn  ;  with  them  he  shall  push  the  people  together," 
but  he  did  not  understand  who  these  horns  were. 
.  "  Four  horns.'9 — These  are  the  four  monarchies,  and 
they  are  the  Babylonian  monarchy,  the  Persian  monarchy, 
and  the  Grecian  monarchy;*  and  so  the  Targum  of 
Jonathan  has  it,  "  the  four  monarchies."  And  these 
four  did  evil  unto  Israel,  as  the  angel  exclaims,  saying, 
"  which  scattered  Judah,  Israel,  and  Jerusalem." 

2.  (i.  19.)   "  And  I  said luhich  scatter  ed"- 

They  pushed  them  even  until  they  scattered  them  hither 
and  thither;  each  of  the  horns  in  its  time  did  them  evil. 
For  the  Persian  monarchy,  although  at  its  beginning  it 
brought  them  up  from  their  captivity,  afterwards  did  them 
evil,  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes  the  First,  and  in  the  days 
of  Ahasuerus  until  the  second  year  of  Darius. 

3.  (i.  20.)  "  And  the  Lord  showed  me  four  workmen" 
as  in  Isaiah  xliv.  13,  "  The  workmen  of  wood,"f  in  order 
to  cut  off  the  horns,  that  is  to  say,  each  kingdom  shall 
be  a  carpenter,  to  cut  off  the  kingdom  that  preceded  it, 
for  the   Babylonian  monarchy  fell  by  the  hand   of  the  I 
Persian,  and  the  Persian  monarchy  fell  by  the  hand  of 
the  Greek.     Or  the  carpenters  may  signify  in  a  parable,  j 

*  He  does  not  mention  the  fourth. 

f  The  English  has  in  both  places  carpenter,  as  Kimchi  explains.     I 
have  translated  literally  "  workmen,"  in  order  to  show  how  our  trans-  j 
lators  had  the  best  authority  for  this  choice  of  words. 


KIMCIlj's    COMMKNTARY,    &C.  29 

the  kings,*  the  supernal  princes,  who  are  appointed  over 
the  kingdoms ;  and  our  rabbies  of  blessed  memory  have 
interpreted  the  verse  of  the  days  of  the  Messiah,  saying, 
"  Who  are  the  four  carpenters  ?  R.  Simeon  Chasida 
says,  They  are  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David ;  and  Messiah, 
the  yon  of  Joseph,  and  Ellas,  and  the  righteous  priest. 
(Cohen  Tsedek.)"  t 

"  And  fie  spake  so  that  no  man  did  lift  up 

1/p  his  head." — They  pushed  and  scattered  them  in  such 
a  manner,  that  no  man  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  lift 
up  his  head,  because  of  them.  ^?  signifies  "  so  that," 
"  in  such  a  manner  that; "  according  as  in  Exod.  xii.  4, 
"  Every  man,  >22,  according  to  his  eating : "  and  so 
Jonathan  has  translated  it,  "  And  they  did  not  permit 
any  man  to  walk  with  an  upright  stature."  nlT*?  sig- 
nifies "  to  cast  out,"  as  in  Lam.  iii.  52,  J  ^1,  "  They 
cast  a  stone  upon  me." 

5.  (ii.  1.)  "  And  I  lifted  up"— In  this  vision  he  turns 
to  behold  another  vision.  And  it  is  certain  that  this 
vision  is  of  the  future,  referring  to  the  days  of  the 
Messiah,  as  the  visions  of  Ezekiel,  in  which  he  saw  the 
angel  measuring  Jerusalem  in  its  length  and  breadth. 

*  Buxtorf  reads  o»3bo,  kings,  but  the  whole  phraseology  here  em- 
ployed, shows  that  Kimchi  alluded  to  the  cr^NVo,  angels,  whom  the  Jews 
suppose  lo  be  appointed  over  the  nations  of  the  earth,  as  may  be  seen 
in  Rashi's  Comment,  in  Isaiah  xxiv.  4,  Dan.  x.  20,  &c.  The  legend 
itself  is  thus  given  in  the  Pirke  Eleazar — "  The  Holy  One,  blessed  be 
He,  descended  with  the  seventy  angels  who  surround  the  throne  of  his 
glory,  and  confounded  their  language  into  seventy  nations  and  seventy 
languages,  each  nation  with  its  own  writing  and  language,  and  over 
each  nation  he  appointed  an  angel,  but  Israel  fell  to  his  portion  and 
lot,  and,  therefore,  it  is  said,  'The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people.'" 
(Deut.  xxxii.  9.)  Chap.  xxiv.  Edit.  Sabionet.  fol.  17,  col.  1. 

t  This  passage  is  found  in  the  Talmud.  Succah,  fol.  52,  col.  2,  where 
Rashi  says,  in  his  Commentary,  on  the  authority  of  the  Bereshith 
Rabba,  that  "  The  righteous  priest "  means  Shem,  the  son  of  Noah, 
who  is  there  supposed  to  be  identical  with  Melchisedek. 

t  English,  53. 


30  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"A  measuring  line." — A  line  with  which  they  measure. 
And  this  man  was  another  angel,  who  did  not  speak  with 
him. 

6.  (English   2.)    "  To   measure"    tbb,   is    the   Infi- 
nitive, from  -na,  the  same  form  as  n^'Drr-n^  D*"ib  ("  to 
sprinkle  the  fine  flour,"  Ezek.  xlvi.  14),  from  DD")  5  and, 
again,  3D  Dpb  an  ("  It  is  enough  for  you  to  compass,"  * 
Deut.  ii.  3),  from  n^D- 

7,  8.  (English,  3,  4.)  "  And  behold and  he  said 

unto   him,   Run,   speak  to  this  young   man"     But   he 
himself  did  not  speak  to  him  (Zechariah)  ;  because  this 
other  angel  had  spoken  with  him  from  the  beginning,  He 
said   to   him,   that   he  should   speak   thus,   although  he 
(Zechariah)  saw  the  angel  measuring  the  length  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  its  breadth.f 

"  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns  without  walls," 
i.  e.,  Many  shall  live  without  the  city,  for  the  city  will 
not  contain  them.  Although  the  city  shall  be  much 
longer  and  broader  than  it  was,  many  shall  live  outside. 
rnPJ?  signifies  cities,  J  without  a  wall,  or  gates,  or  bars, 
for  they  shall  dwell  securely,  so  as  to  be  afraid  of  no 
man,  for  I  will  be  unto  it  a  wall  of  fire. 

"  This  young  man" — It  may  be,  that  he  was  a  young 
man  in  years  when  he  prophesied,  as  Samuel  and  Je- 
remiah :  or  he  was  the  servant  of  another  prophet  greater 
than  himself,  and  is,  therefore,  called  "  a  young  man," 
as  in  the  case  of  Joshua ;  "  His  servant  Joshua,  the  son 
of  Nun,  a  young  man.'*  (Exod.  xxxiii.  11.) 

9.   (English  5.)  "  For  I will  be  a  wall  of  fire," 

Feo  that  no  man  will  touch  them  to  do  them  evil,  as  no 
man  would  touch  fire,  lest  it  should  burn  him. 

"  The  glory  in  the  midst  of  her." — The  object  of  the 

*  I  translate  literally,  to  show  the  Infinitive  form, 
•j  And  might,  therefore,  have  inferred  it  himself. 
J  One  cannot  help  thinking  of  the  cities  of  England,  to  which  God 
has  so  long  given  this  blessing. 


ON    ZFrilARIAH,    CHAP.   II.  31 

glory  is  to  protect  them,  as  it  is  written  in  the  prophecy 
of  Ismail,  iv.  5,  "  And  the  Lord  will  create  upon  every 
dwelling-place  of  Mount  Zion,  &c." 

10.  (Knglish  6.)  "  Ho,  /to,"  is  the  language  of  calling, 
and  is  doubled  for  the  sake  of  strength.  And  thus  in  the 
1 1th  (7th)  verse,  "  Ho,  deliver  thyself,  O  Zion." 

"  And  flee  from  the  land  of  the  north.'" — This  is  said 
in  reference  to  those  who  remained  in  Babylon,  who  did 
not  come  up  at  the  first,  that  they  should  make  haste  to 
go  forth,  and  to  return,  and  build  the  House  (the  Temple), 
for  the  time  is  come.  The  Van  in  303}  is  to  be  taken  as 
in  Psalm  Ixxvi.  7  (6),  D-1DJ  3^  nip?,  («  Both  the 
chariot  and  horse  are  cast  into  a  dead  sleep"),  and  it 
shows  that  a  word  is  left  out,  that  is  to  say,  their  meaning 
is,  "  Come  forth,  and  flee."  * 

"  For  as  the  four  ivinds  of  heaven " — that  is,  when 
I  said,  that  they  should  go  forth  from  their  captivity,  I 
intended  only  those  who  were  led  captive  to  Babylon,  as 
it  is  written,  "  Thou  that  dwellest  with  the  daughter  of 
Babylon  ;"  for  the  others  are  far  away  from  them,  for  1 
have  spread  them  abroad  in  captivity  as  the  four  winds, 
which  are  widely  separated  the  one  from  the  other ;  thus, 
as  to  the  four  corners  of  the  world,  the  east  is  far  from  the 
west,  and  the  north  from  the  south,  so  Israel  is  far  one 
from  the  other  in  their  captivity,  and  their  time  is  not 
yet  come  to  go  forth,  except  for  the  captivity  of  Judah, 
therefore  it  is  said,  6  Ho,  Zion,  deliver  thyself;  '  by 
which  is  meant  the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  for 
they  dwelt  in  Zion.  Our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory, 
have  given  a  mystical  interpretation  to  the  words,  '  As 
the  four  winds ; '  that,  as  the  world  cannot  exist  without 
the  four  winds,  so  neither  can  it  exist  without  Israel."  t 

12.  (English,  8.)  "  For  t/ius  saith  the  Lord a//,-* 

*  And  so  our  translators  have  rendered  it.     This  is  another  proof  of 
the  diligence  of  our  translators  in  consulting  the  best  authorities, 
f  Talmud  Bab.  Taanitli,  fol.  3,  col.  2. 


32  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

the  glory  hath  he  sent  me." — After  the  glory  which  he 
promised  you,  as  it  is  written  in  the  prophecy  above,  the 
end  of  which  is,  "  I  will  be  a  glory  in  the  midst  of  her." 
After  this  he  hath  sent  me  unto  the  nations  which  spoiled 
you,  for  God,  blessed  be  He,  does  not  think  it  a  sufficient 
blessing  to  repay  you  for  the  evil  change  which  came 
upon  you  in  the  captivity,  until  he  have  taken  vengeance 
upon  your  enemies,  who  spoiled  you. 

"  For  he  that  toucheth  you." — He  that  toucheth  you 
shall  not  go  unpunished,  as  a  man  who  touches  the  apple 
of  his  eye,  i.  e.,  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  which  he  will  force 
out,  if  he  touch  it  violently,  so  he  that  toucheth  you  for 
evil,  toucheth  himself. 

13.  (English,  9.)  "  For,  behold  I and  they  shall 

be  a  spoil  to  their  servants"  that  is  to  say,  the  nations 
shall  be  a  spoil  to  Israel,  who  were  their  servants  during 
the  captivity. 

"  And  ye  shall  know." — At  that  time,  when  this  pro- 
phecy draws  near,  ye  shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts 
hath  sent  me,  and  this  will  be  in  the  time  to  come,  in  the 
days  of  the  Messiah. 

14.  (English  10.)  "  Sing  and  rejoice." — It  is  right  to 
interpret  this  prophecy  as  far  as  "  his  holy  habitation," 
of  the  future,  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah,  because  it  is 
said,  "  Many  nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord,"  i.  e., 
all   flesh,  and   this   we   did  not   see   during  the   second 

v—  •-,._.-- x»V  -  Tmrr-ii»irfBL iuiuj-^_iiii-,.^iiijrirriii     ••-    HIM    i  ~ 

temple.  But  the  subject  of  the  rest  of  the  paru.shuh 
refers  to  the  time  of  the  second  temple,  for  it  speaks  of 
Joshua  and  Zerubbabel. 

"  Shall  be  Joined."  —  This  is  plain ;  -V)1??  signifies 
joining. 

16.  (English,  12.)  "  Inherit  —  Judah,"  for  he  is  the 
portion  of  God,  blessed  be  He.  Then  he  shall  inherit 
him,  for  his  inheritance  will  be  in  the  Holy  Land,  for  he 
shall  have  gone  forth  from  the  captivity,  and  shall  be 
the  inheritance  of  the  blessed  God  in  the  Holy  Land. 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.  II.  33 

This  verse  is  similar  to  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  his 
people,  Jacob  the  lot  of  his  inheritance."  Judah  is  men- 
tioned, because  he  is  the  head  of  the  kingdoms  of  Israel, 
and  if  it  alludes  to  the  second  temple,  Judah  was  he  who 
hud  returned  from  captivity. 

17.  (English,  13.)  DH  means  "Be  silent ;"  as  we 
have  explained. 

"  For  he  is  awaked  up  out  of  his  holy  habitation"  that 
is,  heaven. — He  says,  "  Is  awaked  up,"  in  the  way  of  a 
parable,  as  a  man  who  is  awaked  up  from  his  sleep,  in 
the  same  way  as  it  is  said,  "  Then  the  Lord  awaked 
as  one  out  of  sleep."  (Psalm  Ixxviii.  65.)  "^37.3  is  the 
Niphal  conjugation  of  the  verbs  Ain  Vau,*  after  the 
fashion  of  7"n3,  ]"fo3,  although  they  have  got  a  kametz 
under  the  Nun,  and  this  has  got  a  tsere. 

*  Lit.  Quiescents  in  the  Ain. 


34 


CHAPTER  III. 

1.  "And  he  showed  me"  $c.— Satan  is  spoken  figu- 
ratively  of    Sanballat  and  his   companions,    who   were 
adversaries  to  them,  and  caused  them  to  stop  from  their 
work.      Jonathan  has    thus   interpreted   it,    "  And    the 
sinner  *  stood  at  his  right  hand  to  oppose  him. 

2.  "  And  the  LORD,  niiT,  said"— This  is  said  of  the 
angel,  who  is  called  by  the  name  of  his  master,  and  so, 
in  the  history  of  Gideon,  and  other  places,  f 

"  The  Lord  rebuke  thee" — This  refers  to  God,  blessed 
be  He. 

Ct  That  hath  chosen  Jerusalem,"  to  build  it,  and  thou 
canst  not  resist  him. 

"  Is  not  this  a  brand  plucked  from  the  fire?" — As  a 
burning  brand  which  is  removed  from  the  fire,  that  it  may 
not  burn  any  more,  so  was  this  man  (Joshua)  delivered 
from  the  fire  of  captivity  to  come  to  Jerusalem,  and  to 
build  the  house,  and  to  minister  therein.  And  our  rabbies 
of  blessed  memory,  have  interpreted  it  of  him,  according 
to  the  literal  sense,  that  he  was  along  with  Zedekiah  and 
Ahab,  when  the  king  of  Babylon  burned  them  in  the  fire, 
and  they  were  burnt,  but  he  was  delivered,  J  as  is  said  in 
that  D'rash,  §  and  so  Jonathan  has  interpreted.  || 

3.  "  Now  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments" — 
This  is  explained  parabolically  of  his  sons,  who  married 
strange  women,  and  so  is  the  interpretation  of  Jonathan, 

*  Buxtorf  says,  "  By  Synechdoche  for  Satan,  because  he  sins,  and 
makes  others  to  sin." — Lex.  Talm. 

f  This  is  another  most  important  admission,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
a  precaution  against  the  idea  of  a  plurality,  here  so  plainly  intimated. 

I  See  Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  93,  col.  1. 

§  Drash,  signifies  a  mystical  interpretation. 

||  Jonathan  says  nothing  of  this  fable. 


KIMCHl's   COMMENTARY,   &C.  35 

"  Joshua  had  sons  who  had  married  women,  not  lawful 
for  the  priesthood."  And  so  our  rabbies  of  blessed 
memory  have  said,  "  That  on  account  of  this  sin,  that  his 
sons  married  women  unsuitable  for  the  priesthood,  and  that 
he  did  not  restrain  them,  therefore  it  is  said, '  Joshua  was 
clothed  with  filthy  garments; '  not*  that  it  was  Joshua's 
way  to  wear  filthy  garments,  but  that  his  sons  took 
women  unsuitable  for  the  priesthood,  and  he  did  not 
restrain  them."  And  so  it  is  written  in  Ezra,  "And  among 
the  sons  of  the  priests  there  were  found  that  had  taken 
strange  wives,  namely,  of  the  sons  of  Jeshua,  the  son  of 
Jozadak,  and  his  brethren."  (Ezra  x.  18.) 

"  And  he  answered," f  i.  e.  the  angel.  He  said  to  the 
other  angels  who  were  standing  before  him,  for  he  was 
greater  than  they,  and  he  it  was  who  sent  them.  And 
the  Targum  of  Jonathan  has,  "  To  those  who  served 
before  him." 

"  Take  away" — A  type,  that  they  should  separate 
from  the  strange  wives. 

"  Thine  iniquity" — The  filthy  garments  represented 
the  iniquity. 

rnsbqE  signifies  changes  of  pure  raiment,  and  this 
also  represents,  in  a  parable,  the  merits  (of  his  good 
actions),  that  is  to  say,  when  the  iniquity  is  put  away, 
thy  merits  will  appear.  And  Jonathan  has  interpreted 
thus,  "  I  will  clothe  thee  with  merits." 

5.  "  And  I  said" — The  prophet  Zechariah  says,  I  said  to 
the  angel  that  they  should  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head. 
As  thou  hast  commanded  to  take  away  the  filthy  garments 
from  off  him,  and  to  clothe  him  with  change  of  raiment, 
command  also,  that  they  should  put  a  fair  mitre  on  his 
head,  that  he  may  be  consecrated  as  high-priest,  for  the 
mitre  was  worn  on  his  head.  | 

*  The  negative  appears  to  be  omitted  in  the  Hebrew, 
f  Kimchi  has,  "  And  the  angel  answered." 
!   i.  e.,  The  mitre  was  peculiar  to  the  high-priest. 
«  o 


36  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"  And  clothed  him  with  garments  "  (must  be  taken  to 
mean)  And  they  had  already  clothed  him  with  garments  ; 
for  before  any  mention  is  made  of  Zechariah,  it  was  already 
said,  "  And  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of  raiment." 
(Ver.  4.)  And  thus  (the  Vau,  "  and,"  has  a  similar  force) 
in  Exod.  xvi.  20,  ttfN3.n  C^bin  D"g1,  "  And  it  bred 
worms,  and  it  stank  ;  "  i.  e.,  for  it  nlready  stank,  for  every 
thing  stinks  before  it  breeds  worms.  And  again  in  Isaiah 
Ixiv.  4,  (5)  S&n?.!  JF)9?I2  nrihnrr,  «  Behold,  thou  art 
wroth  ;  for  we  have  sinned,"  •)•  and  other  like  passages. 

"  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood  by"  —  According  as 
he  saw  in  the  prophetic  vision,  for  until  they  had  set  the 
pure  mitre  upon  his  head,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  stood,  so 
as  not  to  move  from  his  sight. 

6.  "  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  protested"  —  He  pro- 
tested to  him  concerning  this  thing.     And  thus  [we  find 
the  word  used]  in  Deut.  viii.  19,  "  I  protest  unto  you, 
that   ye  shall  surely  perish;"  and  again,  Gen.  xliii.  3, 
"  The  man  did  solemnly  protest  unto  us."     The  letter  9 
is  pointed  with  pathach,  because  it  is  a  guttural.     Ac- 
cording to  the  rule,  it  ought  to  have  had  a  segol  ("H?J3), 
as   ablC-1?!  ns  a#>3,  "  And  he  brought  back   all  the 
goods."  (Gen.  xiv.  16.)J 

7.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  -  Thou  shalt  judge  my 
house"  —  Inasmuch  as  he  was  High-Priest,  and  the  other 
priests  were  to  act  by  his  command.     "  And  I  will  give 
thee  "  OflEJ1]),  expresses  the  future,  and  the  Vau  is  used 
as  in  Exod.  xix.  16,  "tf^n  Dto  "»n£,  "  And  it  came  to 


*  Compare  Noldius  and  Gesenius  in  i. 

f  In  Hebrew,  "  We  have  sinned,"  but  our  translators  knew  this  sig- 
nification of  the  i,  and  translated  as  Kimchi  here  proposes.  Here,  in 
Zechariah,  they  have  not  done  so,  for  it  does  not  appear  from  the  text 
that  Joshua  had  been  already  clothed.  The  angel  had  given  the 
command,  but  there  is  nothing  to  compel  our  belief  that  the  commam 
had  been  already  executed. 

J  Consult  Gesen.  Lehrgeb. 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.  HI.  37 


pass  on  the  third  day;"  and  in  Gen.  xxii.  4, 
WB-n$,  "  And  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes."  * 

"  Places  to  walk  among  those  that  stand  by"  —  They 
were  the  angels  who  stand  and  endure  for  ever  ;  and  this 
means,  thou  bhalt  walk  amongst  them,  i.  e.,  his  soul, 
when  it  should  he  separated  from  his  body.  The  Targum 
of  Jonathan  says,  "  In  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  will 
revive  thee,"  &c.  f 

8.  "Hear  now,  thou,  -  and  thy  fellows"  —  The 
other  priests. 

"  For  they  are  men  of  sign."  %  They  are  worthy  of 
having  a  sign  wrought  for  them  by  their  hands.  And 
our  rabbles  of  blessed  memory  have  thus  interpreted, 
"  Who  are  men  of  sign  or  miracle  ?  They  are  those  for 
whom  a  miracle  was  wrought,  i.  e.,  Hannaniah,  Mishael, 
and  Azariah."  § 

"  For  behold,  I  will  bring  my  servant,  the  Branch"  — 
This  is  Zerubbabel.  ||  (Literally,  "  I  am  bringing.")  The 

*  It  is  a  Vau  conversive. 

f  And  give  thee  feet  to  walk  among  these  seraphs. 

t  The  marginal  translation. 

§  Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  93,  col.  1. 

||  Kimchi  here  follows  Rashi  in  interpreting  "  My  servant,  the 
Branch  "  of  Zerubbabel.  Their  reason  for  this  probably  was,  that  if 
they  acknowledged  the  person  thus  designated  in  this  chapter  to  be  the 
Messiah,  they  must  have  made  the  same  admission  in  the  parallel 
passage,  chapter  vi.  12;  and  by  so  doing,  they  would  have  admitted 
that  Messiah  was  to  be  a  priest  as  well  as  a  king.  Perhaps  they  also 
saw  some  polemical  danger  in  this  chapter,  in  connecting  the  promise 
of  the  Messiah,  with  the  promise,  occurring  in  the  next  verse,  "  To 
remove  the  iniquity  of  the  land  in  one  day,"  which  would  seem  to 
favour  the  Christian  doctrine,  that  the  Messiah  "  by  one  offering,  per- 
fected for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified."  (Heb.  x.  14.)  But  however 
that  be,  the  interpretation  which  they  propose  is  not  tenable, 

1st,  Because  it  departs  from  the  old  received  interpretation  of  the 
Jewish  Church.  Both  Kimchi  and  Rashi  admit  that  there  was  an  inter- 
pretation referring  this  passage  to  the  Messiah  :  and  Jonathan,  in  his 
urn,  interprets  both  these  passages  of  the  Messiah. 

2d,  Because  it  contradicts  the  analogy  of  the  prophetic  language. 


38  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

reason  why  it  is  said,  "  I  am  bringing"  when  he  was 
already  come,  is,  to  signify  that  his  dignity  should  in- 
crease still  more,  and  his  greatness  should  grow  as  a 
branch  from  the  ground,  which  goes  on  growing;  and 
thus  it  is  said  below  (vi.  12),  "  Behold  the  man  whose 
name  is  the  Branch;  and  he  shall  grow  up  out  of  his 
place,  and  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  And 
so  Haggai,  the  prophet  says,  "  I  will  take  thee,  O  Zerub- 
babel,"  &c.  (Haggai  ii.  23.),  as  we  have  explained.  But 
there  are  some  who  interpret  "The  Branch/'  of  the 
Messiah,  the  King,  and  then  the  meaning  is,  Although 
I  now  give  you  this  salvation,  I  will  bring  to  you  a  greater 
salvation,  in  the  time  that  I  bring  my  servant  the  Branch. 
A  mystical  interpretation  has  also  been  given,  whereby  it 
appears  that  Menachem*  (comforter)  is  the  name  of 
the  Messiah ;  for  Menachem  is,  by  Gematria,f  Tsemach 

Messiah  is  elsewhere  called  "  The  Branch,"  as  in  Isaiah  iv.  2,  and 
Jeremiah  xxiii.  6,  in  both  which  passages  Kimchi  himself  freely  admits 
that  "  Branch"  means  the  Messiah. 

3d,  Because  the  words  do  not  agree  with  the  circumstances  of  Ze- 
rubbabel.  God  says,  "  I  will  bring  my  servant,  the  Branch."  But,  as 
Abarbanel  remarks,  Zerubbabel  had  come  long  before,  and  was  already 
a  prince  among  them.  Kimchi  felt  this  difficulty,  and,  therefore,  tries 
to  twist  the  words  to  mean,  "  that  his  dignity  should  increase  still  more, 
and  his  greatness  should  grow  as  a  branch,"  &c.  But  Abarbanel  re- 
marks again,  that  God  does  not  say  that  he  will  make  him  great,  but 
that  he  will  bring  him ;  and  adds,  that  "  after  this  prophecy  Zerub- 
babel attained  to  neither  royalty,  dominion,  or  other  dignity,  more  than 
he  already  possessed."  (See  Abarbanel  Comment,  in  loc.) 

*  Menachem  (comforter)  is  said  to  be  the  name  of  Messiah  in  the 
Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  98,  col.  2,  where  the  words,  "  The  comforter 
(Menachem)  that  should  relieve  my  soul,  is  far  from  me"  (Lam.  i.  16.), 
are  cited  in  proof. 

f  Gematria  is  the  same  word  as  "  geometry ; "  but  in  Jewish  writings 
it  designates  a  certain  species  of  Cabbalistic  interpretation,' the  principle 
of  which  is,  that  two  words,  whose  letters  amount  to  the  same  numerical 
value,  signifying  the  same  thing.  Thus  Menachem,  consisting  of 
tt=40,  3=50,  n=8,  D=40,  amounts  to  138.  Tsemach,  "branch," 
makes  the  same  amount,  for  s=90,  o=40,  n=8.  A  curious  instance 


ON    ZECHARIAH,   CHAP.  III.  M 

(Branch.)  Jonathan  has  also  given  this  interpretation, 
"  My  servant,  the  Messiah." 

9.  "  For  behold  the  stone"  that  is,  the  plummet,  by 
which  they  make  the  building  straight.  Or,  the  meaning 
may  be,  The  stone  which  they  shall  lay  first,  Zerubbabel 
shall  lay  it  before  Joshua,  as  it  is  said  below  (iv.  7)»  "He 
shall  bring  forth  the  head-stone." 

"  Upon  one  stone  seven  eyes" — Upon  every  stone  there 
shall  be  seven  eyes,  i.  e.,  many  watchings  from  God, 
blessed  be  He,  on  account  of  the  enemies,  who  think  to 
cause  the  work  to  cease.  And  these  are  the  seven  eyes  of 
the  Lord,  spoken  of  below,  (c.  iv.  9.)  "  Seven"  is  a  definite 
number  to  express  a  multitude,  not  literally  seven,  as  in 
Levit.  xx  vi.  21,  "I  will  bring  seven  times  more  plagues 
upon  you,  according  to  your  sins ; "  and  again,  "  The 
righteous  falleth  seven  times  and  riseth  again; "  and  such 
like.  My  Lord,  my  father,  interpreted  "  seven  "  literally, 
to  signify  Joshua,  Ezra,  Zerubbabel,  Nehemiah,  and  the 
three  prophets,  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi.  Jo- 
nathan has  interpreted,  "  Seven  eyes  looking  to  it." 

"  Behold,  I  will  engrave  the  graving  thereof"  or,  "  I 
will  open  the  openings  thereof."  As  if  the  stone  had  been 
bound  up  all  the  time  that  the  work  was  stopped;  and 
now  he  would  loose  it,  and  place  it  in  the  building.  But 
the  true  meaning  is  "  engraving,"  as  in  Exod.  xxviiL  36, 
"  And  thou  shalt  grave  upon  it  according  to  the  graving 
of  a  signet."  For  as  the  finishing  of  the  preparation  of 
precious  stone  is  the  figures,  and  bloom  and  pome- 
granates, which  they  figure  upon  it  by  graving,  so  it  is 
here  said  parabolically,  i.  e.,  I  will  finish  it  in  all  its  pre- 
paration for  the  building. 

of  this  occurs  in  the  ward  OTIJ,  serpent,  which  is  made  one  of  the  names 
of  Messiah,  because  its  numerical  value  is  =  that  of  moo  (Messiah). 
Perhaps  our  Lord  alluded  to  this  interpretation  when  he  said,  "  As 
Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  even  so  shall  the  Son  of 
Man  be  lifted  up."  (John  iii.) 


40  KlMCHl's    COMMENTARY,    &C, 

"  And  I  will  remove" — ''flljta  is  a  transitive  verb,  but 
in  Numb.  xiv.  44,  -Ittte  N'b,  "  They  departed  not,"  is  an 
intransitive.  And  this  shall  take  place  in  the  time  in 
which  the  prophets  promised  an  increase  of  Zerubbabel's 
dignity,  as  Haggai  says,  "  I  will  take  thee,  Zerubbabel ;  " 
and  Zechariah  says,  "  I  will  bring  my  servant,  the 
Branch."  Then  Israel  shall  be  in  prosperity  in  the  time 
of  the  second  temple,  therefore  it  is  said,  "  Ye  shall  call 
every  man  his  neighbour." 

"  The  iniquity  of  the  land  "  may  be  taken  literally,  or, 
it  may  signify  the  punishment,  as  in  Gen.  xv.  16,  "  The 
iniquity  of  the  Amorite  is  not  yet  full ; "  that  is  to  say, 
that  he  would  remove  from  them  all  evil  and  all  affliction, 
and  they  should  be  in  prosperity. 

10.  "  In  that  day  ye  shall  call"  on  account  of  the 
abundance  of  peace  which  ye  shall  have. 


41 


CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  "  And  the  angel  came  again  and  waked  me." — In 
the  other  visions  he  says,  "  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes,"  because 
he  saw  of  himself;  but  the  angel  waked  him  to  see  this 
vision. 

injl^E  ito.'i  ("that  is,  wakened  out  of  his  sleep"). 
This  verb  is  in  the  Niphal  conjugation,  and  is  thus  to  be 
interpreted,  "  He  waked  me,  and  I  was  awakened  as  a 
man  that  is  wakened  out  of  sleep." 

2.  IBS'1'!-     The  k'thiv  (the  text)  has  the  third  person, 
"  And  he  said,"  which  is  a  continuation  of  the  narrative; 
but  the  k'ri  (the  marginal  note)  has  "Jp^J,  the  first  person, 
"  And  I  said,"  which  refers  to  the  words  of  Zechariah. 

"  And  her  bowl,"  nb:n.  The  point  in  the  n  is  mappik, 
and  the  word  is  not  the  third  person  feminine  (of  a  verb). 
A  similar  instance  is  in  Isa.  xxviii.  4,  V"?i?  D}£?  rn-teja^, 
("  As  her  hasty  fruit  before  the  summer.")  And  again, 
Job  xxviii.  11,  *-Vitf  N?5*  n»b?;T)  ("And  her  secret 
bringeth  he  forth  to  light.")  And  again,  Ezek.  xxii.  24, 
D9J  DV2?  ^P},  ("  And  her  visitation  with  rain  [did  not 
take  place]  in  the  day  of  indignation.") 

"  And  his  seven  lamps  thereon ; "  like  the  candlestick  in 
the  law.  And  the  middle  one  is  a  type  of  the  Deity,  who 
forms  the  bond  of  union  to  unite  contraries.  And  thus 
the  seven  doubles  f  are  contraries,  and  the  governors 

*  Kirachi  appears  to  have  read  with  a  Mappik. 

f  By  the  seven  doubles,  Kimchi  means  the  letters  in  which  a 
dagesh  can  occur.  We  now  commenly  reckon  only  six,  ncs  in,  but 
the  rabbies  include  the  i,  as  some  instances  are  found  where  it  is 
doubled.  (See  Gesen.  Lehrgeb.,  §  37,  1.)  In  this  reduplication  the 
Cabbalistic  writers  find  great  mysteries,  to  which  Kimchi  here  alludes. 
For  instance,  Saadiah  Gaon  says,  "  As  these  letters  have  got  two 
opposite  states  (the  dageshed  and  the  undageshed),  by  their  means  were 
established  those  things  which  have  got  opposites.  By  means  of  the 


42  KlMCHl'S  COMMENTARY 

to  the  world,  which  is  made  up  of  contraries,  are  the  seven 
planets ;  *  and  the  world  has  also  six  sides  and  three 
planes  (dimensions),  but  the  master  of  the  sides  is  the 
seventh,  and  that  is  the  centre ;  and  thus  it  is  with  the 
body  of  every  thing.  But  the  author  of  the  book  of  Jet- 
zirah  attributes  to  the  world  six  sides,  answering  to  the 
six  points,  and  the  holy  temple  situate  in  the  middle,  f 
He  mentions  the  thing  most  honoured  among  all  creatures. 

se  Thereon,"  i.  e.,  on  the  candlestick;  and  the  bowl 
was  above  them;  and  he  showed  him  this  vision  to 
inform  him,  that  God,  blessed  be  He,  gives  light  to 
Israel,  which  is  the  contrary  of  their  having  been  in 
darkness. 

"  Seven  and  seven  pipes  to  the  lamps."  J — The  whole 
had  seven  pipes;  one  pipe  to  each  lamp.  And  Rashi,  of 

dageshed  letters,  were  created  the  things  that  are  strong,  as  life,  peace, 
riches,  seed,  grace,  dominion,  wisdom ;  and  by  means  of  the  un- 
dageshed  letters,  were  created  the  opposites  of  these.  (Comment,  in 
Sepher  Jetzirah,  edit.  Mantua,  fol.  88,  col.  1.) 

*  According  to  the  Jewish  astronomers,  the  seven  planets  are,  the 
Sun,  Venus,  Mercury,  the  Moon,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  which  were, 
according  to  Saadiah,  in  the  place  just  cited,  created  by  means  of  the 
seven  double  letters,  and  have,  therefore,  a  double  power  of  good  and 
evil,  according  to  their  position  with  respect  to  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 
The  rabbies  believe  in  astrology,  as  may  be  seen  abundantly  in  the  com- 
mentaries to  this  book  of  Jetzirah,  and  in  Aben  Ezra's  Commentary  on 
the  Tenth  Commandment,  &c.  &c.  They  also  believe  that  the  heavenly 
bodies  and  spheres  are  living  and  intelligent  beings,  to  whom  is  com- 
mitted the  management  of  things  here  below,  as  may  be  seen  in  Mai- 
monides.  (Hilchoth  Jesode  Torah,  c.  Hi.,  and  Moreh  Nevuchim,  part  ii. 
c.5.) 

f  The  passage  to  which  Kimchi  alludes  is  as  follows,  "  The  seven 
double  letters,  rnHJ  -m,  answer  to  the  seven  extreme  points.  Of  these 
six  are,  the  zenith  and  the  nadir,  the  east  and  the  west,  the  north  and  the 
south,  and  the  holy  temple  is  placed  in  the  centre,  and  it  bears  them 
all."  The  Commentary  on  which  passage  tells  us,  that  "  the  holy  temple 
is  a  mystical  expression  to  signify  the  Creator."  (Sepher  Jetzirah,  edit. 
Mantua,  fol.  77,  col.  1.  Compare  also  fol.  103,  col.  1.) 
J  Seven  several  pipes.  (Marginal  Translation.) 


ON    ZECHARIAH,  CHAP.  IV.  43 

blessed  memory,   has   explained  that  there   were  seven 
pipes  to  each  lamp. 

"  Pipes"  nhpSTO,  pourers  5  an  adjective  instead  of  a 
verb,*  and  this  name  was  used,  because  they  were  pouring 
oil  from  lamp  to  lamp. 

3.  And  two  olive-trees." — And  again  I  saw  two  olive- 
trees,  either  on  the  candlestick  or  on  the  bowl,  but  this  is 
much  the  same. 

"  One  upon  the  right  of  the  bowl,  and  the  other  upon 
the  left  thereof"  (nbrfap-b^.)  — The  same  as  nb«Btt?a, 
i.  e.,  ^  has  the  same  force  as  B.  But  he  says,  they  were 
upon  the  bowl,  and  in  a  following  verse  (11)  he  says, 
"  Upon  the  right  of  the  candlestick,  and  on  the  left 
thereof  j "  the  sense,  however,  is  the  same. 

4.  "  So  I  answered,"  is  clear. 

5.  "  And  the  angel  answered"  is  clear. 

6.  "  Then  he  answered  —  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power." 
— As  thou  hast  seen  the  work  of  the  candlestick,  that  it 
was  done  of  itself,  and  without  any  man  or  thing  arranging 
the   lamps,    or   pouring   oil   into   them,   thus   shall  the 
building  of  the  temple  be  effected  without  the  power  of 
man,  solely  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  blessed  be  He,  and  by  his 
good  pleasure.     But  he  afterwards  explains  to  him  the 
vision  in  detail. 

7.  "  Who  art  thou,  O  great  mountain." — He  says,  in 
reference   to    Sanballat   and  his   companions   who   were 
opposing,  Though  thou  be  like  a  great  mountain,  before 
Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain,  and  shall  not  be 
able  to  stand  before  him  to  stop  the  work. 

"  And  he  shall  bring  forth  the  head-stone."  f  As  he 
brought  forth  the  head-stone,  when  he  began  the  building, 
in  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the  ninth  month,  so  he  shall 
finish  the  work. 

*  The  Michlal  Jophi  reads  too,  "  the  active  participle."    Kimchi 
makes  the  root  p*r :  Gesenius  says,  ps. 
f  Kimchi  lakes  hrsim  in  the  past  time. 


44  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"  With  shoutings,  Grace,  grace."  When  Zerubbabel 
laid  the  head-stone  in  the  building,  he  laid  it  with 
shoutings  and  a  great  tumult,  and  all  the  people  said, 
Grace,  grace,  to  this  stone  from  God,  blessed  be  He. 
The  repetition  of  the  word  is  to  increase  the  force,  as 
"  Peace,  peace,  to  him  that  is  far  off."  (Isaiah  Ivii.  19.) 

8,  9.  "  Moreover  the  word  of  the  Lord  came. The 

hands  of  Zerubbabel  shall  make  an  end  of  if,"  i.  e.,  shall 
finish  it.  And  thus  the  verb  222  is  used  in  Isaiah  x.  12, 
"  Wherefore  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  the  Lord  hath 
performed  his  whole  work  upon  mount  Zion,"  i.  e., 
finished. 

10.  "  For  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things  ?  " 
For  when  they  began  to  build,  their  enemies  stopped  the 
work,  and,  behold,  that  day  was  the  day  of  small  shout- 
ings,* and  they  despised  that  day  during  all  the  years 
that  the  work  was  interrupted,  but  now,  when  they  see 
the  plummet  in  the  hand  of  Zerubbabel,  they  will  rejoice. 

"  The  plummet"  i.  e.,  u  the  stone,"  the  tin  perpen- 
dicular, which  is  in  the  hand  of  the  builder,  to  make  the 
building  straight.  The  governing  word  to  "  tin,"  is  left 
out ;  the  complete  form  is  b^n  73$  f^n,  "  The  stone, 
the  stone  of  tin."  The  perpendicular  weight  was  made  of 
tin  or  lead,  and  is  called  a  stone,  as  the  weights  are  called 
stone  in  Deut.  xxv.  13,  "  Thou  shalt  not  have  in  thy  bag 
a  stone  and  a  stone,"  i,  e.,  divers  weights. 

"  These  seven."— The  same  as  he  said  above ;  "  Upon 
one  stone  seven  eyes."  (iii.  9.)  "  They  are  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord,  which  run  to  and  fro  through  all  the  earth,"  and 
he  sees  those  who  persecute  Israel,  and  he  will  keep  them 
from  their  hand,  that  they  should  not  rule  over  them. 

11.  "  And   I  answered"  f — He   had   understood    the 
matter  of  the  candlestick,  for  it  had  been  exhibited  to 
him  to  show  him  light  and  joy,  and  the  angel  had  ex- 

*  Kimchi  supplies  shoutings;  the  Michlal  Jophi  has  the  same, 
t  Zechariah  did  not  ask  for  an  explanation  of  the  candlestick. 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.    IV.  45 

plained  to  him  concerning  the  candlestick,  that  it  was 
made  of  itself,  to  show  him,  that  it  was  not  by  might  nor 
by  power :  and  now  he  asked  him  about  the  signification 
of  the  two  olive-trees,  and  the  two  branches  of  the  olive- 
trees,  and  the  two  golden  pipes;  and  though  his  question 
(about  the  latter)  is  not  mentioned  in  the  vision,  we  learn 
that  he  saw  them.  The  angel  replied  to  the  two  questions 
briefly  and  mystically,  "  These  are  the  two  sons  of  oil ; " 
and  the  prophet  understood  his  answer. 

12.  "  And  I  answered  —  the  two  olive-branches." — 
From  these  two  olive-trees  proceeded  two  olive-branches, 
which  were  pressed  "  in  the  hand,  T2j  of  the  two  golden 
pipes,'*  and  they  were  pressed*  of  themselves.  The 
meaning  of  "  in  the  hand"  is,  In  the  midst  (through,  as 
in  English) ;  and  behold,  the  olive-trees  were  pressed  in 
the  midst  of  the  golden  pipes,  and  the  oil  fell  from  the 
pipes  into  the  bowl ;  and  from  the  bowl  it  went  forth  to 
the  tubes ;  and  from  the  tubes  to  the  lamps.  And  he 
compares  these  branches  C»*?2jttf)  to  ears  of  wheat  (D^bsttf), 
because  they  were  full  of  oTive-berries,  as  the  ears  are 
full  of  grains  of  wheat. 

s<  Pipes"  rVTiri52,  are  vessels  of  the  cruse- species 
(nns^).  Jonathan  has  rendered  this  word  by  )J^lppN 
(phials);  and  so  Onkelos  has  rendered  rPmDS::  O^e 
wafers,  Exod.  xvi.  31)  by  the  same  word.f 

"  Which  empty  the  golden  oil  out  of  themselves." — 
Oil  clear  as  gold:  and  similar  to  this  is  the  verse  in 
Jer.  li.  7?  "  Babylon  hath  been  a  golden  cup  in  the  hand 
of  the  Lord,"  i.  e.,  the  wine  was  clear  and  pure. 

14.  "  And  he  said.  These  are  the  two  sons  of  oil." — 

*  i.  e.,  The  oil  pressed  out  of  them. 

t  In  Hebrew,  nnci?  signifies  a  cruse,  and  rvnw,  which  is  only  a 
different  form  of  the  same  word,  signifies  "  a  cake,  wafer."  In  Chaldee 
the  one  word,  pmpo»,  signifies  both,  though  sometimes  a  distinction  is 
made  by  the  insertion  of  '  after  N.  (See  Buxtorf  Lex.  Talm.  in  radic. 


46  KIMCHl's   COMMENTARY,   &C. 


-in$T!  is  the  same  as  ?£$,  oil,  as  in  Deut.  xxviii.  5,  corn, 
wine,  "in^yi,  or  oil."  Therefore  he  called  them  olive- 
trees,  and  they  are  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua  ;  and  he  calls 
them  "  sons  of  oil,"  because  they  were  anointed  with  the 
oil  of  anointing,  the  one  to  the  kingdom,  and  the  other  to 
the  priesthood. 

«  That  stand  by  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth"  for  they 
are  appointed  to  do  his  pleasure.  —  Jonathan  has  inter- 
preted thus,  "  These  are  the  two  sons  of  princes,  who 
stand  before  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  But  as  to  the 
matter  of  the  two  olive-trees  and  the  two  olive-branches, 
no  explanation  is  given  of  what  they  signified.  And, 
behold,  the  olive-trees  represent  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua, 
and  the  two  branches  that  proceed  from  them  represent 
their  deeds,  for  with  their  hands  they  began  the  building 
of  the  temple.  The  two  golden  pipes  represent  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah,  who  came  after  them,  and  by  the  hands  of 
these  four,  light  and  good  went  forth  to  Israel. 


47 


CHAPTER  V. 

1.  "  Then  I  turned a  flying  roll." — He  saw  in 

a  vision,  a  roll  flying  through  the  air,  and  this  is  also 
Jonathan's  interpretation,  "  a  flying  roll." 

2.  "  And  he  said  -          -  the  length  thereof  twenty 
cubits,   and  the  breadth  ten  cubits" — It  is  not  clear  to 
what  time  this  prophecy  applies,  but  it  seems  as  if  it 
were  spoken  of  the  prophet's  own  times;  for  we  have  seen 
in  the  book  of  Ezra,  that  they  were  then  guilty  of  many 
transgressions.  And  this  curse  went  forth  against  stealing 
and  false  swearing ;  for,  although  stealing  is  not  so  grave 
an  offence  as  false  and  lying  oaths,  yet  thereby  men  are 
led  to  swear  falsely.     As  to  the  circumstance,  that  he  saw 
the  measure  of  the  length  and  the  measure  of  the  breadth, 
the  commentators  have  explained  this  to  mean,  that  he 
saw  it  going  forth  from  the  porch  of  the  temple,  of  which 
the  length  was  twenty  cubits,  and  the  breadth  ten  cubits, 
according  to   the  building  which   Solomon  built :    and 
although  it  was  then  desolate,  yet  this  roll  had  gone  forth 
thence,  for  it  had  been  spread  out  there,  according  to  the 
measure  of  the  length  and  the  breadth ;  and  this  is  what 
is  meant  by  the  expressions,   "  that  goeth  forth,"  and 
'*  I  will  bring  it  forth." 

3.  "  Then  said  he This  is  the  curse"  the  male- 
diction. 

"  Over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth"  the  land  of  Israel. 
— Jonathan  has  interpreted,  "  This  is  the  oath*  which 
shall  go  forth."  The  subject  of  this  roll  is  similar  to  that 
seen  by  Ezekiel,  which  was  written  within  and  without 
(Ezek.  ii.),  and  so  this  roll  was  written  on  both  sides,  and 
the  writing  was  on  one  side,  "  Every  one  that  stealeth 
shall  be  cut  off;  and  on  the  other  side,  "  Every  one  that 

from  «o»,  jurare. 


48  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

sweareth  shall  be  cut  off'."  The  meaning  of  ^^?,  "  ac- 
cording to  it,'*  is  the  same  as  in  Genesis  xliv.  18, 
runs?  *pD3  ("For  thou  art  even  as  Pharaoh");  and 
again,  1  Kings  xxii.  4,  ^pEJ  ^ES  ("  I  am  as  thou  art") ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  roll  was  written  with  curse  and  male- 
diction on  this  side  as  on  that  side,  and  on  that  side  as  on 
this  side;  the  meaning  of  nj?3  \Sy  «  Shall  be  cut  off,"  as 
in  Exodus  xxxiv.  75  n^r.  tfb  nj?3.  (English  translation, 
"  That  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.")  n|M  is  the 
conjugation  Niphal.  Although  I  have  borne  with  them 
long  until  now,  from  henceforth  they  shall  receive  their 
punishment,  for  their  time  is  come,  therefore  this  roll 
went  forth.  The  prophet  saw  the  roll,  but  he  did  not  see 
the  writing  upon  it  as  Ezekiel  did,  until  the  angel  told 
him,  for  the  power  of  prophecy  was  gradually  exhausting, 
and,  therefore,  the  visions  of  Zechariah  are  obscure,  and 
in  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Malachi,  prophecy  ceased. 

4.  "  /  will  bring  it  forth.*' — This  curse  I  have  brought 
forth  to  punish,  from  this  time  forth,  the  secret  thief  and 
the  swearer,  and  I  will  no  longer  bear  with  them. 

"  And  it  shall  remain"  n^b1].  The  curse  shall  abide  in 
the  midst  of  his  house,  until  it  consume  him,  and  the 
timbers' of  his  house,  and  the  stones  thereof. 

5.  "  Then  the  angel  went  forth." — It  appears 

that,  after  showing  him  the  vision  of  the  flying  roll,  the 
angel  was  hidden  from  him,  and  afterwards  he  went  forth 
and  showed  him  the  vision  of  the  ephah. 

"  That  goeth  forth" — Going  forth  from  the  house  of 
the  Lord,  as  the  former.  Or  the  meaning  may  be,  Going 
forth  from  the  land  of  Israel.  The  Targum  of  Jonathan 
has,  "  Who  are  these  that  are  revealed  ? " 

6.  "  And  he  saidy  This  is  the  ephah  that  goeth  forth." 
— He  showed  him  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes,  who  had 
long  since  been  led  away  captive,  how  that  they  were 
utterly  lost  in  the   captivity,  and  did  not  now  go  forth, 
when  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  went  forth. 


ON    ZECHAUIAH,   CHAP.    V.  49 

He  showed  him  an  ephah,  which  is  a  measure,  to  signify 
that  God  had  measured  out  to  them  measure  for  measure  ; 
for,  according  as  they  had  done  by  continuing  many 
days  in  their  wickedness,  from  the  day  that  the  kingdom 
was  divided  until  the  day  that  they  were  led  away  captive; 
and  as  they  had  not  had  one  out  of  all  their  kings,  who 
turned  them  to  good,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they  all 
walked  in  an  evil  way ;  according,  I  say,  as  they  had 
continued  long  in  evil,  so  they  shall  be  many  days  in 
captivity:  this  is  measure  for  measure,  therefore  the 
prophet  saw  an  ephah,  which  is  a  measure. 

"  He  said  moreover,  This  is  their  eye  in  all  the  earth" 
Again  the  angel  interpreted  to  him,  and  said,  "  This  id 
their  eye;"  that  is  to  say,  this  ephah,  which  thou  seest, 
teaches,  that  there  is  an  eye  upon  them,  which  sees  their 
deeds,  and  which  also  sees  in  all  the  earth ;  as  he  said 
above,  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  that  run  to  and  fro  through 
all  the  earth. 

"  Their  eye"— The  eye  that  seeth  them,  i.  e.,  the  eye 
of  the  Lord. 

7.  "  And,  behold,  a  talent  of  lead  lifted  ?<;;."— Was 
lifted  up. 

"  In  the  midst  of  the  ephah." — 123,  talent,  is  feminine, 
as  nns  nrft.  1??!,  "  One  loaf  of  bread  "  (Ex.  xxix.  23) ; 
Fjpp-'n??  nips,  "  Ten  talents  of  silver."  (2  Kings  v.  5.) 
And  u  talent  of  lead  is  to  teach  us,  that  it  was  to  make 
it  heavy,  and  to  sink  it  in  captivity. 

"  And  this  is  one  woman  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the 
eplnili" — To  whom  does  this  woman  refer?  She  is  the 
ten  tribes,  who  were  included  in  one  kingdom,  and  walked 
one  way  to  evil,  therefore,  he  calls  her  "  one  woman  ;  " 
and  she  is  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  ephah,  for  she 
receives  the  measure  which  she  meted  withal. 

S.  "  And  he  said,  This  is  the  wickedness"— The  angel 

id  to  tlie  prophet,  this  ephah  is  the  wickedness  that  was 

E 


50  KIMCHI'S    COMMENTARY 

in  Israel,  and  that  is,  the  ten  tribes  who  made  the  calves, 
and  began  the  service  of  Baal. 

"  And   he  cast  her  into   the   midst   of  the   ephah"- 
Therefore  God,  blessed  be  He,  cast  her  into  the  midst  of 
the   ephah,    for   he   measured   to   her   according   to  her 
measure. 

And  he  cast  the  weight  of  lead  upon  the  mouth  thereof." 
— To  sink  her  in  captivity  many  days.  "  The  mouth 
thereof,"  means  the  mouth  of  the  ephah.  nrtzn  may  be 
a  substantive  or  an  adjective. 

9.  "  Then  I  lifted  up  mine  eyes and  beheld  two 

women." — As  we  interpreted  "  one  woman  "  to  mean  the 
ten  tribes,  so  we  will  interpret  the  two  women  of  Judah 
and  Benjamin,  who  had  been  carried  captive  to  Babylon. 
Although  they  had  long  since  gone  up  from  the  captivity, 
when  this  vision  happened,  he  showed  him  the  vision 
for  the  sake  of  those  who  remained  in  Babylon,  who  weie 
lazy  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  even  after  the  building  of  the 
house  had  begun.  And  he  said  that  he  saw  these  two 
women  going  forth  in  captivity. 

"  And  the  wind  in  their  wings"  i.  e.,  They  were  very 
quickly  carried  captive  to  Babylon. 

"  For  they  had  wings  like  the  wings  of  a  stork)'  that  is 
to  say,  wings  long  and  broad  like  the  stork's. 

"  And  they  lifted  up  the  ephah." — They  lifted  it  up  upon 
their  wings,  to  show  them  that  their  captivity  was  ini 
equity  and  in  measure,  as  God  measured  to  them  for] 
their  evil  deeds.  The  words,  "  between  earth  and 
heaven,"  are  very  plain ;  for  he  that  flies,  flies  between 
the  earth  and  the  heavens,  in  the  firmament  of  thcji 
heavens ;  and  show  that  these  two  are  not  like  the  firste; 
woman,  for  upon  her  he  cast  a  talent  of  lead  to  sink  her 
in  the  earth,  in  the  place  of  her  captivity.  But  of  tin 
he  did  not  speak  to  sink  them  in  the  earth,  but  they 
suspended  in  the  air,  until  the  time  that  they  returned 


ON    ZECHARIAH,   CHAP.  V.  51 

their  land  after  the  seventy  years.  The  reason  why  he 
saw  Judah  and  Benjamin  as  a  vision  of  two  women,  and 
the  ten  tribes  as  one  woman,  ie,  because  the  tribe  of 
Judah  was  kept  distinct  on  account  of  the  kingdom;  and 
the  tribe  of  Benjamin  was  joined  with  them  more  than 
the  other  tribes,  because  their  portion  was  like  one,  and 
they  were  both  carried  captive  together,  therefore  he 
says,  "  Two  women."  That  great  wise  man,  the  Rav, 
our  rabbi,  Moses,  the  son  of  Maimon,  may  his  memory 
be  blessed,  has  interpreted  the  two  women  of  angels, 
whom  he  saw  in  the  likeness  of  women,  as  he  had  also 
seen  them  in  the  likeness  of  horses,  because  the  power  of 
prophecy  was  languid  in  his  time.* 

10.  "  And  I  said  —  whither  do  these  bear  the  ephah?" — 
He  did  not  ask  this  in  the  first  vision  (but  now),  because 
he  saw  them  bearing  it  away  quickly.  And  what  is  the 
meaning  of  this,  that  the  woman  bore  away  the  ephah  ? 
It  is  to  show,  that  they  caused  the  blessed  God  to  pay 
them  according  to  their  measure.  And  it  is  as  if  he 
said,  "  They  carry  themselves  away  captive" 

11."  And  he  said,  to  build  her  an  house  in  the  land  of 
Shinar" — The  ^  in  ''?,  is  rapheh.f  This  is  what  Je- 
remiah sent  to  them,  saying,  "  This  captivity  is  long, 
build  ye  houses,  and  dwell  in  them."  (Jer.  xxix.  28.) 

"  And  it  shall  be  established,  and  set  there  upon  her 
own  base." — Their  habitation  shall  be  established  there, 
that  is  to  say,  they  have  built  houses  there,  and  estab- 
lished their  habitation  there ;  and  it  is  said,  "  Set  these 
upon  her  own  base,"  that  is  to  say,  the  base  that  she  has 
!  made  for  herself,  because  by  the  building  of  houses  and 
1  planting    of    vineyards,    they   are   lazy  to   go   up   from 
!  Babylon,  who  have  remained  there  after  that  Ezra  went 
j  up,  and  they  did  not  wish  to  go  up  even  after  the  building 

*   In  the  Moreh  Nevuchim,  part  i.,  chap.  49. 
t  It  might  have  a  inappik.     (See  Michlal  Jophi.) 


52  KIMCHI'S    COMMENTARY,    &C. 


of  the  house  was  begun,  •frpan']  is  a  compound  form 
from  niTOn  the  Hiphil,  and  nnsin?  the  Hophal.  And 
the  reason  of  the  composition  is,  that  at  first,  when  she 
was  carried  into  captivity,  nTOn*  she  was  placed  there 
without  her  will,  and  afterwards,  niTOn*  she  placed 
herself  there,  i.  e.,  she  tarried  there  according  to  her  own 
will,  and  was  lazy  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem. 


53 


CHAPTER  VI. 

1 .  "  And  I  turned four  chariots  going  forth 

from  the  two  mountains,  and  the  mountains  were  mountains 
of  brass." — Visions    of   the  four  monarchies,   which  he 
had  seen  twice.      Again  he  turned,  and  saw  them  a  third 
time  more  clearly  than  on  the  former  occasions.     And 
a  chariot.     niiD-iB  is  «•  team  of  four  horses, »  to  show  the 
strength  of  each  in  its  time,  when  it  ruled  in  the  world, 
and  each  of  them  did  evil  to  Israel.     And  again  he  saw 
them,  that  they  were  going  forth  between  the  two  moun- 
tains :  and  this  teaches  us,  that  their  strength  was  as  the 
strength  of  mountains.     And  the  mountains  were  moun- 
tains of  nitfn3)  and  that  is  the  cutting  iron,  that  is  called 
atsir  f  in  profane  tongues.     There  are  similar  expressions 
in  the  Bible,  and  one  of  them  is,  "  Walking  with  slander, 
brass  and  iron."  J   (Jer.  vi.  28.)     The  meaning  is,  that  it 
is  stronger  than  stone,  for  it  cuts  and  graves  stone ;  and 
it  was  to  represent  the  strength  more  forcibly,  that  he 
showed  him  that  they  were  mountains  of  brass  (or  steel). 
And   again,    nttfm  is   mentioned,    because  it  is  a  noun, 
derived  from  »na>  to  try,  as  T1?1???  njrP:  *yn&\  Vntfn:?? 
"  I  have  learned  by  experience  that  the  Lord  hath  blessed 
me  for  thy  sake."  (Gen.  xxx.  2J.)     And  by  the  hand  of 
the  four  kingdoms  Israel  was  proved  and  tried. 

*  The  rabbles  infer  that  ^5570,  signifies  a  team  of  four  horses,  or  a 
four-horse  chariot,  because  it  is  said  in  1  Kings  x.  29,  "  And  a  chariot 
came  up,  and  went  out  of  Egypt  for  six  hundred  shekels,  and  an  horse 
for  an  hundred  and  fifty."  The  price  of  the  chariot  is  here  four  times 
that  of  the  horse. 

t  Acero  is  the  Spanish  for  steel ;  Kimchi  thiuks  that  rwna  signifies 
not  brass,  but  steel.  In  Buxtorfs  Bible  this  word  is  written  T"SM, 
but  in  the  Michlal  Jophi  it  stands  thus,  VTW,  which  is  more  correct. 

J  On  this  passage  of  Jeremiah,  Kimchi  also  says,  that  men:  signifies 
steel,  but  he  says,  that  it  is  a  mixture  of  brass  and  iron. 


54  KIMCHj's    COMMENTARY 

2.  "  In  the  fast  chariot." — A  type  of  the  Babylonian 
monarchy,  as  I  have  explained. 

"  Black  horses."— These  are  the  same  as  the  speckled 
horses  above.  This  is  a  type  of  the  Medo-Perisan  mo- 
narchy, and  he  called  them  above  "  speckled/'  and  here 
black,  for  they  are  two  nations,  although  but  one  king- 
dom. Some  interpreters  say,  that  he  showed  their  colour 
black,  because  the  faces  of  Israel  were  made  black  in  their 
monarchy,  and  this  was  in  the  days  of  Haman.  Other 
interpreters  say,  that  these  colours  agree  with  their  custom 
of  dying  their  clothes,  and  that  one  was  accustomed  to 
the  speckled  colour,  and  the  other  to  black. 

3.  "  And  in  the  third  chariot  white." — A  type  of  the 
Grecian  monarchy,  but  we  do  not  know  why  he  has  de- 
signated them  by  white.     R.  Saadiah,  of  blessed  memory, 
has  written,  that  it  is  on  account  of  the  first  king  of  Greece, 
Alexander,   the  Macedonian,   who  was  a  wise  man  and 
philosopher;    and   as    wisdom   is  a  thing  that   is   white 
and  fair,  therefore  he  designated  that  monarchy  by  the 
appellation  white. 

"  And  in  the  fourth  chariot  grisled  and  bay  /torses." — 
In  this  chariot  he  saw  two  colours,  "  grisled,*'  D*>T"a> 
which  is  a  colour  that  has  white  spots,  after  the  likeness 
of  hail,  and  they  are  in  the  midst  of  another  colour.  And 
the  reason  why  he  showed  him  this  colour  in  reference  to 
the  Roman  empire,  is,  because  they  think  to  triumph 
over  the  law  of  Moses,  which  is  white  as  hail,  but  they 
mix  it  with  many  creeds,  as  the  hail  is  mixed  with  the 
colour  that  was  in  them  (the  horses),  whether  black  or 
any  other  colour. 

"  Bay." — Jonathan  has  rendered  this  word  by  T??^1!?, 
i.  e.,  that  the  colour  thereof  was  the  colour  of  ashes. 
This  chariot  is  a  type  of  the  Roman  monarchy,  which 
humbled  the  Grecian  monarchy,  and  has  dominion  in  the 
world.  He  saw  therein  two  colours,  because  there  is 
another  kingdom  with  her,  which  rules  in  the  world,  and 


Ott    /K<  liAKIAM,    <HA1».    VI.  55 

that  is  the  kingdom  of  Ishmael;  and  so  it  is  said,  in  the 
kingdom  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  as  Daniel  has  interpreted 
it,  "  The  kingdom  shall  be  divided."  (Dan.  ii.  1  1.) 

4.  "  Then  I  answered." — Inasmuch  as  he  had  already 
seen  two  visions  relating  to  this  one  matter,  and  as,  in  the 
second  of  the  four  horses,  more  light  had  been  given  him 
than  in  the  first,  according  as  the  angel  explained  it  to 
him  \  therefore  when  he  saw  again  the  four  chariots,  he 
knew  that  it  was  exhibited  to  him  in  order  to  communi- 
cate something  new,  and  therefore  asked  the  angel, 
"What  are  these,  my  Lord?"  i.e.,  For  what  new  in- 
formation are  these  come  ?  I  have  already  seen  that  the 
visions  represent  the  four  monarchies;  if  so,  what  are 
these  ?  for  what  purpose  do  I  see  them  ? 

"  And  the  angel  answered These  the  four  winds  of 

heaven"— Winds  nirw  here  signifies  the  same  as  rrirm^> 
to  the  windy.  (There  are  similar  cases  where  the  pre- 
position *?,  to,  is  omitted,]  as  nbtpT  tfhjl,  "  And  he 
came  Jerusalem,"  i.e.,  to  Jerusalem.  (1  Kings  iii.  15.) 
And  again:  VlNt0T7J,  "the  son  of  Saul,"  for  VlStp  ]$? 
"  to  the  son  of  Saul "  (2  Sana.  iv.  2)  ;  and  other  similar 
cases.  The  meaning  is,  These  four  chariots  go  forth  to 
the  four  winds  of  heaven ;  i.  e.,  to  give  permission  to  the 
four  monarchies  to  rule  in  the  four  winds,  each  in  its 
time,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  whole  world,  which  has  four 
corners. 

5.  "  From  standing   before   the   Lord  of   the    whole 
earth"  i. e.,  commissioned  by  God,  who  sent  them,  ac- 
cording as  it  is  said,   "  And  the  sons  of  God  came  to 
present  themselves  before  the  Lord."     (Job  i.  6.) 

6.  "  Which  are  therein." — He  does  not  mention  the 
red   horses,   for   the  Babylonian    monarchy   had  already 
passed  away.     The  Medo-Persian  monarchy  went  forth 
first  to  the  land  of  the  north,  which  is  Babylon,  to  destroy 
it,  but  afterwards  ruled  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth. 
The  white  horses,  which  represent  the  Grecian  monarchy, 


56  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

went  forth  after  them,  when  their  kingdom  was  strong  ; 
for  behold,  Alexander  the  Macedonian,  the  first  King  of 
Greece,  slew  Darius  in  Babylon,  and  took  the  kingdom 
from  him,  and  afterwards  had  dominion,  he  and  his  suc- 
cessors, over  the  whole  earth. 

"  And  the  grisled  go  forth  toward  the  country  of 
Teman,"  which  is  the  south  country,  for  Rome  is  to  the 
north,  and  Lulianus  Caesar,  who  reigned  over  Rome, 
began  to  wage  war  against  the  kingdom  of  Greece;  and  in 
the  beginning  of  his  wars,  he  went  forth  to  the  land  of 
Egypt,  which  is  to  the  south.  At  that  time  the  Greeks 
ruled  over  all  lands,  but  this  Lulianus  Caesar  prevailed 
against  them,  and  caused  the  kingdom  to  pass  away  from 
the  Greeks,  and  turned  it  to  the  Romans. 

7.  "  And  the  lay"  (strong).— These  signify  the  Turkish 
empire,  who  strengthened  themselves  to  seek  a  kingdom 
in  any  place  that  might  offer  :  and  therefore  he  does  not 
define  any  wind  of  heaven  for  them.    This  is  what  is  said, 
"  And  they  sought  to  go,  that  they  might  walk  to  and  fro 
through  the  earth." 

"  And  he  said,"  i.  e.,  Permission  was  given  them  to 
walk  to  and  fro,  and  to  subdue  lands. 

8.  "  Then  cried  he  upon  me." — He  cried  upon  me  with 
a  loud  voice,  and  said  to  me,   "  Behold  these  that  go 
toward  the  north  country  have  quieted  my  spirit  in  the 
north  country ;   i.  e.,  These  black  horses  which  went  forth 
to  Babylon  to  destroy  it  have  caused  a  quieting  of  my 
spirit  by  destroying  it. 

"  Have  quieted  my  spirit" — My  wrath  which  I  had 
against  them,  because  they  did  evil  to  Israel,  more  than 
enough,  as  is  said,  "  I  was  a  little  displeased,  and  they 
helped  forward  the  affliction." 

9.  10.  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  —    •—  take"  Sfc. 
rtipb  is  the  infinitive  instead  of  the  imperative,  as  Tyibn 

«  Go  and  cry."     (Jer.  ii.  2.) 
"  Take  of  the  captivity"  of  those  that  have  come  from 


<»N    ZECIIAR1AH,    CHAP.    VI.  57 

the  captivity,  i.  e.  Hildai,  and  Tobijah,  and  Jedaiah,  and 
Josiah,  who  had  brought  silver  and  gold  as  a  free-will 
offering  for  the  building  of  the  temple.  The  word  of  the 
Lord  came  to  the  prophet,  and  made  this  known  to  him, 
and  said  to  him  that  he  should  take  the  silver  and  the 
gold  and  make  crowns  thereof. 

"  Come  thou  the  same  day,"  i.  e.,  In  the  day  that  thou 
comest  thither,  for  he  had  not  told  him  to  go  there  on  the 
day  of  the  prophecy. 

"  Ami  go  into  the  house  of  Josiah  the  son  of  Zepha- 
niah"  for  the  others  were  in  his  house  ;  and  this  is  what 
is  said,  "  Which  are  come  from  Babylon,"  Josiah  and  the 
others  above-mentioned. 

11.  "  Then  take  silver,"  t°yr.—  Thou  shalt  take  from 
them  silver  and  gold  which  they  have  brought  in  their 
hands  as  a  voluntary  contribution. 

"  And  make  crowns"  —  Thou  shalt  make  thereof  two 
crowns,  and  place  one  upon  the  head  of  Joshua,  to  dis- 
tinguish him  as  high-priest  :  and  this  is  similar  to  the 
pure  mitre  which  they  placed  on  his  head  in  the  prophecy 
as  is  said  above.  As  to  the  other  crown,  it  was  not 
necessary  to  mention  what  was  to  be  done  with  it,  for 
it  is  clear  that  it  was  to  be  upon  the  head  of  Zerubbabel, 
for  he  was  in  the  place  of  king,  and  no  king  without 
a  crown.  And  perhaps  before  they  placed  the  crown  on 
his  head  he  was  called  governor,  as  it  is  written,  "  Go- 
vernor of  Judah'*  (Hag.  i.  1):  but  after  that  the  crown 
had  been  placed  on  his  head  they  called  him  king,  for, 
although  this  is  not  written,  the  circumstances  warrant 
this  opinion. 

"  And  make  "  C^JHR.  —  According  to  Ben  Naphthali,* 


*  R.  Jacob  ben  Naphthali,  a  Babylonian  rabbi,  and  R.  Aaron  bu 
Asher,  a  learned  rabbi  of  Tiberias,  both  of  the  llth  century,  collected 
various  readings  from  the  manuscripts  then  existing.  See  the  Prole- 
gomena to  Walton's  Polyglott,  iv.  9,  and  Home's  Introduction,  vol.  ii., 
p.  37. 


58  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

this  word  is  Milra,  the  accent  is  under  Ihe^,  but  according 
to  Ben  Asher  it  is  Milel,  and  the  accent  is  under  the  jp, 
and  so  we  read. 

"  And  speak  unto  him Behold  the  man  whose 

name  is  the  Branch  ;  "  i.  e.,  Behold  a  man  is  with  thee 
who  shall  be  the  head  of  Israel,  and  that  is  Zerubbabel, 
and  he  shall  be  called  the  Branch,  for  his  advancement 
shall  be  like  a  branch  of  the  ground,  which  grows  up 
gradually.  Thus  his  degree  shall  gradually  mount,  until 
it  be  very  great,  as  Haggai  prophesied  concerning  him  : 
"  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  will  I  take  thee,  O 
Zerubbabel,"  &c.  (Hag.  ii.  23.) 

"  He  shall  grow  up  from  under  him" — From  his  place,* 
i.  e.,  the  place  where  he  is,  that  is  Jerusalem,  from  whence 
his  advancement  is  to  come. 

13.  "Even  he  shall  build." — This  is  said  twice  for 
confirmation. 

"And  he  shall  bear  the  glory." — He  shall  bear  the 
glory  and  majesty  of  royalty. 

"  Upon  Ms  throne" — As  the  king  who  sits  upon  his 
throne  and  rules  the  land. 

"And  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne  "  \  that  is, 
before  his  throne.  The  preposition  bv  has  the  same  force 
above,  \nsn  b^  P"?N  bv  SSVinE,  "  From  standing  before 
the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth."  And  thus  [the  priest  is 
described].  (1  Sam.  ii.  35.)  "  And  he  shall  walk  before 
mine  Anointed  for  ever ;"  for  the  priest  was  accustomed 

*  Here  again  our  translators  agree  with  Kimchi.  Hengstenberg 
thinks  that  the  right  translation  is  "  De  subter  se  germinabit,"  which 
contains  the  explanation  of  rrps.  The  great  personage  here  promised 
will  bear  the  name  "  branch  "  with  good  reason,  for  he  will  not  descend 
from  above  in  full  glory,  but  like  a  plant  that  shoots  forth  from  the  earth, 
gradually  rise  from  the  humility  of  his  beginning."  (Christologie,  part  ii. 
page  74.) 

f  Kimchi  would  translate,  "  And  there  shall  be  a  priest  before  the 
throne."  But  this  is  evidently  false ;  INDU  fr,  just  two  or  three  words 
before,  means  (t  upon  his  throne." 


ON    ZECHAIUAH,    CHAP.    VI.  59 

to  come  before  the  king  to  instruct  him  and  to  speak 
with  him.  But  the  king  was  not  in  the  habit  of  coming 
before  the  priest,  except  when  he  consulted  by  means  of 
the  Urim  and  Thummim,  as  it  is  written,  "  And  he  shall 
stand  before  Eleazar  the  priest,  who  shall  ask  counsel  for 
him,  after  the  judgment  of  Urim  before  the  Lord." 

"  And  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be  between  them  both" 
for  one  shall  not  envy  the  other,  and  they  both  shall 
agree  like  one  man  in  what  they  do. 

14.  "And  the  crowns  shall  be." — Each  of  the  crowns 
shall   be  to  them  for  a  memorial  in  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  as  it  is  said  in  the  law,  "  For  a  memorial  before  the 
Lord*'    (Exod.  xxx.  16):    that  is  to  say,  their  free-will 
offering  shall  ascend  before  the  Lord  for  good  to  them  in 
this  world  and  that  to  come.     Some  interpreters  say  "for 
a  memorial "  means,  that  they  should  be  remembered  in 
the  mouths  of  the  coming  generations,  for  their  names 
shall  be  written  and  engraved  upon  them. 

"  To  Helem." — He  is  Heldai,  whom  he  mentioned 
above,  and  he  had  two  names. 

"  And  to  Hen" — This  is  Josiah  whom  he  had  men- 
tioned. Our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory,  have  interpreted 
"  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord  "  to  mean,  that  the  crowns 
were  placed  there  after  they  had  been  put  on  the  heads  of 
Zerubbabel  and  Joshua,  and  so  it  is  in  the  treatise  Mid- 
doth  :  "  And  golden  chains  were  fixed  in  the  beams  *  of 
the  porch,  by  means  of  which  the  young  priests  went  up 
and  saw  the  crowns  which  were  in  the  windows  ;  for  it  is 
said,  And  the  crowns  shall  be  to  Helem,  and  to  Tobijah, 
and  to  Jadaiah,  and  to  Hen  the  son  of  Zephaniah,  for  a 
memorial  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord." 

15.  "  And  they  that  are  far  0jf."— Some  of  the  Gentiles 
of  the  land  shall  come  from  a  far  country  to  build  in  the 

*  Middoth,  c.  iii.  8.  See  Surenhusius,  p.  v.  362.  In  the  Mishna 
lately  published  at  Berlin,  mpn  is  translated  "  Decke"  (covering,  or 
roof). 


GO  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  VI.    9 — 15. 

temple  of  the  Lord  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  bring  voluntary 
contributions  for  the  building  of  the  temple.  And  per- 
haps this  was  fulfilled  in  the  days  of  Herod  in  the  great 
building  which  he  built  in  the  house  of  the  sanctuary. 
Some  interpreters  say,  "  They  that  are  far  off"  refers 
to  Israel  scattered  in  the  captivity  in  distant  lands. 

"And  this  shall  come  to  pass  if  ye  will  diligently  obey" 
All  this  that  I  promise  you  shall  come  to  pass  if  ye  will 
diligently  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  CHAPTER  VI.  9—15. 

THIS  is  one  of  the  many  passages  in  which  Rashi, 
Aben  Ezra,  and  Kimchi  depart  from  the  ancient  inter- 
pretation, and  offer  a  new  one  less  favourable  to  Chris- 
tianity. These  three  rabbies  assert,  as  in  the  third 
chapter,  that  the  "  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch  " 
signifies  Zerubbabel,  and  make  this  exposition  the  turn- 
ing-point of  the  whole  interpretation,  grammatical  and 
doctrinal.  They  have  thus  begun  at  the  wrong  end.  The 
first  consideration  must  be  the  grammatical  meaning,  and 
when  that  is  fixed,  then  comes  the  application  of  the 
sense  to  the  particular  person  intended;  and  this  is  the 
order  in  which  I  shall  offer  my  observations  on  this  pas- 
sage. 

I.  There  are  certain  portions  of  this  passage  of  which 
Kimchi  endeavours  to  establish  a  grammatical  exposition 
favourable  to  his  own  doctrinal  interpretation.  The  first 
of  these  is  in  verse  1 1,  nli^l?  O^^l  "  And  thou  shalt 
make  crowns ;"  which  Kimchi  thus  interprets  :  "  Thou 
shalt  make  thereof  two  crowns."  The  word  /ThtoV. 
"  crowns"  is  confessedly  the  plural  of  nntD^,  "  a  crown," 
and  if  we  look  merely  to  the  number,  it  may  signify  a 
thousand  crowns  as  well  as  two.  Two  is  therefore  an 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.    VI.   9 — 15.  61 

entirely  arbitrary  exposition,  or  rather  a  gratuitous  ad- 
dition to  the  text.  The  context  does  not  require  the 
number  two,  for  the  following  words  are  H7bVn$  ^p?^ 
Ttth'rp,  "  And  thou  shalt  set  upon  the  head  of  Joshua  the 
high-priest."  The  JTntaB  (crowns),  whatever  their  num- 
ber, whether  two  or  two  hundred,  were  to  be  set  upon 
the  head  of  Joshua.  There  is  not  one  word  said  about 
setting  them  on  the  head  of  Zerubbabel,  or  any  other 
person.  Abarbanel  thinks  that,  because  silver  and  gold 
are  both  mentioned,  there  were  two  crowns,  one  of  silver 
and  the  other  of  gold;  but  this  does  not  necessarily 
follow.  These  two  materials  might  be  employed,  whether 
there  was  only  one  crown  or  many  crowns.  There  is 
therefore  nothing  to  warrant  Kimchi's  assertion  that  two 
crowns  were  to  be  made. 

But  besides  the  plural  form,  we  must  also  inquire,  how 
this  word,  rvi~)lp3?,  is  elsewhere  used  in  the  plural.  It  occurs 
first  and  most  frequently  as  the  proper  name  of  a  city,  as 
1.TTO  7^71  rrhrpr,  "Ataroth  (crowns),  and  Dibon,  and 
Jazer."  (Numb,  xxxii.  3.)  And  again  :  "  It  went  down 
from  Janohah,  to  JYhiaS  Ataroth  (crowns),  and  to  Naha- 
rath,  and  came  to  Jericho,  and  went  out  at  Jordan."  (Josh, 
xvi.  7.)  And  again  :  "  Bethlehem  and  the  Netophathite, 
SS'P  rP3  rvhtp?,  the  crowns  of  the  house  of  Joab." 
(I  Chron.  ii.  54.)  In  these  and  other  passages  the  plural 
form,  rrhfc§,  is  taken  in  a  singular  sense  to  stand  for  the 
name  of  one  city,  and  the  frequency  of  its  occurrence  in 
this  singular  sense  would  lead  to  the  supposition,  that  it 
signifies  one  crown  consisting  of  several  smaller  crowns 
or  diadems  ;*  and  this  conclusion  is  fully  confirmed  by 

*  Hengstenberg  Christologie,  part  ii.,  p.  71,  who  gives  as  an  illus- 
tration, Rev.  xix.  12,  "  And  on  his  head  were  many  crowns,"  which  as 
he  says,  "  cannot  mean  that  Christ  wore  many  separate  and  distinct 
crowns,  but  one  crown  composed  of  several ;"  to  which  we  may  add 
the  well-known  triple  crown.  Hengstenberg  does  not  mention  the  oc- 
currence of  nrrcy  as  a  proper  name,  but  I  think  it  an  important  part 
of  the  argument. 


02  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  VI.  9 15. 

the  only  passage  where  it  occurs  as  a  common  substan- 
tive. "  Behold  my  desire  is,  that  the  Almighty  would 
answer  me,  and  that  mine  adversary  had  written  a  book  : 
surely  I  would  take  it  upon  my  shoulder,  and,  ^3}??$ 
*»b  ntifclg,  bind  it  as  a  crown  to  me."  (Jobxxxi.  15.)  Here 
this  plural  plainly  signifies  one  crown,  not  many,  and  we 
are  thus  authorised  in  using  it  in  the  same  sense  in  the 
passage  before  us.  And  if  further  confirmation  be  neces- 
sary, we  have  it  in  the  14th  verse,  where  this  plural  noun 
is  construed  with  a  singular  verb.*  njrrj-l  f"Tni$2?  vH  "  And 
the  crowns,  it  shall  be  to  Helem  and  Tobijah,"  &c.  This 
of  itself  would  not  be  decisive,  but  is  yet  an  important 
confirmation  when  taken  in  connexion  with  the  preceding 
reasons.  Had  the  verb  been  plural,  it  would  have  served 
to  balance  the  decisive  passage  from  Job,  but  now  it  con- 
firms the  inference  that  this  plural  form  is  to  be  taken  in 
the  singular,  and  that  therefore  only  one  crown  is  in- 
tended ;  and  this  exactly  agrees  with  the  command  in  the 
context,  to  set  what  was  made  on  the  head  of  one  person. 
The  next  passage,  of  which  Kimchi  endeavours  to 
modify  the  sense,  is,  "isps-b^  ?nb  nvY) ,  "  And  he  shall  be 
a  priest  upon  his  throne."  He  says  that  b3?  has  here  the 
same  force  as  in  verse  5 :  ^iNrrbj  Tnfcf1??  S-SVpnft, 
"  From  standing  before  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth." 
He  would  therefore  translate  the  whole  sentence,  "  And 
there  shall  be  a  priest  before  his  throne,"  or,  "  And  a 
priest  shall  be  before  his  throne,"  by  which  translation 
he  makes  a  new  subject  to  the  verb  substantive,  and  thus 
finds  out  two  persons  for  the  two  crowns  of  which  he  had 
spoken  before.  Now,  in  the  first  place,  granting  for  a 
moment  that  this  translation  of  bs  is  correct,  it  will  not 
afford  a  sense  agreeing  with  the  context.  To  what  pur- 
pose should  Zechariah  tell  Joshua  that  there  should  be  a 
priest  before  the  throne,  when  he  himself  was  already  the 
high-priest?  This  translation  will  introduce  a  third 
*  Hengstenberg  Christologie,  part  ii.,  p.  73. 


OBSKRVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  VI.  9 15.  <>3 

person,  which  is  quite  beside  Kimchi's  purpose.  Then, 
again,  if  Joshua  was  not  to  sit  upon  a  throne  himself,  and 
was  not  even  the  type  of  him  that  was  to  sit  upon  the 
throne,  to  what  purpose  was  he  crowned  ?  Crowns  and 
thrones  generally  go  together.  But,  secondly,  this  trans- 
lation of  Kimchi  is  not  warranted  by  the  text;  for,  first,  he 
translates  "  And  he  shall  be  a  high-priest  upon  his  throne : " 
other  Jewish  interpreters  translate  differently.  Jonathan 
Rashi,  who  otherwise  agrees  with  Kimchi,  says,  in  his  note 
upon  the  words,  "  And  he  shall  sit,"  "  That  is  the  high- 
priest  upon  the  throne  of  the  priesthood."  Aben  Ezra  says 
still  more  expressly,  "  The  high-priest  Joshua  shall  also 
sit  upon  his  throne,  and  there  shall  be  no  jealousy  be- 
tween them  on  account  of  the  two  thrones."  Abar- 
banel,  who  supposes  the  words  to  refer  to  the  high-priest 
in  the  days  of  the  Messiah,  translates  bp  in  the  same 
way ;  he  says,  "  At  that  time,  which  is  still  future,  the 
priest  shall  sit  upon  his  throne."  It  cannot  therefore  be 
said,  that  our  English  translation  is  a  mere  Christian 
translation  made  to  suit  Christian  doctrinal  interpretations. 
It  is  the  translation  authorised  by  the  most  famous  Jewish 
names,  and  one  of  these  commentators,  Abarbanel,  had 
Kimchi's  Commentary  before  him,  but  yet  rejected  this  in- 
terpretation as  untenable.  Secondly,  It  is  not  enough  to 
show  that  '?,  when  construed  with  i!£V^n,  signifies 
"  before'''  Not  this  verb,  but  another,  r?TJ7%  occurs  in 
this  passage ;  and  in  order  to  establish  his  translation,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  show  that  bs,  when  construed  with 
rpn,  has  this  signification ;  for  every  one  knows  that 
the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  prepositions  varies  very 
much,  according  to  the  verbs  with  which  they  are  con- 
strued. But,  thirdly,  The  context  fixes  the  meaning  of 
b$,  the  word  occurs  before  in  this  very  verse,  where 
Kimchi  himself  allows  that  it  means  "  upon."  The 
whole  sentence  is, 

rrm 


64  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    VI.    9 — 15. 

"  And  he  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne,  and  be  a 
priest  upon  his  throne/'  where  it  would  be  very  strange, 
indeed,  that  the  same  preposition,  governing  the  very  same 
word  twice  in  the  same  short  sentence,  should  have  two 
different  significations.  Kimchi's  new  translation,  there- 
fore, is  not  correct. 

Having  thus  disposed  of  the  verbal  exposition,  we  now 
come  to  the  application  of  the  whole  to  Zerubbabel. 
Kimchi  says,  that  "  The  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch," 
is  Zerubbabel,  and  that  he  it  was  who  was  to  grow  up 
out  of  his  place,  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  sit  and 
rule  upon  his  throne ;  in  which  application  he  has  trod  in 
the  footsteps  of  Aben  Ezra  and  Rashi.  To  show  the 
untenableness  of  this  exposition  is  not  very  difficult.  It 
has  been  done  already  by  a  bigoted  Jew  thoroughly 
hostile  to  Christianity,  and  confessedly  one  of  the  most 
able  of  their  rabbies,  Abarbanel ;  and  as  it  may  be  inter- 
esting to  see  his  line  of  argument,  it  is  here  subjoined  : — 

"  Rashi  has  written,  that  the  words,  *  Behold  the  man 
whose  name  is  the  Branch,'  have,  by  some,  been  inter- 
preted of  the  Messiah.  He  here  means  Jonathan,  whose 
interpretation  he  did  not  receive;  for  he  adds,  that  the 
building  here  spoken  of  refers  altogether  to  the  second 
temple;  and  in  like  manner  the  interpreters  have  inter- 
preted this  whole  chapter  of  the  second  temple.  But  I 
wish  that  I  could  ask  them,  if  this  prophecy  refers  to  the 
second  temple  and  Zerubbabel,  why  it  is  said,  The  man 
whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  he  shall  grow  up  from 
beneath  him,  vnnna  ?  Surely,  we  know  that  every  man 
grows  up  from  beneath  him,  and  that  from  being  a  child, 
he  grows  up  to  manhood,  and  even  to  old  age  and  hoary 
hairs.  Rashi,  perceiving  this  objection,  has  interpreted 
this  to  mean,  that  he  should  be  of  the  royal  seed ;  but  this 
is  not  correct,  for  the  word  'WrTPIp,  teaches  nothing 
about  the  royal  family.  R.  Aben  Ezra  has  interpreted 
to  mean  "  of  his  own  accord,"  but  this  is  not 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    VI.    9 — 1">.  <>."> 

true,  for  Zerubbabel  did  not  rise  up  of  himself,  but  by 
the  command  of  Cyrus.  If  he  said  this  in  allusion  to  the 
words  of  Haggai,  (  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of 

Zerubbabel,  the  son  of  Shealtiel ,  and  they  came  and 

did  work  in  the  house  of  the  Lord ; '  this  would  prove 
too  much,  for  it  is  written  in  the  same  place,  '  And  the 
spirit  of  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedech,  the  high-priest, 
and  the  spirit  of  all  the  remnant  of  the  people '  (Haggai 
i.  14) ;  so  that,  according  to  this,  they  might  all  be  called 
'  Branches,'  and  of  all  it  might  be  said,  '  They  shall 
grow  up  out  of  their  place.'  Rabbi  David  Kimchi  says, 
*  He  shall  grow  up  out  of  his  place,  which  is  Jerusalem, 
whence  his  advancement  is  to  come.'  But  after  his  arrival 
in  Jerusalem,  we  do  not  see  that  he  attained  any  dignity 
at  all ;  though  even  if  he  had,  what  great  news  would  it 
have  been  to  say,  that  in  the  place  where  he  is,  there  his 
advancement  shall  come  ?  Even  if  it  were  so,  the  words, 
6  He  shall  grow  up  from  beneath  him/  would  still  remain 
an  objection  against  this  opinion.  But,  at  all  events,  I 
should  ask  them,  if  these  words  be  spoken  of  Zerubbabel, 
why  does  the  prophet  add,  '  He  shall  build  the  temple  of 
the  Lord,  even  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord  ? ' 
why  this  repetition  to  express  one  single  event  ?  The 
commentators  have  got  no  answer  but  this,  It  is  to 
confirm  the  matter.  But  if  that  be  the  case,  it  would  be 
better  to  repeat  the  words  three  or  four  times,  for  then 
the  confirmation  would  have  been  greater  still.  I  should 
further  ask  them,  how  they  can  interpret  of  Zerubbabel 
those  words,  '  He  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and 
rule  upon  his  throne,'  for  he  never  ruled  in  Jerusalem, 
and  never  sat  upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom,  but  only 
occupied  himself  in  building  the  temple,  and  aftenvards 
returned  to  Babylon"  (Abarbanel  Comment,  in  loc.) 
Here,  then,  we  have  the  reasons  which  led  a  learned  an- 
tagonist utterly  to  reject,  as  untenable,  the  notion,  that 
this  prophecy  of  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  can 


66  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.    VI.   9 — 15. 

refer  to  Zerubbabel.  The  last  reason  assigned  is  decisive, 
and  must  compel  every  honest  interpreter  to  seek  for 
some  other  person  as  the  subject  of  the  prophecy.*  The 
tradition  of  the  ancient  Jewish  Church,  f  and  the  parallel 
passages  in  Isaiah  iv.  and  Jeremiah  xxiii.,  point  out  the 
Messiah  as  that  person,  and  this  opinion  is  fully  confirmed 
by  the  contents  of  the  prophecy. 

The  prophecy  is  twofold;  there  is,  first,  a  prophetic 
or  symbolic  action,  and  then  a  verbal  prophecy  to  explain 
it.  The  prophetic  action  consists  in  taking  gold  and 
silver  from  certain  men,  who  had  come  from  Babylon, 
making  a  crown  of  these  metals,  setting  it  upon  the  heads 
of  the  high-priest  first,  and  then  depositing  the  crown  in 
the  temple.  That  there  are  such  things  as  symbolical 
prophecies,  or  prophetic  actions,  no  one  that  believes  the 
Bible  can  deny.  Not  to  go  elsewhere,  they  abound  in 
this  book.  The  vision  of  the  four  horns  and  the  four 
carpenters  is  of  this  nature.  Again,  the  man  measuring 
Jerusalem,  chapter  ii.  The  putting  off  the  filthy  garments 
from  Joshua,  which  is  also  followed  by  a  verbal  prophecy 
concerning  the  man  whose  name  is  the  Branch,  chap.  iii. 
Again,  the  candlestick  and  the  olive-trees,  chapter  iv. 
Again,  the  flying  roll  and  the  ephah,  chapter  v.  Again, 
the  four  chariots,  in  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  under 
consideration.  In  every  chapter,  without  exception,  from 
the  first  to  the  sixth,  we  have  symbolical  prophecies,  and 
in  no  case  do  the  things  or  persons  employed  as  symbols, 

*  The  misapplication  of  the  prophecy  to  Zerubbabel  has,  however, 
one  important  use  in  the  Jewish  controversy.  It  shows  how  little  good 
faith  there  is  in  the  common  objection,  that  our  Lord  was  not  called 
Immanuel,  but  Jesus,  and  that,  therefore,  Isaiah  vii.  14  cannot  refer  to 
him.  Rashi,  Aben  Ezra,  and  Kimchi,  all  apply,  "  The  man  whose 
name  is  the  Branch,"  to  Zerubbabel,  though  it  is  certain  that  Zerubbabel 
is  never  thus  called  in  Scripture.  They  thereby  teach  us,  that  in  similar 
prophecies  it  is  sufficient,  that  the  character  and  circumstances  of  the 
person  should  answer  to  the  meaning  of  the  name. 

f  See  the  notes  on  chapter  iii. 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  VI.    9 — 15.  6? 

represent  themselves,  at  some  future  period  of  their 
history,  but  they  are  symbols  of  other  things  and  persons. 
The  uniform  nature,  therefore,  of  all  the  preceding 
visions,  decides  that  the  action  here  described  is  sym- 
bolical, and  that  it  does  not  symbolise  any  thing  referring 
to  Joshua,  but  to  some  one  else.  The  symbols  selected 
point  out,  first,  that  that  person  is  to  be  a  high-priest. 
Secondly,  as  Joshua  was  engaged  in  the  building  of  a 
temple,  the  person  symbolised  should  also  build  a  temple. 
Thirdly,  that  he  is  to  be  crowned,  that  is,  also  to  be  a 
king.  And,  Fourthly,  that  persons  from  a  distance,  sym- 
bolised by  those  who  had  come  from  Babylon,  should 
acknowledge  his  royal  dignity,  as  these  men  contributed 
the  gold  and  silver  to  make  the  crown. 

The  verbal  prophecy  promises  the  same  particulars. 
First,  "  he  shall  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne."  Secondly, 
"  he  shall  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  Thirdly, "  he  shall 
bear  the  glory"  (Tin?  the  majesty  *),  and  shall  sit  and  rule 
upon  his  throne.  "  And  they  that  are  far  off  shall  come 
and  build  ia  the  temple  of  the  Lord."  It  is  not  necessary 
to  point  out  the  well-known  passages  which  prove  that 
these  four  particulars  are  all  features  in  Messiah's  cha- 
racter, and  in  that  of'  no  one  else.  It  is  also  easy  to 
identify  these  features  in  the  character  of  Jesus  of  Na- 
zareth. He  is  represented  in  the  New  Testament  as  a 
high-priest,  as  a  King;  and  it  is  certain  that  the  Gentiles, 
who  were  then  afar  off,  have  acknowledged  his  dignity. 
The  only  apparent  difficulty  is  the  building  of  the  temple. 
Did  he  build  a  temple  ?  The  nature  of  all  the  preceding 
visions  removes  this.  The  symbols  represented  something 
else,  not  any  thing  identical.  The  temple  here  spoken  of 
cannot,  therefore,  be  a  literal  temple,  but  something  else 
that  is  symbolised  ;  it  is  his  natural  and  mystical  body. 
"  Destroy  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it 
up."  (John  ii.  19.)  "  In  whom  ye  also  are  builded 
*  Hengsteuberg,  Christologie,  part  ii.  p.  77. 
F2 


63  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  VI.   9 — 15. 

together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit." 
(Eph.  ii.  22.) 

The  above  remarks  are  sufficient  to  vindicate  the  Chris- 
tian interpretation,  but  there  is  one  feature  in  the  verbal 
prophecy,  on  which  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words.  Vitringa 
and  others  interpret  the  personal  pronoun  "  his,"  in  the 
words,  "  He  shall  sit  and  rule  upon  his  throne,  and  shall 
be  a  priest  upon  Ms  throne,"  as  referring  to  God,  meaning 
that  the  Messiah  should  rule  and  be  a  priest  upon  the 
throne  of  God.  Hengstenberg  objects  to  this  interpretation, 
but  assigns  no  solid  reasons  for  his  dissent.  The  whole 
context  appears  to  me  not  only  to  warrant,  but  to  require 
this  interpretation.  The  prophecy  begins  with  promising 
Messiah  as  a  man.  "  Behold !  a  man.  Branch  is  his 
name."  It  then  states  what  he  should  do.  "  He  shall 
build  (it  is  said,  not  his  own  temple,  but)  the  temple  of 
the  Lord ;  and  he  shall  bear  the  glory,  and  shall  sit  and 
rule  upon  his  throne,  and  be  a  priest  upon  his  throne." 
Here  the  structure  of  the  sentence  appears  to  me  to  lead 
the  mind  naturally  to  Him  whose  is  the  temple.  But  the 
concluding  words,  "  And  the  counsel  of  peace  shall  be 
between  them  both,"  seem  to  me  absolutely  to  require  it. 
Who  are  the  "  both,"  between  whom  the  counsel  of  peace 
is  to  be  ?  Hengstenberg  and  others  answer,  the  kingly 
estate  and  the  priesthood ;  but  this  seems  harsh  and  con- 
trary to  fact.  The  counsel  concerning  peace  is  not  between 
Christ's  kingly  and  priestly  office,  but  between  the  Deity 
and  Jesus  of  Nazareth  as  Messiah.  The  words  "  between 
them  both,"  naturally  convey  to  the  mind  the  idea  of  two 
personal  agents,  not  two  offices.  The  only  two  personal 
agents  mentioned  in  the  preceding  words,  are,  "  The  man 
whose  name  is  the  Branch,  and  "  The  Lord."  To  them, 
therefore,  we  naturally  refer  the  words.  If  the  word 
King  had  occurred  in  the  text,  that  is,  if  the  prophet  had 
written,  "  He  shall  be  a  king  upon  his  throne,  and  a  priest 
upon  his  throne,"  Hengstenberg's  interpretation  would 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  VI.  9 — 15.  69 

have  had  some  colour,  but  the  absence  of  this,  along  with 
the  other  reasons,  serves  to  confirm  Vitringa's  opinion. 
This  interpretation  also  agrees  with  the  parallel  passages 
in  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah,  where  both  the  natures  of  Mes- 
siah are  distinctly  mentioned.  In  Isaiah  iv.  2,  "  The 
branch  of  the  Lord"  is  the  divine  nature.  "The  fruit 
of  the  earth,"  the  human  nature.  In  Jer.  xxiii.  5,  "  I 
will  raise  up  unto  David  a  righteous  Branch,"  is  the 
human  nature.  "  And  this  is  the  name  whereby  he  shall 
be  called,  THE  LORD  our  righteousness,"  is  the  divine 
nature.  And  so  the  prophecy  under  consideration  con- 
cludes with  a  declaration  that  would  naturally  lead  Ze- 
chariah  to  conclude,  that  the  Lord  himself  should  be  the 
person  here  promised.  The  Lord  who  had  been  speaking 
to  Zechariah  all  the  way  through  says  to  him,  "  And  ye 
shall  know  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  you." 


70 


CHAPTER  VII. 

1,  2.  "And  it  came  to  pass when  they  had  sent" 

nblpfl-  N7P3  (literally,  "  and  it  came  to  pass and  he 

sent").  The  meaning  is,  after  they  had  sent.*  [The 
conjunction  i  has  frequently  this  signification]  as  in  Isaiah 
Ixiv.  4  (5) :— NEtf^  ttSpin.  nn«  Itf,  "  Behold  thou  wast 
angry  when  we  sinned  "f  [according  to  Kimchi].  And 
again,  Lev.  ix.  22,  nstf  nn  rrib^S  -g*},  "  When  \  he  de- 
scended from  offering  the  sin-offering,"  and  other  like. 
The  sense  is.  After  he  had  sent,  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  to  Zechariah.  It  is  not  said  who  sent.  Some  in- 
terpreters say  that  bwrYO  (Bethel),  "  the  house  of  the 
Lord,"  is  the  name  of  a  man,  and  that  he  sent  Sherezer 
and  Regemmelech  and  his  men  from  the  captivity  to 
Jerusalem.  But  the  correct  interpretation  is,  that  bsrva 
is  to  be  taken  literally  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Jonathan 
has,  "And  he  sent  to  Bethel."  The  senders  were  the 
children  of  the  captivity,  and  though  the  singular  number 
"  He  sent "  is  used,  it  is  to  be  taken  collectively  5  as  in 

the  third  verse,  "  Shall  I  weep  • as  I  have  done." 

The  messengers  were  Sherezer  and  Regemmelech  and  his 
men. 

"  Regemmelech." — A  man  who  had  this  name,  and  he 
brought  his  men  with  him ;  and  that  is  what  is  meant  by 
the  words,  "  and  his  men."  These  came  to  Jerusalem  to 
pray  before  the  Lord,  for  the  children  of  the  captivity  had 
sent  by  their  hand  to  make  inquiry,  and  to  say  to  the 
priests  and  the  prophets,  "  Shall  I  weep  ?" 

3.  "  To  speak  to  the  priests in  the  house  of  the 

*  As  our  translators  have  it. 

t  See  this  passage  quoted  above,  chap.  iii.  5,  p.  36. 

J  Our  translation  has  And. 


KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY,    &C.  7\ 

Lord." — H^b  is  the  same  as  rV3?.  Jonathan  has,  "  Who 
serve  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord."1 

"  And  to  the  prophets."—  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and  Ma- 
lachi.  But  Jonathan  has  "  to  the  scribes." 

"Should  I  weep?" — For  as  yet  they  did  not  believe  in 
the  building  of  the  temple,  on  account  of  the  enemies  who 
had  caused  the  work  to  cease  for  many  years ;  and  now, 
although  they  had  heard  that  they  were  building,  they 
were  weak  in  faith,  and  did  not  wish  to  go  up  from  Baby- 
lon, for  they  did  not  believe  that  the  building  of  the 
temple  would  be  finished  and  would  stand  because  of 
these  enemies ;  they  therefore  asked  whether  they  should 
fast  on  the  9th  of  Av,  as  they  had  done  during  the  seventy 
years. 

"  Separating  myself"  — lT3n  is  the  infinitive.  The 
meaning  is,  "  Shall  I  separate  myself  from  eating,  and 
drinking,  and  delights."  Jonathan  has  interpreted  it, 
"  Shall  I  withhold  myself  from  delights." 

3.  "  Then  came  the  word  of  the  Lord?  —  Here  it  is 
said,  "  In  the  fifthf  month,  and  in  the  seventh  J  month," 

•  So  our  translators  have  rendered  it. 

t  The  fast  of  the  5th  month  happens  on  the  9ih  day  of  the  month. 
The  reason  why  the  Jews  fast  on  this  day  are  thus  given  by  Maimonides  : 
— "  On  the  ninth  of  Av,  five  things  happened.  1st.  The  decree  went 
forth  in  the  wilderness  that  the  people  should  not  enter  the  land.  2d.  The 
first  and  second  temple  were  both  destroyed  on  this  day.  3d.  The  great 
city  Bither  was  taken,  in  which  were  thousands  and  myriads  of  Israel ; 
and  they  had  a  great  king,  whom  all  Israel  and  the  greatest  of  the 
wise  men  thought  was  the  King  Messiah :  but,  4th,  he  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  Gentiles,  and  they  were  all  put  to  death,  and  the  affliction 
was  great,  even  like  the  desolation  of  the  house  of  the  sanctuary. 
5th.  On  that  day,  devoted  to  punishment,  the  wicked  Turnus  Ilufus 
ploughed  up  the  sanctuary  and  the  parts  about,  to  fulfil  that  which  was 
said,  «  Zion  shall  be  ploughed  as  a  field.'"  (Mich.  iii.  12.)  (Jad 
Ilachasakah.  Hilchoth  Taanith.,  c.  5.) 

t  The  fast  of  the  seventh  is  that  of  the  3d  day  of  Tisri.  The  Jews 
fast  on  this  day,  "  Because  on  it  Gedaliah  the  son  of  Ahikam  was  slain, 
and  thus  was  quenched  the  coal  of  Israel  that  had  been  left."  (Ibid.  See 
also  Jer.  xli.  2.) 


72  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

although  there  were  four  fasts.*  He  names  the  fifth 
month,  because  in  it  the  desolation  took  place :  and  he 
names  the  seventh  month,  because  in  it  Gedaliah  was 
killed,  and  that  was  a  second  desolation,  for  the  poor  of 
the  land  had  already  been  left,  and  it  was  not  desolate  so 
long  as  the  poor  of  the  people  remained  whom  Nebuzar 
Adan  left  as  vine-dressers  and  husbandmen.  (Jer.  lii.  16). 
Gedaliah  was  slain  on  the  first  of  the  seventh  month,  and 
as  this  was  a  holiday,  they  appointed  the  fast  for  the 
following  day. 

"  Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me?"—^nQ¥  is  for  Dfl£2 
VVi«,  that  is  to  say,  did  ye  fast  on  my  account  ?  On 
account  of  your  sins  the  temple  is  destroyed,  and  ye 
are  in  captivity,  and  therefore  ye  fast :  if  ye  will  do  judg- 
ment and  justice,  ye  need  not  fast,  for  the  temple  shall  be 
built,  and  go  up  from  the  captivity,  and  ye  shall  dwell  in 
the  land  for  ever  :  if  ye  will  do  that  which  is  good  in  my 
eyes,  ye  shall  not  be  led  away  captive  from  it  for  ever. 
The  meaning  of  "^N  after  ^ttp?  is,  "  Did  I  command  you 
to  fast?"  Jonathan  has  rendered  it  thus  :  "  Is  it  the  fast 
of  affliction  wherewith  ye  afflict  yourselves  before  me?" 

6.  "And  when  ye  did  eat." — He  means  to  say,  what 
have  I  from  your  feasting  or  your  eating  ?     When  ye  fast 
it  is  because  of  your  sins,  and  when  ye  eat  and  drink  it  is 
for  your  own  profit :  the  whole  matter  is  for  yourselves ; 
but  what  have  I  in  aH  this,  for  neither  in  the  fasting  nor 
the  eating  is  there  any  thing  for  my  glory  ? 

7.  "  Should  ye  not  hear  the  words." — What  but  your 
*  Besides  the  two  fasts  here  mentioned,  there  are  two  other  great  fasts 

mentioned  in  the  8th  chapter;  that  of  the  fourth  month,  or  17th  day  of 
Tammuz,  on  which,  according  to  Maimonides,  five  evils  happened. 
"  1st.  The  stone  tables  were  broken.  2d.  The  daily  offering  ceased  in  the 
first  temple.  3d.  A  breach  was  effected  in  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  at  the 
second  destruction.  4th.  The  wicked  Apostomos  burned  the  law;  and, 
5th,  set  up  an  image  in  the  sanctuary."  (Ibid.) 

The  other  fast  is  that  of  the  tenth  month,  or  10th  day  of  Teveth,  on 
which  day  "  The  wicked  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,  laid  siege  to 
Jerusalem."  (Ibid.) 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.  VII.  73 

own  sins  has  caused  you  to  fast  ?  for  when  Jerusalem  was 
in  prosperity,  I  cried  by  the  hand  of  my  servants  the 
prophets  that  ye  should  turn  from  your  sins,  that  the 
land  might  not  be  wasted ;  but  ye  did  not  choose  to 
hear. 

"  When  men  inhabited  the  south  and  the  plain,"  i.  e., 
all  the  land  was  dwelling  securely,  and  he  mentions  the 
south  and  the  plain  to  show  that  if  this  was  the  case, 
much  more  was  there  a  secure  dwelling  in  the  mountains 
and  hills. 

nBr>  the  active  participle  here  means  that  there  was  in 
them  a  secure  dwelling. 

8.  "  And  the   word   of  the  Lord   came"— After   the 
parenthesis  about  "  inhabiting  the  plain  and  the  south/' 
he  returns  to  conclude  the  former  things,  that  he  should 
tell  all  the  people  of  the  land,   what  the  former  prophets 
who  spoke  to  them  had  cried. 

9.  "  Thus  speaketh  the  Lord  of  hosts  execute 

true  judgment." — When  ye  judge  between  man  and  man, 
let  your  judgment  be  the  judgment  of  truth  ;   and  with 
him  that  has  need  of  it,  do  mercy  and  compassion,  for 
they  are  more  than  judgment." 

10.  "And  the  widow." — Take  good  heed  to  yourselves 
that  ye  oppress  not  the  weak,  either  in  their  property  or 
by  words. 

"  Evil  of  a  man  against  his  brother"  i.  e.,  do  not  think 
evil  one  against  another  in  your  heart;  even  the  thought 
is  forbidden,  how  much  more  the  deed,  and  further,  the 
thought  which  leads  to  the  deed.  And  even  though  he 
does  not  commit  it,  it  is  forbidden,  for  it  is  said,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thy  heart." 

11."  But  they  refused  and  gave  a  backsliding 

shoulder." — rrrp  signifies  "  to  turn  away  from;"  as  in 
Hos.  iv.  16,  "  As  a  backsliding  (perverse)  heifer,"  for  he 
that  does  not  wish  to  attend  to  him  that  calls  him,  turns 
away  his  shoulder,  and  will  not  turn  towards  him. 


74  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

12.  "  They  made  their  hearts  as  an  adamant." — 
an  adamant  is  a  hard  stone  which  no  iron  can  cut. 

"  And  the  words  which  the  Lord"— The  words  of  re- 
proof which  the  prophets  spake  to  them. 

"  In  his  Spirit"— In  the  spirit  of  prophecy  which  was 
speaking  along  with  the  prophets. 

"  Therefore  came  a  great  wrath." — Upon  your  fathers. 

13.  "  It  is  come  to  pass  as  he  cried." — As  he  cried  to 
them  in  my  name,  and  they  did  not  hear,  so  they  will  cry 
and  he  will  not  hear. 

14.  ".But  I  scattered  them  with  a  whirlwind  amongst 
all  the  nations  whom  they  knew  not."   The  word  DnStJSI 
presents  a  grammatical  difficulty.     It  has  been  said  that 
it  is  a  form  compounded  of  Kal*  and  Niphal.  f     My  lord 
my  father  has  written  that  it  is  altogether  from  Kal,  and 
although  it  is  solitary,!  the  meaning  is,  "  And  I  will  be 
scattered  with  them  "  DE37 ;  as  inlsa.xxxv.  1,  "T?7P  tNDUP 
nj?1,  "The  wilderness  and  solitary  place  shall  be  glad 
with  them,"   DOS.     The  punctuation  is  D^DSI.,  and  not 
D^ypWI,  in  order  to  make  wide  §  the  r  and  to  make  it 
light,  and  they  have  pointed  the  H  with  Tzere  and  the 
Samech  with  Kametz,  to  make  the  word  still  longer  and 

*  Michlal  Jophi  reads  Kal  and  Pihel. 

f  Gesenius  and  Rosenmiiller  both  explain  this  peculiar  punctuation  as 
a  Syriasm.  The  former  says,  "  In  the  Syriac,  where  the  vowel-letters  are 
much  more  liquid,  than  in  the  Hebrew,  the  letters  N  and  »  at  the  begin- 
ning of  words  are  often  allowed  to  quiesce.  For  so  one  may  call  the 
Syriac  custom  of  pronouncing  «  and  '  with  Sheva  at  the  beginning  of 
words  as  a  simple  vowel-sound,  E  and  I,  when  at  the  same  time  the  full 

7     •  l>   0        7  ~      x 

vowel  is  written;  as  •Agj  he  said,  for  TON  :|ji-^  God  ^^  he  bare. 
In  Hebrew  this  has  been  imitated  in  the  case  of  N,  which,  instead  of  (-:) 
and  (v:),  gets  Zere,  and  instead  of  (T:),  gets  Cholera.  E.g.,  D^DN  in- 
stead of  DtgOM,  Zech.  vii.  14;  opi-ft*  instead  of  Dpi-w,  Isa.  xxxiii.  10;  *» 
instead  of  »»,  Exod.  xvi.  23  ;  ww  instead  of  ro»,  Isaiah  xxi.  12  ;  &c. 
(Gesen.  Lehrgebaude.  p.  151, 152.)  See  Rosenmiiller  Schol,  in  loc. 

t  Intransitive.     See  Buxtorf  in  TO. 

§  This  is  to  facilitate  the  pronunciation. 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.  VII.  7^ 

easier.  The  meaning  of  the  whole  is,  "  I  will  be  afflicted 
with  them  "  in  captivity,  similar  to  the  declaration,  "  In 
all  their  afflictions  he  was  afflicted."  The  law  speaks 
after  the  manner  of  men.*  But  it  is  more  correct  to  in- 
terpret DiBDH!  as  a  transitive  verb,  for  we  find  that  some- 
times a  verb  is  both  transitive  and  intransitive,  as  for 
instance,  the  verb  Dbn  is  intransitive,  in  Judges  v.  22 : — 
C-ID-^p?  siD^n  TN,  "  Then  were  the  horsehoofs  broken;" 
and  is  transitive  in  Proverbs  xxiii.  35,  *jsiyj*^j  ^obry, 
"  They  have  beaten  me,  and  I  felt  it  not."  The  wise  man 
R.  Abraham  Aben  Ezra,  of  blessed  memory,  has  inter- 
preted, "  I  will  storm  upon  them  with  my  storm  of  wind," 
i.  e.,  he  scattered  them  over  the  face  of  all  nations. 

"  Thus  the  land  was  desolate  after  them" — The  con- 
trary of  "  The  south  and  the  plains  were  inhabited." 

•  Thus  far  Joseph  Kirachi. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

1 .  "  Again  the  word  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  came,  say- 
ing." — The  same  as  if  it  were  written,  "came  to  me, 
saying."*     And  in  the  Masorah  it  is  said,  there  is  no 
similar  case. 

2.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord"— This   chapter   contains 
comfort  for  the  time  to  come,  in  the  days  of  Messiah,  in 
the  wars  of  Gog  and  Magog,  who   shall   come   against 
Jerusalem.     But  at  that  time  I  will  be  jealous  for  her 
with  great  jealousy,  and  I  will  pour  out  great  wrath  upon 
all  the  heathen  who  come  against  her. 

3.  "  Thus  saith and  Jerusalem  shall  be  called 

a  city  of  truth." — As  he  promised,    "  The  remnant  of 
Israel  shall  not  do  iniquity,  nor  speak  lies :"    (Zeph.  iii. 
13.)     This  is  a  declaration  for  all  the  land  of  Israel,  but 
he  mentions  Jerusalem  as  it  is  the  capital  of  the  kingdom, 
and  also  because  of  the  mountain  of  the  Lord,  the  holy 
mountain,  which  strangers  shall  no  more  profane. 

4.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord" — With  reference  to  all  the 
comfort,   he  says,  "  Thus   saith,"    to  give  force  to  the 
consolation,  for  the  good  here  promised  shall  be  in  every 
way. 

"  And  every  man  with  his  staff  in  his  hand"  to  be  taken 
literally,  as  is  said,  "  for  very  age." 

5.  "  And  the  streets:'— This  is  plain. 

6.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord should  it  be  marvel- 
lous in  mine  eyes." — Some  interpreters  explain  this  in- 
terrogatively,  as   if  he   had   said,   "  Should   it   also   be 
wonderful  in  mine  eyes."    As  the  words  1tt?£  "*?$  nj  nns  , 
"  Art  thou  my  very  son  Esau  ?"    (Gen.  xxvii.  24),   and 
other  similar  passages.      But  the  wiseman  R.  Abraham 
Aben  Ezra  takes  it  as  it  stands,  and  to  mean,  "  I  will  do  a 

*  So  it  is  in  English. 


KlMCHl's    COMMENTARY,    &C.  77 

wonderful  thing  in  those  days,  of  which  I  never  did  the 
like." 

7-  "  Thus  saith from  the  east  country  and  from 

the  west  country  ;"  i.  e.,  the  whole  world,  for  Israel  has 
been  scattered  in  every  part  of  the  world. 

8.  "  And  I  will  bring  them  in  the  midst  of 

Jerusalem." — He  mentions  Jerusalem,  as  I  have  explained 
above,  because  it  was  the  city  of  the  royal  residence,  and 
on  account  of  the  temple  whither  all  Israel  was  accus- 
tomed to  come. 

"  In  truth" — Similar  to  the  promise,  "  I  will  betroth 
thee  unto  me  in  faithfulness."  (Hosea  ii.  22,  English  20.) 

9.  "  Thus  let  your  hands  be  strong."" — As  ye  hear  all 
these  future  consolations,  let  your  hands  be  strong  in  the 
commandments  of  God  and  to  build  the  temple,  according 
as  ye  have  begun,  for  ye  see  that  in  the  day  that  the 
foundation   of  the  temple   was   laid  the  blessing  began 
to  come  upon  you. 

10.  "  For  before  these  days  ;"  i.  e.,  Before  the  founda- 
tion of  the  temple  was  laid,  which  was  in  the  second  year 
of  Darius,  on  the  24th  day  of  the  ninth  month,  ye  know 
that  the  hire  of  man  did  not  become  (mm  Mb),  that  is  to 
say,  did  not  become  a  blessing,  but  turned  to  a  curse. 

"  And  the  hire  of  beast  was  not."—  na^tf ,  as  if  the 
beast  was  not  when  its  hire  turned  to  a  curse. 

t(  For  I  set." — nbttJSH  signifies  permitting  a  thing  for  evil, 
as  rnfo  rm  n$  D32  *&f&flj\9  "  I  will  also  send  wild 
beasts  among  you  "  (Lev.  xxvii.  22)  ;  as  the  Targum  has 
"  I  excited  every  man." 

11.  " But  now"— This  is  clear. 

12.  "  For  the  seed  peace;"*  that  is  to  say,  Your  seed 
shall  be  peace  and  a  blessing,  so  that  they  will  call  it  "  a 
seed  of  peace."     Jonathan's  interpretation  is,  "  The  seed 
shall  be  perfect." 

"  And  I  ivill  cause   the   remnant  of  this  people  to 
*  See  marginal  translation. 


78  KIMCHl's   COMMENTARY 

possess." — It  is  possible  that  this  may  have  been  spoken 
of  the  second  temple,  on  condition  that  they  would  keep 
the  commandments  of  the  Lord ;  or  it  is  still  future, 
referring  to  the  days  of  Messiah  ;  and  this  is  proved  by 
the  following  verse,  which  says,  "  O  house  of  Judah,  and 
house  of  Israel."  During  the  second  temple  the  house  of 
Israel  did  not  return. 

13.  ef  And  it  shall  be  as  ye  were  a  curse" — For  the 
Gentiles  curse  you,   yea  in   every  famine  or  misfortune 
that  comes  upon  this  land,  they  say  it  is  on  account  of 
the  sin  of  the  Israelites  dwelling  amongst  them. 

"  And  ye  shall  be  a  blessing." — For  the  Gentiles  shall 
be  blessed  in  you,  like  Gen.  xii.  2,  "  And  thou  shalt  be  a 
blessing." 

"  Let  your  hands  be  strong" — At  this  time,  on  account 
of  the  good  consolations  which,  ye  hear,  are  to  come  upon 
Israel. 

14.  "  For  thus  saith  the  Lord and  I  repented 

not" — For  I  did  what  I  intended,  even  to  the  desolation 
of  their  land,  and  the  leading  them  into  captivity. 

15.  "  Fear  ye  not" — Because  of  those  that  resist  you, 
Sanballat  and  his  companions,  who  think  to  cause  your 
work  to  cease  now. 

16.  "  These  are  the  things  speak  ye  truth." — 

Speak  not  with  one  thing  in  your  mouth  and  another 
thing  in  your  heart. 

"And  the  judgment  of  peace? — nibtt?  toQtp'ftJ),  for  if  ye 
judge  righteousness  there  will  be  peace  between  the 
parties  in  the  lawsuit,  according  as  our  rabbies  have  said 
in  a  proverb  of  the  children  of  men.  "  He  that  has  his 
coat  taken  from  him  by  the  tribunal,  let  him  sing  and  go 
his  way."*  And  they  have  adduced  in  proof  that  verse, 

*  Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  7,  col.  i.,  about  the  middle  of  the  page. 
Rashi  explains  "  that  he  is  to  sing  and  go  his  way,  because  they  have 
judged  the  judgment  of  truth,  and  have  taken  away  that  which  would 
have  been  stolen  property  if  he  retained." 


ON    /ECIIARIAH,    CHAP.  VIII. 

"  And  all  this  people  shall  also  go  to  their  place  in  peace." 
(Exod.  xviii.  23.)  "  All  the  people,"  even  he  that  is  con- 
demned in  judgment  And  our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory, 
have  interpreted  Dlbttf  toCttfai  of  reconciliation,  for  it  is 
said,  "  What  sort  of  judgment  is  that  in  which  there 
is  peace  ?  They  answered,  That  of  arbitration/'*  t3Gt??pn 
is  pointed  with  pathach,  because  it  is  in  regimen. 

"  In  your  gates" — For  that  was  the  seat  of  the  elders ; 
as  it  is  said  in  the  law,  "  To  the  gate  to  the  elders." 
(Deut.  xxr.  70 

17.  "And  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  against  his 
neighbour." — The  same  is  said  above  (vii.  10),  and  there 
it  is  interpreted. 

"  And  love  no  false  oath." — And  afterwards  he  says, 
"  That  I  hate ;"  that  is  to  say,  Do  not  ye  love  that  which 
I  hate. 

"  For  all  these  are  things." — Imagining  evil  against  a 
neighbour  and  false  oaths,  and  that  which  is  the  opposite 
of  the  former  things ;  i.  e.,  Truth  and  peace.  Therefore 
he  says,  "  All  these  things." 

18.  "And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me"— It  ye 
will  do  these  things  which  I  have  commanded  you,  the 
God  of   hosts  says,   that  the  fasts  concerning  which  ye 
have  asked  whether  ye  shall  fast  on  those  days,  ye  shall 
not  fast,  but  ye  shall  rejoice  in  them,   because   of  the 
abundance  of  good  which  shall  be  to  you. 

19.  "  The  fast  of  the  fourth  month."— This  is  Tammuz 
in  which  they  fasted  in  captivity,  on  the  17th  of  the 

•  i.  e.,  Where  the  parties  are  brought  to  agree  by  means  of  arbitra- 
tion. The  whole  passage  is  found  in  Sanhedrin,  fol.  6,  col.  2  : — "  R. 
Judah  ben  Korcha  says,  it  is  a  commandment  to  put  an  end  to  a  suit 
by  arbitration  ;  for  it  is  said,  *  Judge  truth  and  the  judgment  of  peace  in 
your  gates.'  (Zech.  viii.  16.)  But  how  can  there  be  peace  in  a  place 
where  there  is  judgment;  or  in  a  place  where  there  is  peace,  how  can 
there  be  judgment?  The  difficulty  is  solved  by  considering  what  sort  of 
judgment  is  here  intended  :  it  is  that  of  arbitration.1' 


80  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

month,  the  day  on  which  a  breach  was  effected  in  the 
city. 

"  The  fast  of  the  fifth  month"— This  is  Av,  in  which 
they  fasted  on  the  9th  day.f 

"  The  fast  of  the  seventh  month"— This  is  the  fast  of 
Gedaliah,  as  we  interpreted  above. 

"  The  fast  of  the  tenth  mo?ith."—This  is  the  tenth  of 
Tevath,  on  which  day  the  King  of  Babylon  invested  Jeru- 
salem. 

"  Shall  be." — Every  one  of  them  shall  be  to  the  house 
of  Judah  during  the  second  temple,  for  the  ten  tribes 
have  not  returned. 

"  Therefore  love  the  truth  and  peace." — And  on  con- 
dition that  ye  love  the  truth  and  peace,  as  I  have  com- 
manded you. 

20.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord there  shall  come 

people." — There  shall  yet  be  a  time  when  the  people  shall 
come,  and  this  will  be  in  the  days  of  Messiah.     YJ9  has 
the  same  signification  as  in  Vn2  DVH  Tto,   "  It  is  yet 
high  day:"  and  again,  D^n«?  *P"KHN,  "  I  will  yet  make 
thee  to  dwell  in  tabernacles  "  (Hos.  xii.  10,  English  9) : 
and  other  similar  passages. 

21.  "  1 will  go  also" — According  to  its  Targum,  "One 
shall  say  to  the  other,  I  will  go  also." 

22.  "  Yea,  many  people  and  strong  nations."  —  Strong 
in  number :  and  we  find  this  sense  of  D22  in  Jer.  xv.  8  : 
"  Their  widows  are  strong  (are  increased)  to  me  above 
the   sand  of  the  seas/'     It  here  refers  to  the  matter  of 
quantity.     The   same  sentiment  is  repeated  in  different 
words.     The  Targum  of  Jonathan  has  "  great  kingdoms." 

23.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord in  those  days  that 

ten  men  shall  take  hold." — This  that  I  have  said  to  you 
shall  happen  in  those  days  when  they  shall  take  hold. 
And  afterwards  these  words,  "  even  shall  take  hold,"  are 

*  See  the  notes  above  on  chapter  vii.  3. 


ON    ZECHARIAII,    CHAP.    VIII.  81 

repeated  on  account  of  the  length  of  the  intervening  sen- 
tence, as  the  words,  D^orni  riBbO  DM,  "  If  truly  and 
sincerely,"  are  repeated  in  Judges  ix.  16 — 19.  There  are 
many  such  passages. 

"  Ten  men" — Ten  is  not  to  be  taken  strictly,  but  it  is 
a  round  number,  like  "  Ten  women  shall  bake  your 
bread"  and  other  similar  passages.  And  according  to  the 
Drash,  "  Ten  men  out  of  all  languages  of  the  nations " 
means  700  to  each  skirt  of  the  Arbah  Kanphoth*  (four 
corners). 

*  So  the  Jews  call  that  particular  garment  on  which  they  wear  the 
fringes  commanded  in  Numbers  xv.  38,  39. 


82 


CHAPTER  IX. 

1 .  "  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  land 
of  Hadrach.'' — This   prophecy    refers   to    the   land    of 
Hadrach  and  Damascus,  for  there  shall  be  its  resting-place 5 
or,  the  interpretation  is,  The  prophecy  of  the  Lord  shall 
yet  be  in  the  land  of  Hadrach  as  in  the  land  of  Israel,  for 
it  shall  be  (a  part)   of  the  land  of  Israel,  and  thus  Da- 
mascus shall  be  his  resting-place,    i.  e.,   the   Shechinah 
(habitation)  of  his  glory  and  his  prophecy.     We  find  in 
the    words   of    our    rabbies,    of    blessed    memory,  that 
"  R.  Benaiah  says,  that  "pnn,  Hadrach,  is  the  Messiah, 
who   is  sharp,  in,   to  the  Gentiles,  and  tender,  -p,  to 
Israel.     R.  Jose,  the  son  of   a   Damascus   woman,  said 
to  him,  How  long  wilt  thou  pervert  the  Scriptures  against 
us  ?     I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness,  that  I  am  from 
Damascus,  and  there  is  there  a  place,  of  which  the  name 
is  Hadrach.     He  said  to  him,  And  what  do  I  establish  by 
the  words,  '  Damascus  shall  be  his  resting-place  fy    I  es- 
tablish  this,   that  Jerusalem  shall  yet  extend  as  far  as 
Damascus,  for  it  is  said,  (  His  resting-place,'  and  he  has 
no  rest  but  Jerusalem,  as  he  says,  'This  is  my  rest  for  ever 
and  ever/  (Ps.  cxxxii.  14.)   He  said  to  him,  And  what  do 
I  establish  by  the  words,    i  And  the  city  shall  be  built 
upon  her  heap  ? '    (Jer.  xxx.  18.)     He  said  to  him,  That 
she  shall  not  be  moved  from  her  place.     He  said  to  him, 
And  what  do  I  prove  by  the  words,  c  It  was  made  broader, 
and  went  round  still  upward?'  (Ezek.  xli.  J.)     That  Je- 
rusalem shall  be  enlarged  and  extend  on  all  sides,  as  this 
fig-tree,  which  is  narrow  underneath,   and  broad  above, 
and  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  shall  yet  extend  to  Damascus, 
and  so  it  is  said,  '  Thy  nose  is  as  the  tower  of  Lebanon, 
that  looketh  towards  Damascus,'  and  the  captivities  come 


KIMCIil's   COMMENTARY,   &C.  83 

and  encamp  in  the  midst  of  it,  as  it  is  said,  «  And  Da- 
mascus his  resting  place.' "  * 

"  For  to  the  Lord  the  eye  of  man." — For  in  those  days 
the  eye  of  all  mankind  shall  be  to  the  Lord,  not  to  idols 
and  images ;  therefore  the  land  of  Hadrach  and  Damascus, 
and  the  other  places  near  the  land  of  Israel,  such  as 
Tyre,  Sidon,  and  Hamath,  and  the  cities  of  the  Phi- 
listines, shall  be  included  among  the  cities  of  Judah,  and 
shall  be  in  the  faith  of  Israel. 

"  And  all  the  tribes  of  Israel"  and,  a  fortiori,  the 
tribes  of  Israel  shall  have  their  eye  and  their  heart 
toward  the  Lord.  Or,  the  meaning  of  it  may  be,  The 
eye  of  man  shall  be  to  the  Lord,  and  to  all  the  tribes 
of  Israel  to  walk  in  their  ways,  as  is  said  above,  "  We 
will  go  with  you." 

2.  "  And  Hamath  also"— He   says,    «  And  Hamath 
also ;  "  for  it  is  a  great  city,  as  is  said,  "  Hamath  Kabbah," 
and  it  is  outside  the  border  of  the  land  of  Israel,  for  it  is 
one  of  the  borders  of  the  land  of  Israel ;  and  he  says 
that,  at  that  time  Hamath  shall  be  within  her  border,  and 
that  is  what  is  said,  "  And  Hamath  also  shall  border  in 
her,   Tyre  and  Zidon,  though  it   be  very  wise."     And 
thus,  also,  Tyre  and  Zidon,  which  are  also  in  her  vicinity, 
shall  be  in  the  midst  of  her  border.     "  Although  she  be 
very  wise,"  refers  to  Tyre,  as  is  mentioned  in  Ezekiel's 
chapter  about  Tyre  (xxvii),  and  the  meaning  is, "  Although 
she  was  wise  in  her  own  eyes  in  former  days,  her  wisdom 
did  not  profit  her.     But  in  the  days  of  Messiah  she  shall 
not  trust  in  her  wisdom,  but  shall  humble  herself  before 
Israel.0 

3.  "  And   Tyre  did   build  herself  a  strong  hold." — 
For  although  a  strong  hold  was  built  for  her  in  ancient 
days,  and  she  heaped  up  silver  as  dust,  and  fine  gold  as 
ihr  mire  of  the  streets,  all  this  did  not  profit  her. 

*    This  rabbinical  interpretation    is    to   be  found    with   some  slight 
variations  in  the  Yalkut  Shimoni,  part  i.  fol.  25R,  col.  2. 

o  2 


84  KIMCHI'S   COMMENTARY 

4.  "  Behold,  the  Lord  will   cast  her  out"  i.  e.,  will 
dispossess  her  of  all  her  greatness. 

"  And  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea"  as  is  ex- 
plained at  large  in  Ezekiel.  And  when  she  shall  think  of 
all  these  things,  she  shall  be  humbled  in  the  days  of 
Messiah.  For  although  there  were  inhabitants  in  her  at 
that  time,  they  were  not  the  same  as  the  inhabitants  in 
ancient  times.  The  affair  of  Tyre  is  known  to  every  one, 
for  it  is  written  in  the  prophets,  and  there  are  also  written 
accounts  amongst  the  Nazarenes  who  dwell  there  at  this 
day,  and  they  were  there  at  that  time. 

5.  "  Ashkelon  shall  see"  —  M^J-J  is  milra,  the  accent  is 
on  the  Resh.      He  says,  when  Ashkelon  shall  see  that 
Tyre  is  humbled,  she  will  be  humbled  also.      But   the 
true  interpretation  of  the  words  "  Tyre  and  Zidon,"  is  to 
connect  them  with  the  following  verse. 

*2.  "And  Tyrus  did  build  herself  "  —  It  is  said 
Hamath  shall  border  therein,  but  Tyre  and  Zidon  shall  be 
considered  as  opposing  Israel,  because  she  was  very  wise 
in  her  own  eyes,  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Ezekiel, 
and  Zidon  was  near  to  her,  and  followed  her,  therefore 
it  is  joined  with  Tyre. 

"  And  she  did  build:'—  She  will  think  to  be  delivered 
by  the  building  which  she  shall  build,  and  by  the  silver 
and  gold  which  she  shall  amass.  But  all  this  will  not 
help  her,  for  behold  the  Lord  will  cast  her  out. 

"  A  strong  hold."  —  "TO£,  a  strong  tower,  and  thus  in 
2  Chron.  xiv.  5  (6),  rryiS!?  "n?  ?yn,  «  And  he  built  fenced 
cities  ;  "  Jonathan  has  also  interpreted,  "  And  Tyre  has 
built  a  strong  place  for  herself." 

«  Fine  gold."—V™  signifies  gold,  as  V^rr  j7n,rr»3, 
"  with  yellow  gold  (Psalm  Ixviii.  14)  [13],  and  so  Jo- 
nathan has  interpreted  it. 

4.  "  The  Lord  will  cast  her  out"  natjht*.—  This  verb 


Kimchi  here  returns  to  give  another  interpretation. 


ON    ZECHARIAH,  CHAP.  IX.  85 

lias  the  signification  of  driving  out  and  sending  away,  as 
T3QP  onis  tfnte,  «  He  driveth  them  out  before  thee," 
and  other  similar  passages  ;  and  so  Jonathan  renders  it, 


"  And  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea."  —  All  the 
wealth  and  all  the  money  in  which  she  was  trusting,  the 
sea  shall  come  and  overwhelm  it. 

"  And  she  shall  be  burned  witkjire."  —  And  she,  i.e., 
the  city  and  her  buildings,  and  her  fortified  towers,  in 
which  she  was  trusting,  a  fire  shall  go  forth  from  the 
midst  of  her  that  shall  consume  them. 

5.  "  Ashkelon  shall  see"  —  And  when  Ashkelon  shall 
see  that  Tyre  is  wasted  by  the  hand  of  God,  she  shall  fear 
and  humble  herself  before  Israel,  and  so  with  Gaza  and 
Ekron. 

"  For  he  hath  made  ashamed  her  expectation"  *  — 
^9??,  that  is  Tyre,  to  which  they  were  looking,  C^SP, 
and  thought  to  be  saved  with  her  on  account  of  her 
strength. 

PTtp2D._The  Mem  has  a  segol. 

fitoini  comes  from  l^fo,  to  be  ashamed.  —  And  the 
meaning  is,  They  shall  be  ashamed  along  with  Tyre,  to 
which  they  were  looking,  when  God,  blessed  be  He,  shall 
cast  her  out.  But  Jonathan  interprets  tzrainl,  "  and  shall 
be  ashamed,"  as  referring  to  Ekron,  so  that  the  meaning 
is,  Ekron  shall  be  ashamed  of  her  expectation.  His 
words  are,  "  Behold  Ekron  is  ashamed  of  the  house  of 
his  confidence." 

"  And  the  king  shall  perish  from  Gaza."  —  Her  king 
who  is  in  her  at  that  time  shall  perish,  and  his  kingdom 
also,  for  it  shall  be  to  Israel. 

"  And  Ashkelon  shall  not  be  inhabited."  —  By  her  men 
who  shall  be  there  at  that  time,  for  Israel  shall  dispose  of 
it. 


*  The  verb  tf^im  may  be  tuken  either  transitively  or  intransitively. 
Hut  the  parallel  passage  in  Isaiah  xx.  5,  "  They  shall  be  ashamed  of 
Ethiopia  their  expectation,"  shows  that  it  must  be  taken  intransitively. 


86  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"  And  a  bastard  shall  dwell  in  Ashdod"  "tt£fc. — Some 
interpret  mamser  as  the  name  of  a  nation.  Some  say  it 
means  a  bastard,  proceeding  from  the  forbidden  inter- 
course of  those  Israelites  who  dwelt  alone  in  the  cities  of 
the  Philistines,  and  were  separate  from  the  congregation. 
And,  behold,  our  rabbies  have  said,  that  Elijah  will  cleanse 
these  bastards,  and  cause  them  to  enter  into  the  congre- 
gation of  the  Lord.  But  it  ought  to  be  interpreted  as  if 
the  3,  the  sign  of  comparison,  had  been  omitted,  and 
thus  -ftEto  means  the  same  as  -it,  "  a  stranger."  As  "  a 
bastard  shall  not  enter."  (Deut.  xxiii.  2.)  And  the  two 
Mems  are  added,  as  in  the  word  rrnapE,  "  the  barns  are 
broken  down."  (Joel  i.  17-)  And  the  meaning  is,  He  of 
the  Philistines  that  dwelleth  in  Ashdod,  shall  dwell  there 
as  a  man  that  is  a  stranger  and  an  alien,  for  they  shall  be 
under  the  power  of  Israel,  and  this  is  what  follows,  "  I 
will  cut  off  the  pride  of  the  Philistines." 

7-  "  And  I  will  take  away  his  blood  out  of  his  mouth" 
— After  the  manner  of  a  parable,  that  is  to  say,  The  de- 
vouring and  consuming  of  Israel  are  to  be  considered  as 
"his  blood  and  abominations,"*  that  is,  I  will  destroy  the 
wicked  of  heart  who  are  amongst  them,  and  "  he  that 
remaineth  shall  be  for  our  God,"  and  as  to  them  that 
remain  of  them,  whose  heart  is  right  with  the  Lord,  I 
will  cause  him  to  remain,  and  he  shall  be  as  a  governor 
in  Judah.  And  there  is  also  an  interpretation,  As  the 
remainder  of  the  sons  of  the  stranger  who  join  themselves 
to  the  Lord,  for  of  them  it  is  said,  "  Even  them  will  I 
bring  to  my  holy  mountain ;  and  make  them  joyful  in  my 
house  of  prayer."  (Isaiah  Ivi.  70  Behold  they  shall  be  as 
a  governor  and  as  a  great  man  in  Israel. 

*  Hengstenberg  gives  the  true  sense  of  this  passage.  He  says,  that 
"  the  blood  and  abominations"  here  stand  for  idolatry,  as  the  heathen 
used  to  drink  the  blood  of  the  victims,  or  to  mix  it  with  wine. 
The  meaning  then,  is,  I  will  turn  them  from  idolatry  to.  worship  the 
true  God.  (Christologie,  part  ii.  p.  117.)  Aben  Ezra,  in  his  Com- 
mentary, suggests  the  same  interpretation. 


ON    ZttCHARIAH,    CHAP.  IX.  SJ 

"  And  Ekron  as  a  Jebusite" — Ekron  shall  be  as  the 
Jebusite,  the  inhabitant  of  Jerusalem,  for  the  Jebusite 
was  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
was  their  tributary  servant ;  so  it  shall  be  in  the  days  of 
Messiah.  He  mentions  Judah,  because  there  was  the  holy 
mountain  and  the  house  of  prayer.  And  our  rabbles,  of 
blessed  memory,  have  interpreted,  "  His  blood  and  his 
abominations,"  of  the  obscene  language  to  which  the 
nations  of  the  world  are  accustomed. 

8.  "  And  I  will  encamp  about  mine  house  because  of 
the  army"  rosia. — This   word  is   here  written  with   n 
instead  of  ^. 

"  For  now  have  1  seen  with  mine  eyes" — Now  in  this 
time  when  all  this  promise  shall  be  accomplished,  I  have 
seen  with  mine  eyes  their  affliction  and  their  deportation 
into  captivity  amongst  the  nations,  and  I  will  help  them, 
and  will  bring  upon  them  all  this  good.  "  And  I  have 
seen,"  is  similar  to  "  And  God  saw  the  children  of  Israel." 
(Exod.  ii.)  But  the  wise  man,  R.  Abraham  Aben  Ezra, 
of  blessed  memory,  has  explained,  that  these  are  the  words 
of  the  prophet,  who  says,  "  Now  have  I  seen  all  this  with 
my  eyes,  in  the  visions  of  the  night,  in  prophecy." 

9.  "Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion,"  v^  is  milra. 
— He  mentions  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  because  she 
is  the  head  of  the  kingdom. 

"  Righteous,  and  having  salvation"  Sttfa  (Or  saved). — 
He  shall  be  righteous,  and  in  his  righteousness  he  shall 
be  saved  from  the  sword  of  Gog  and  Magog.  BttHa  Js 
pointed  with  pathach,*  for  it  is  the  perfect  tense  turned 
into  the  future  by  the  1  conversive. 

'??,  the  same  as  1^?,  "  lowly."  The  Targum  of  Jo- 
nathan has  101?^»  "  humble,  lowly,  meek."  And  so  it  is 
said  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  "He  shall  not  cry,  nor 
lift  up,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street  A 
bruised  rood,  &c."  (Isaiah  xlii.  2,  3.) 

*  It  is  not  so  pointed  in  the  present  copies. 


88  KIMCHIS    COMMENTARY 

"  And  riding  upon  an  ass"— Not  from  poverty,  for 
behold  the  whole  world  shall  be  in  his  power,  but  from 
humility  he  will  ride  upon  an  ass :  and  further,  to  show 
that  Israel  shall  not  want  horse  nor  chariot,  therefore  it  is 
added, "  And  I  will  cut  off  the  chariot  from  Ephraim,  and 
the  horse  from  Jerusalem." 

"  And  upon  a  colt,  the  foal  of  an  ass." — The  same 
sentence  is  repeated  in  other  words.  And,  further, 
he  mentions  "  a  colt,"  because  it  is  young,  and  par- 
ticularly selected  for  riding;  and  so  it  is  said  of  the  sons 
of  Ibzan,  "  that  ride  upon  thirty  ass  colts."  (Judges 
x.  4,  and  xii.  8.) 

"  The  foal  of  she-asses,"  mains  p,  »•  e«,  the  foal  of 
one  of  the  she-asses.  A  similar  idiom  is  found  in  "Of?.! 
"F?V}  V3??>  "  And  was  buried  in  the  cities  of  Gilead." 
(Judges  xii.  7)>  i-  e.,  in  one  of  the  cities  of  Gilead. 

10.  "  And  I  ivill  cut  off.—  And  so  it  is  said  in  the 
prophecy  of  Micah,  v.  10,  "  And  I  will  cut  off  the  horses 
out  of  the  midst  of  thee,  and  I  will  destroy  thy  chariots." 
Ephraim  and  Jerusalem  are  mentioned,  because,  in  the 
former  days,  the   kingdom  was  divided,  but  in  the  day 
of  the  Messiah  they  shall  be  one. 

"  And  he  shall  speak  peace  to  the  heathen."  —  He 
shall  make  peace  between  one  nation  and  another,  if 
they  be  at  war,  for  all  the  Gentiles  shall  be  obedient  to 
him. 

"  And  his  dominion  shall  be  from  sea  to  sea" — The 
wise  man,  R.  Abraham  Aben  Ezra,  of  blessed  memory, 
has  explained  this  to  mean,  "  From  the  south  sea,  which 
is  called  the  sea  of  Edom,  to  the  northern  sea,  which  is 
the  ocean." 

"  And  from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth" — From 
the  river  that  goes  forth  from  Edom,  which  is  in  the 
beginning  of  the  east,  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  which  is 
the  end  of  the  west.  And,  behold,  he  shall  rule  in  all 
the  world. 

11.  "  As  for  thee  also"—  This  he  says  in  reference  to 


the  congregation  of  Israel.  As  it  is  said  of  the  King, 
the  Messiah,  that  he  shall  be  saved  by  his  righteousness, 
so  it  is  said,  As  for  thee,  thou  shalt  be  saved  by  the  blood 
of  thy  covenant,  and  that  is  the  blood  of  circumcision, 
which  Israel  in  captivity  has  adhered  to  more  tenaciously 
than  to  all  the  commandments. 

"  Out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water." — This  is  the 
captivity.  Some  interpret  the  words,  "  By  the  blood  of 
thy  covenant,"  as  referring  to  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
which  the  Lord  made  with  Israel  in  Sinai.  Our  rabbies, 
of  blessed  memory,  have  said,  that  "  water"  means  pro- 
phecy figuratively;  for  prophecy  has  never  existed  during 
the  captivity,  and  there  has  been  no  prophet  after  Haggai, 
Zechariah,  and  Malachi.  And  we  find  a  similar  passage 
referring  to  prophecy,  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth, 
Come  ye  to  the  waters."  (Isaiah  Iv.) 

12.  "  Turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold." — The  commentators 
have  interpreted  this  paragraph  as  referring  to  the  second 
temple.  And  our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory,  have  done 
the  same,  except  that  they  interpret  half  this  verse  of 
the  future,  as  written  above.  The  meaning  of  "  Turn 
ye  to  the  strong  hold,"  is,  Turn  ye  to  God,  blessed  be 
He,  for  he  is  a  strong  hold  and  a  tower  of  strength. 

"  Ye  prisoners  of  hope." — Because  they  had  been  in 
captivity,  and  had  been  prisoners,  but  had  hoped  for  the 
redemption  these  many  years. 

12.  "  Even  to-day  do  I  declare  that  I  will  render 
double  unto  thee"  *  The  blessed  God  says,  In  another 
message,  which  is  near  at  hand,  the  prophet,  the  an- 
nouncer, will  declare  a  second  message,  after  that  first 
one  relating  to  the  future.  And  this  is  God's  deliverance 
of  Israel  from  the  Greeks  by  the  hand  of  Mattathias,  the 
son  of  John,  the  high-priest,  and  by  the  hands  of  his 
sons  in  the  time  of  the  second  temple.  But  in  my  opinion 

•  Kimchi  appears  to  have  construed  this  verse  thus,  "  Even  to-day 
I  will  cause  to  return  to  thee  an  announcer  of  a  second." 


90  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

this  whole  paragraph  is  future ;  I  will,  however,  interpret 
it,  first,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  commentators, 
of  the  second  temple. 

13.  "  When  I  have  bent"— The  tribe  of  Judah  is  my 
bow,  which  I  will  bend  against  Greece,  i.  e.,  By  means 
of  Judah,  I  will  make  war  with  Greece. 

"  Filled  the  bow  with  Ephraim" — This  expression  is 
similar  to  "  And  Jehu  filled  his  hand  with  the  bow" 
(2  Kings  ix.  24),  and  it  means  the  stretching  of  the  bow 
with  all  his  force  to  shoot  the  arrow.  And  Ephraim  is 
mentioned,  for  although  in  the  second  temple  there  was 
neither  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  nor  the  other  tribes,  yet 
there  remained  in  the  land  after  the  captivity,  in  the  days 
of  Hoshea,  these  few,  as  we  find  in  the  words  of  Josiah, 
"  From  the  coast  of  Manasseh  and  Ephraim,  and  all  the 
remnant  of  Israel."  And  these  went  into  captivity  with 
the  tribe  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  to  Babylon,  and  re- 
turned with  them  when  they  returned. 

"  And  raised  up  thy  sons,  O  Zion,  against  thy  sons, 
O  Greece" — I  will  stir  them  up  against  them,  and  will 
put  strength  and  power  in  them,  and  this  is  what  is  said, 
"  And  made  thee  as  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man/' 

14.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  be  seen  over  them"  i.  e.,  The 
Lord  shall  fight  for  them. 

"  And  the  Lord  God  shall  blow  the  trumpet." — As  if  he 
should  blow  the  trumpet,  after  the  manner  of  warriors. 

"  And  shall  go  with  the  whirlwinds  of  the  south" — 
He  shall  go  against  the  children  of  Greece  like  a  whirl- 
wind, as  it  is  written,  "  The  Lord  hath  his  way  in  the 
whirlwind  and  the  storm."  (Nahum  i.  3.)  l^fi  is  men- 
tioned, that  is  the  south  point,  for  thence  comes  the 
whirlwind,  as  it  is  written,  "Out  of  the  chamber  cometh 
the  whirlwind."  (Job  xxxvii.  9.)  And  -nn  means  the 
south,  as  it  is  written,  l^n  ^.ID^  «  And  the  chambers  of 
the  south."  (Job  ix.  9.)  Jonathan  also  has  thus  rendered 
it,  u  And  he  shall  lead  with  a  storm  of  wind  from  the  south." 


ON    2ECIIAU1AH,    CHAP.    IX.  91 

15.  "  The  Lord  of  Hosts  shall  defend  them"— Judah 
and  Ephraim,  whom  he  had  mentioned. 

"  And  they  shall  cat  and  subdue  the  slingstones" — Not 
enough  that  the  Lord  shall  defend  them,  so  that  their 
enemies  shall  not  subdue  them,  but  they  shall  consume 
(lit.  eat)  their  enemies,  and  shall  subdue  those  that  are  left 
for  servants  and  handmaids.  The  children  of  Greece  are 
called  slingstones,  which  are  common  stones,  with  which 
the  slingers  sling;  whereas  the  children  of  Judah  are 
called  "  stones  of  a  crown,"  which  are  precious  stones 
and  pearls,  which  they  place  in  a  crown. 

"  And  they  shall  drink  and  make  a  noise  through  wine" 
that  is,  they  drink  the  blood  of  their  enemies,  and  shall 
make  a  noise  over  them  as  if  they  were  drinking  wine, 
and  this  is  similar  to  that  passage,  "  And  they  shall  be 
drunken  with  their  own  blood."  (Isaiah  xlix.  26.)  And 
the  making  a  noise  over  wine  is  similar  to  "  They  are 
drunken,  but  not  with  wine.  They  make  a  noise,*  but  not 
with  strong  drink."  (Isaiah  xxix.  9.) 

"  And  they  shall  be  filled  like  a  bowl,  like  the  corners 
of  the  altar.1'— They  shall  be  full  of  the  blood  of  their 
enemies  as  a  bowl  in  which  they  receive  the  blood  of  the 
sacrifices,  or,  as  the  corners  of  the  altar,  which  they 
sprinkled  with  blood. 

16.  "  And  the  Lord  God  shall  save  them  as  the  flock  of 
his  people" — Just  as  a  man  saves  his  flock  with  all  his 
strength,  so  he  will  save  his  people,  for  they  are  his  flock. 
Some  interpreters  say,  As  Moses  saved  them,  for  he  fed 
them  as   a  flock,  as  it  is  written,    "  Thou  leddest  thy 
people  like  a  flock  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron." 
(Psalm  Ixxvii.  20,  Heb.  21.) 

"  For  they  shall  be  as  the  stones  of  a  crown  lifted  up 

as  an  ensign  upon  his  land." — Judah  and  Ephraim  shall 

be  as  the  stones  of  a  crown  lifted  up  and  exalted  upon 

his  land,   which  is  the  Holy    Land.      /TiDp^OP    is  the 

*  Kimchi  read  'on,  whereas  we  read  va,  they  stagger. 


92  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX. 


same  as  ntartirttp,  u  lifted  up,"  as  D3 
DpiDOn1?,  u  Thou  hast  given  a  banner  to  them  that 
feared  thee,  that  it  may  be  lifted  up."  (Psalm  Ix.  6, 
English  4.)  In  like  manner  03,  a  standard,  has  re- 
ference to  lifting  up  and  exaltation,  for  the  standard- 
bearer  lifts  up  and  exalts  it  above  the  heads  of  the  people. 
17.  "  How  great  is  his  goodness,  and  how  great  is  his 
beauty"  —  How  good  is  the  fruit  of  their  land,  how  good 
is  the  corn  and  new  wine,  which  make  to  grow  and 
bring  up  such  handsome  young  men  and  maidens,  as 
shall  be  at  that  time. 


OBSERVATIONS  IN  DEFENCE  OF  THE  CHRIS- 
TIAN  INTERPRETATION  OF  CHAPTER  IX. 

As  this  chapter  contains  a  passage,  quoted  in  the  New 
Testament  as  having  been  fulfilled  by  an  event  in  the 
history  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  it  requires  a  special 
consideration.  There  are  two  questions  to  be  considered  ; 
First,  The  general  meaning  of  the  prophecy;  and  Se- 
condly, The  applicability  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

1.  The  New  Testament  takes  for  granted  that  the 
subject  is  Messianic,  for  it  cites  the  passage  to  prove  the 
Messiahship  of  our  blessed  Lord ;  but  the  question  here 
arises,  whether  the  Jews  of  that  day,  and  in  the  suc- 
ceeding times,  have  admitted  that  the  chapter  refers  to 
the  Messiah,  or  whether  this  is  a  private  interpretation 
peculiar  to  the  New  Testament  ?  *  The  writings  of  the 
Jews  furnish  an  unbroken  chain  of  testimony  to  prove 
that  it  was  always  referred  to  the  Messiah,  and  that, 
therefore,  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  did  not  lay 

*  Theodoret  says,  that  the  Jews  of  his  time  interpreted  the  passage  of 
Zerubbabel,  but  there  is  no  trace  of  this  exposition  in  any  of  the  Jewish 
writings.  (Hengstenberg  Christologie,  part  ii.  p.  141.) 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX.  93 

hold  of  a  text,  the  letter  of  which  seemed  to  suit  their  pur- 
pose, hut  applied  a  passage  of  Scripture  which  the  Jewish 
nation  ever  regarded  as  a  test  to  try  the  claims  of  every 
pretender  to  the  Messiahship. 

The  book  of  Zohar  shows  us  the  opinion  of  the  Jews 
in  the  first  century  of  Christianity.  Speaking  of  Abra- 
ham's  saddling  his  ass,  it  says,  "  And  on  his  account  it 
is  said  of  Messiah,  Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass.'** 
And  in  a  subsequent  passage,  "  On  this  account  it  is 
written  of  the  Messiah,  Lowly  and  riding  upon  an  ass."f 
The  Talmud  shows  us  that  this  interpretation  continued 
in  later  ages,  "  R.  Joshua,  the  son  of  Levi  objects,  that 
it  is  written  in  one  place,  f  Behold,  one  like  the  Son  of 
Man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven  : '  but  in  another 
place  it  is  written,  '  Lowly,  and  riding  upon  an  ass.' 
The  solution  is,  if  they  be  righteous,  he  shall  come  with 
the  clouds  of  heaven.  If  they  be  not  righteous,  he  shall 
come  lowly  and  riding  upon  an  ass."  J 

At  a  later  period  Saadiah  Gaon,  in  interpreting  the 
above-cited  words  of  Daniel,  says,  "  This  is  the  Messiah 
our  righteousness.  But  is  it  not  written  of  the  Messiah, 
'  Lowly  and  riding  upon  an  ass?1  Yes,  but  this  shows 
that  he  will  come  in  humility,  and  not  in  pride  upon 
horses/'§ 

The  first  trace  of  a  different  interpretation  occurs  in 
the  12th  century.  Aben  Ezra  tells  us,  in  his  commentary 
on  the  passage,  that  "  R.  Moses  the  priest  says,  this 
refers  to  Nehemiah,  the  Tirshatha,  of  whom  it  is  written 
in  Ezra,  {  There  is  a  King  in  Judah '  (Nehem.  vi.  7) ; 

•  -vran  to  aam  w  rma  to  -innn  rrrai.  (Lublin  Edit,  of  the  Zohar, 
folio  110,  col.  3,  of  part  iii.) 

f  -non  to  MYTI  »»  rr\i?m  m  rro  «n  pyi.  (Fol.  133,  col.  4.  See 
other  passages  from  this  book  in  Schottgen,  vol.  ii.  p.  20.) 

t  Talm.  Bab.  Sanhedrin,  fol.  98,  col.  1. 

'3  mars  wr  N"?W  -non  to  MVYI  »a»  rrw  to  avo  vhm  up*  rnoo  im  § 

Nir  vb 


94  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    IX. 

therefore  it  is  said,  (  Lowly  and  riding  upon  an  ass.'  A 
horse  is  not  mentioned,  for  he  was  too  poor  to  buy  one." 
This  opinion,  however,  Aben  Ezra  immediately  rejects 
and  refutes.  He  says,  "  This  is  not  true ;  for  Nehemiah 
was  governor,  and  did  not  require  the  bread  of  the  gover- 
nor from  Israel,  and  yet  every  day  entertained  a  great 
number  of  persons  at  his  table.  (Nehem.  vi.  15 — 18.) 
And  how  is  it  that  he  should  not  have  a  horse  ? "  To 
which  it  may  also  be  added,  that  Nehemiah  never  as- 
sumed the  style  and  title  of  royalty ;  and  when  Sanballat 
accused  him  of  it,  he  replied,  "  There  are  no  such  things 
as  thou  sayest ;  but  thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  own 
heart." 

Aben  Ezra  goes  on,  however,  to  give  his  own  inter- 
pretation, saying,  u  According  to  my  opinion,  this  king  is 
Judas  the  son  of  the  Hasmonean,  for  he  was  a  mighty  man, 
as  it  is  written,  '  I  have  made  thee  as  a  sword  of  a  mighty 
man  '  (Zech.  ix.  13) ;  and  his  hand  was  mighty  against  the 
Greeks,  but  at  first  he  had  neither  wealth  nor  horses." 
But  this  opinion  does  not  appear  to  have  found  any 
favourers  amongst  the  Jews,  and  Abarbanel  has  saved  us 
the  trouble  of  refuting  it.  He  says,  "  I  am  astonished  at 
the  wicked  motive  that  blinded  his  understanding,  for 
Judas,  the  son  of  the  Hasmonean,  was  never  called  King 
all  his  days ;  whereas  the  king,  mentioned  to  Zion  by 
name,  is  David,  who  took  Zion.  Again,  if  the  prophecy 
refer  to  the  Hasmoneans,  why  is  Ephraim  mentioned,  for 
there  was  no  kingdom  of  Ephraim  during  the  second 
temple  ?  Moreover,  Judas  the  Hasmonean  did  not  speak 
peace  to  all  the  heathen,  neither  was  his  dominion  from  sea 
to  sea,  nor  was  there  in  his  days  any  fulfilment  of  the  words, 
*  When  I  have  fill  the  bow  with  Ephraim,'  for  the  king- 
dom of  the  ten  tribes,  called  the  kingdom  of  Ephraim,  has 
not  returned  to  this  day."  (Abarbanel  in  loc.)  Excepting 
these  two  writers,  all  the  Jews,  ancient  and  modern,  not 
even  excepting  that  determined  opposer  of  Christianity, 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    IX.  95 

R.  Isaac,  the  author  of  the  Chizzuk  Eniunuh,  agree  in  in- 
terpreting this  passage  of  the  Messiah ;  so  that,  as  far  as 
authority  goes,  the  New  Testament  interpretation  is  fully 
justified.  The  interpretation  does  not,  however,  rest 
solely  on  authority.  There  are  some  distinct  declarations 
which  can  refer  to  none  but  the  Messiah.  First,  that  he 
should  speak  peace  to  the  heathen  j  second,  that  he 
should  be  the  king  of  Zion  and  Redeemer  of  Israel ;  and, 
thirdly,  that  his  dominion  should  be  from  sea  to  sea,  and 
from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  These  three  con- 
ditions have  never  been  fulfilled  in  any  of  Israel's  ancient 
kings,  and  exactly  agree  with  the  general  tenor  of  Scrip- 
ture in  describing  the  Messiah's  character. 

Having  ascertained  that  the  prophecy  refers  to  the 
Messiah,  our  next  business  is  to  consider  the  import  of 
some  particular  passages  on  which  there  is  a  difference  of 
opinion.  And  first,  what  are  we  to  understand  by  the 
words,  "  Lowly  and  riding  upon  an  ass?"  Do  they  inti- 
mate a  moral  quality,  humility,  or  a  state  of  humiliation, 
or  both  ?  Kimchi,  as  we  have  seen,  says  that  "OS ,  lowly, 
is  synonymous  with  V22,  meek,  humble.  And  of  "  riding 
upon  an  ass"  he  says,  "  Not  from  poverty,  for  behold  the 
whole  world  shall  be  in  his  power,  but  from  humility  he 
shall  ride  upon  an  ass :  and  further,  to  show  that  Israel 
shall  not  want  horse  nor  chariot."  On  the  other  hand, 
R.  Moses,  as  cited  above,  interprets  W  to  signify  poor, 
because,  he  says,  Nehemiah  was  too  poor  to  buy  a  horse. 
And  Aben  Ezra  follows  him,  saying,  that  "  at  first  Judas 
Maccabseus  had  neither  wealth  nor  horses."  Abarbanel 
leaves  the  matter  undecided,  saying,  "  His  salvation  shall 
not  be  by  the  strength  of  the  horse,  nor  by  the  legs  of  a 
man  ;  for  he  shall  be  at  his  commencement  lowly  and 
riding  upon  an  ass.  But  it  is  also  possible  to  interpret 
this  of  humility,  as  if  the  word  1337  (humble)  had  been 
used/'*  Three  out  of  these  four  commentators  admit 

':?  inVnra  rrrr  win  o  ''NH  71^3  vtr\  Dion  'TU;Q  inymn  rrrm  vb  to«  • 
•  w  -raw    ito*3  m:r    sro  ':r  Sc1?  'wen  on  -non  to  «rr» 


96  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX« 

that  the  word  may  mean  "  poor."     Two  say  positively 
that  it  signifies  "  poor  "  in  this  particular  passage,  and 
only  one  asserts  that  it  signifies  "  humble."     The  weight 
of  testimony,  then,  would  incline  us  to  reject  the  opinion 
of  that  one ;  and  this  inclination  is  confirmed  by  the  dis- 
covery that  these  three  give  an  unbiassed  opinion,   and 
that  the  other  had  a  motive  for  assigning  a  particular 
meaning.  R.  Moses  and  Aben  Ezra  applied  the  passage  to 
individuals  whom  they  might  acknowledge  to  be  poor  and 
lowly  without  compromising  their  religious  views.     Abar- 
banel  thought  that  Messiah  might  be  lowly  at  first.     But 
not  so  Kimchi:  he  applied  the  passage  to  the  Messiah, 
and  considered  it  unbecoming  his  dignity  to  be  poor  and 
lowly ;   his  religious  views  therefore  coloured  his  inter- 
pretation.    But  an   examination   of  other   passages  will 
show  that  Kimchi  is  wrong,  and  that  "O3?  and  13?  are  not 
synonymous,   for   they   cannot  be  interchanged  without 
changing  the  sense.     For  instance :  "  Thou  shalt  not  op- 
press an  hired  servant  that  is  poor  and  needy,  l^SH  ^  ." 
(Deut.  xxiv.  14.)      Here  125  would  entirely  change  the 
sense.     It  would  be,  "  Thou  shalt  not  afflict  an  hired 
servant  who  is  humble  and  needy;"  which  would  imply, 
that   if    he   were   proud   he    might    be    oppressed,   and 
so    one    might   go   through   the   numerous   passages    in 
the  Concordance.     But  Kimchi  himself  shall  bear  witness 
against  himself.    In  his  Lexicon,  after  giving  examples  of 
the  root  H3r,  he  says,  "  And  the  adjective  [occurs  in  the 
following  passages]  (  Neither  did  she  strengthen  the  hand 
of  the  poor  •>??  and  needy.'    (Ezek.  xvi.  49.)     '  The  poor 
D™32jn  and  needy.'  (Isa.  xli.  17.)     'O  thou  afflicted  njDV, 
tossed  with  tempest,  &c.'  (Isa.  liv.  11.)     The  substantive 
[occurs  as  follows] :  c  He  hath  not  despised  or  abhorred 
the  affliction  of  the  afflicted  W  ni3£..'  (Ps.  xxii.  25,  Eng- 
lish 24.)     And  again,  another  form  of  the  substantive  in 
the  words,  '  The  bread  of  affliction  'ofo  noV  (Deut.  xvi.  3), 
which  is  so  called  because  they  were  afflicted  in  Egypt." 
Now  the  reader  will  observe  from  these  passages,  and  it 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX.  97 

is  generally  true,  that  'OE,   poor  or   afflicted,   is  usually 
connected  with  some  word  expressive  of  poverty.    He  will 
observe   further   that  the  substantives  formed  from   this 
word   do   not   signify  humility,  as  they  ought  to  do  if 
Kimchi's   Commentary   were   true,   but   that    they   both 
express   affliction :    and  he  may  gather  from  the  whole 
that  the  word  signifies  "  afflicted,  in  trouble,"  it  may  be 
from  poverty,  or  from  other  causes.     It  therefore  is  not 
synonymous  with  lay,  humble,  the  substantive  of  which, 
HTO,  signifies  humility.     In  the  passage  before  us,  there- 
fore, the  word  does  not  signify  "  humble,"  but  "  in  lowly 
circumstances."     It  does  not  exclude  humility  of  mind, 
on  the  contrary,  as  coming  from  the  same  root  with  1337, 
humble,  it  has  an  affinity  with  it,  but  it  absolutely  im- 
plies that  the  person  to  whom  it  is  applied  is  "  afflicted," 
or  "  in  lowly  circumstances."  The  English  word  "  lowly," 
selected  by  our  translators,  has  the  advantage  of  the  double 
meaning,  but  it  is  not  sufficiently  strong ;  for  a  person 
may  be  in  lowly  circumstances  without  suffering  affliction, 
as  this  word  necessarily  implies.     The   prophet,   there- 
fore, tells  us  that  the  Messiah  should  come  to  Jerusalem 
in  an  afflicted  and  lowly  condition,  to  which  the  following 
words,  "  riding  on  an  ass,"  exactly  agree.     A  poor  and 
afflicted  person  riding  on  an  ass,  does  not  excite  the  idea 
of  grandeur,  but  of  lowliness  and  poverty  :  it  is,  therefore, 
needless  to  discuss  the  second  clause,  or  to  answer  those 
passages  which  show  that  the  judges  of  Israel  rode  upon 
asses.  Hengstenberg  remarks  well,  that  all  these  examples 
are  taken  from  a  period  antecedent  to  the  reign  of  Solo- 
mon, but  that  after  that  monarch  had  introduced  horses 
not  one  such  instance  is  to  be  found.     But  the  discussion 
is  superfluous,  the  meaning  of  'OS  necessarily  fixes  the 
sense  of  the  following  words. 

There  is  one  word  more  that  requires  a  remark,  and 
that  is  the  word  Vttffa,  "  having  salvation."  R.  Isaac 
accuses  the  Christians  of  corrupting  the  text  here,  saying, 

H 


98  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX. 

"  The  Nazarenes   have  altered  the  word  softa  (saved), 
and  written  instead  of  it  3pttfiE  (Saviour),  in  order  to  add 
some  auxiliary  confirmation  to  their  faith."     Now  in  the 
first  place,  the  accusation  as  it  stands  is  perfectly  false. 
The  Christians  have  never  altered  this  word.     In  every 
Christian  edition  of  the  Hebrew  Bible  it  stands,  just  as  it 
does  in  those  edited  by  Jews.     But  in  the  next  place,  al- 
lowing him  to  mean,  what  he  does  not  say,  that  some 
Christians,    as   the   Vulgate,    have   translated   the   word 
"  Saviour/'  and  not  "  saved,"  as  he  would  have  it,  they 
did  not  do  this   with  a  fraudulent  intention  to  confirm 
their  faith,  but  were  led  by  Jews  to  think  that  this  was 
the  right  sense  of  the  word.     The  Jews,  who  translated 
Zechariah  into  Greek,   before   the   rise   of  Christianity, 
translated  Wia  by  <™fr>i/,  "  saving,  or  Saviour,"  and  Chris- 
tians simply  followed  them.     The  mistake,  therefore,  is 
not  to  be  attributed  to  the  Christians,  but  to  the  Jews 
themselves.     But  if  Jews  say  that  the  Greek  text  has 
been  altered,  then  we  refer  them  to  the  Targum  of  Jona- 
than, who  translates  the  word  by  p*HD,  "  Redeemer,"  or 
Saviour ;  and  surely  Jonathan  had  no  fraudulent  desire  to 
favour  Christianity.  His  translation  shows  that  the  mean- 
ing of  the  word  originated,  and  was  common,  amongst  the 
Jews  themselves  ;  they,  therefore,  and  not  the  Christians, 
are  answerable  for  it.     Our  English  translation  has  fol- 
lowed the  Hebrew,  and  rendered  the  word  "  having  sal- 
vation :"  but  if  the  Jews  like  the  word  "  saved "  better, 
as  being  more  literal,  we  have  no  objection,  for  it  will 
make  no  difference  in  the  Christian  application  of  the  pas- 
sage. 

Another  passage,  which  demands  peculiar  consideration, 
is  the  latter  half  of  the  12th  verse,  which  our  English 
translators  have  rendered  "  Even  to-day  do  I  declare  that  I 
will  render  double  to  thee."  They  have  here  inserted  the 
three  words  printed  in  italics,  and  have  connected  the 
word  "  double,"  as  the  accusative,  with  the  verb,  "  I  will 


ORSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.   IX.  99 

render."  For  this  translation  they  have  had  authority  of 
the  Septuagint,  which  has  xat'  aVn  /oua?  r'/A^a?  irapoixifi'af 
<r«  <WA<fc  aWa7ro<JwVw  <roi,  "  Instead  of  one  day  of  thy  so- 
journing, I  will  repay  double  to  thee."  The  Vulgate  has, 
"  hodie  quoque  annuntians  duplicia  reddam  tibi,"  which, 
is,  however,  much  more  like  the  Hebrew,  as  "  duplicia  " 
may  be  connected  either  with  the  preceding  or  following 
word.  The  Targum  of  Jonathan  gives  a  similar  sense  : 
"  Even  this  day  will  I  send  to  announce  to  you,  that,  con- 
cerning the  double  blessings  which  I  promised  you,  I  will 
bring  to  you."*  How  Jonathan  construed  the  original  is 
not  very  clear,  but  the  sense  evidently  is,  that  God  would 
give  them  the  double.  But  the  English  version,  though 
resting  on  such  authority,  and  assumed  as  the  true  sense 
by  Hengstenberg,t  is  certainly  not  correct  ;  for,  in  the 
first  place,  the  accents  connect  the  word  "  double  "  with 
"  declare/'  and  not  with  "  render."  The  literal  translation 
of  the  text,  according  to  the  accents,  is,  "  Even  this  day  : 
an  announcer  of  double  will  I  cause  to  return  to  thee." 
But  this  sense,  determined  by  the  accents,  is  confirmed  by 
the  usage  of  the  language.  The  verb  T?n  is  almost  uni- 
versally followed  by  an  accusative  of  the  thing  announced, 
or  a  dative  of  the  person,  or  both.  If,  then,  "P3n  be  taken 
in  its  participial  sense,  it  will  require  one  of  the  two,  but 
according  to  the  English  version  it  has  neither.  It  is 
true  that  T2p  might  be  taken  as  a  substantive,  "  an  an- 
nouncer," but  then  the  sense  of  the  whole  would  be,  "  I, 
an  announcer,  will  render  double  unto  thee  ;"  but  this 
sense  is  far  from  satisfactory.  The  reading  of  the  accents 
is  further  confirmed  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  words 
of  the  text  then  give  a  complete  sense,  without  adding  a 
single  word  for  which  there  is  no  authority  in  the  original. 
The  English  version  has  added  the  pronoun  "  I  "  and  the 


•psb  TV«  moN  H  pass  ]nn  in  to  H  p3^  rwin^  ntox  p  «ov  rp  • 
t  He  translates  "  Heute  noch  zcige  ich  an  :  Das  Doppelle  will  ich  dir 
/imickgeben." 

ii  2 


]QO  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX. 

connecting  word  "  that."  The  construing  suggested  by 
the  accents  gives  a  complete  sense  without  taking  any 
such  liberty ;  and  for  these  reasons  I  prefer  that  con- 
struction, and  think  that  the  whole  passage  ought  to 
stand  thus  : — "  Turn  ye  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners  of 
hope:  even  to-day:  an  announcer  of  double  will  I  cause 
to  return  to  thee."  In  the  words  "  even  to-day  "  I  find 
a  parallel  to  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice"  (Ps.  xcv.) ; 
and  by  "double"  I  understand  the  double  portion  of 
blessing  which  God  has  promised;  as  in  Isaiah,  "  For 
your  shame  ye  shall  have  double,  and  for  confusion  they 
shall  rejoice  in  their  portion  :  therefore  in  their  land  they 
shall  possess  the  double."  (Isa.  Ixi.  7-)  And  by  the 
"  announcer  of  double,"  I  understand  the  Messiah,  as  he 
is  described  in  that  same  chapter  :  "  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  God  is  upon  me :  because  the  Lord  hath  anointed 
me  to  preach  good  tidings  to  the  meek:  he  hath  sent 
me  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to 
the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them 
that  are  bound,"  &c. ;  where  I  also  find  the  same  allusion 
to  prison  and  prisoner.  The  sense  of  the  whole  would 
be,  ct  Turn  in  true  penitence  to  the  stronghold,  that  is, 
to  God,  ye  Jews,  prisoners  of  hope  :  turn,  even  to-day, 
after  all  your  impenitence,  and  I  will  cause  the  Messiah 
to  return  to  you  as  the  announcer  of  double  blessings." 

We  now  proceed  to  consider  the  applicability  of  the 
whole  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  The  modern  Jews  say  it  is 
no  proof  of  his  Messiahship,  for  that  it  was  not  fulfilled 
in  him.  The  detail  of  their  reasoning  is  given  by  R. 
Isaac,  in  the  Chizzuk  Emunah,  and  this  must  first  be 
answered. 

He  says,  it  cannot  apply  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,    "  For 

the  whole  chapter  refers  to  the  future,  and  speaks  of  the 

gathering  of  the  captivities  of  Israel,  and  the  coming  of 

the  true  Messiah,  which  we  expect  in  the  last  days ;  and 

•  Wagenseil's  Tela  Ignea,  vol.  ii.,  p.  295. 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.   IX.  101 

further,  of  the  promises  and  joyful  declarations  of  what 
will  happen  in  his  time,  according  to  the  intention  of  the 
prophecy,  if  well  explained  with  reference  to  the  pre- 
ceding and  following  context.  The  preceding  context  is, 
'  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  Damascus 
shall  be  the  rest  thereof,'  .  .  .  that  is  to  say,  these 
cities,  namely,  Hadrach,  Damascus,  and  others,  shall,  in 
the  time  of  the  Messiah,  form  a  part  of  the  land  of 
Israel,  and  shall  be  called  the  resting-place  of  the  Holy 
One,  blessed  be  He." 

This  foundation  of  all  R.  Isaac's  reasoning  is  contrary 
to  truth ;  the  whole  chapter  does  not  refer  to  the  future. 
In  the  verses,  to  which  he  refers,  the  prophet  announces 
the  destruction  of  Tyre  and  Zidon,  which  is  long  since 
past.  The  prophet  says,  "  Tyrus  did  build  herself  a 
strong  hold,  and  heaped  up  silver  as  the  dust,  and  fine 
gold  as  the  mire  of  the  streets.  Behold,  the  Lord  will 
cast  her  out,  and  he  will  smite  her  power  in  the  sea ;  and 
she  shall  be  devoured  with  fire."  Now,  it  is  known  to 
every  one,  that  Tyre  was  destroyed  in  the  time  of  Alex- 
ander the  Great,  and  that  from  that  day  to  this,  she  has 
had  neither  power  nor  riches.  Kimchi  himself  says,  "The 
affair  of  Tyrus  is  known  to  every  one."  And  Abarbanel, 
who  absurdly  endeavours  to  prove  that  Tyrus  here  means 
Venice,  admits  that,  "  The  Tyre  that  was  close  to  the 
land  of  Israel,  was  desolated  long  ago,  first,  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, and  the  second  time  by  Alexander  the  Mace- 
donian."* This  one  plain  and  undeniable  fact  completely 
overthrows  R.  Isaac's  premises,  and  shows  that  the 
prophecy  begins  its  fulfilment  at  the  time  of  Alexander 
the  Great,  i.  e.,  in  the  time  of  the  second  temple,  and 
thence  stretches  forward  to  the  times  of  the  Messiah.  It 
fixes  the  chronology  with  certainty  down  to  the  seventh 
verse,  for  the  fall  of  the  Philistines  is  by  the  prophet 

n::nn  nrvm  DUI  D'E'  m  nnm  -UD  bwror  p«V  roioo  nrvrro  -ns  njm  * 
•  pipvo  CIVUCD'TN  '"r  mtai  -cms  Trm:  *"y  nnw  DtDrc  TW? 


102  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX. 

intimately  connected  with  the  destruction  of  Tyre.  After 
the  prediction  of  this  event,  he  adds,  "  Ashkejon  shall 
see  it,  and  fear,"  &c.  But  if  the  first  seven  verses  refer 
to  the  time  of  Alexander,  why  should  not  the  eighth 
verse,  which  is  closely  connected  with  the  former,  and 
which,  according  to  Aben  Ezra,*  concludes  a  paragraph? 
This  verse  says,  "  I  will  encamp  about  mine  house 
because  of  the  army,  because  of  him  that  passeth  by, 
and  because  of  him  that  returneth ;  "  and  there  is  a 
circumstance  in  the  history  of  this  period,  which  seems 
exactly  to  fulfil  it,  that  is,  Alexander's  treatment  of  the 
Jewish  high-priest,  and  the  preservation  of  the  temple. 
There  is  one  difficulty  not  urged  by  R.  Isaac,  but  which 
must  be  considered.  The  prophet  adds,  "  And  no  op- 
pressor shall  pass  through  them  any  more ;  for  now  I 
have  seen  with  mine  eyes ; "  whereas,  after  this,  the 
Jews  suffered  much  from  the  Gentiles,  and  were  finally 
driven  forth  from  their  land,  and  the  temple  itself  was 
destroyed.  From  this,  Jews  and  Christians,  too,  may 
argue,  that  the  third  temple,  and  not  the  second,  is  in- 
tended; but  this  will  not  prove  that  Jesus  is  not  the 
Messiah,  or  that  he  was  not  to  appear  in  the  second 
temple.  For,  if  the  third  temple  be  intended,  the  pro- 
phet evidently  departs  from  the  chronological  order,  and 
makes  a  sudden  transition  from  the  time  of  Alexander, 
Yrhen  Tyre  and  Philistia  were  destroyed,  to  the  last  days 
and  to  events  which  must,  in  every  case,  be  posterior  to 
the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  The  only  question,  then, 
can  be,  as  to  how  long  posterior  ?  But  this  the  prophet 
does  not  decide.  If  the  prophet  had  said,  that  this  state 
of  security  was  to  be  cotemporaneous  with  the  coming  of 
Messiah,  or  to  take  place  within  a  very  few  years  after 
his  advent,  it  might  be  argued,  that  as  this  was  not  ful- 

*  Aben  Ezra  begins  his  Commentary  on  the  ninth  verse  by  saying, 
J<  This  is  the  beginning  of  a  paragraph." 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX. 

filled  in  the  appearance  of  Jesus,  he  is  not  the  Messiah. 
But  the  prophet  does  not  define  any  time,  he  simply 
states,  that  there  was  to  be  such  a  state  of  things.  It 
can,  therefore,  be  no  argument  against  the  claims  of  our 
Lord.  If  it  be  urged,  that  the  Messiah  is  mentioned  in 
the  next  verse,  and  that  1700  years  have  already  rolled 
away,  and  that  this  is  too  long  a  period  to  suppose  between 
the  eighth  and  ninth  verses,  we  reply,  that  if  the  prophet 
speaks  of  the  third  temple  in  the  eighth  verse,  there  is 
a  much  longer  period  between  the  subjects  of  the  seventh 
and  eighth  verses,  for  in  the  former  he  was  speaking  of 
the  time  of  Alexander,  since  when  two  thousand  years 
have  passed  away,  and  we  do  not  see  the  third  temple 
yet. 

Admitting,  then,  ^he  strongest  case  that  the  Jews  can 
make  out,  it  will  not  affect  the  proof  of  our  Lord's  Mes- 
siahship ;  but  still,  from  the  nature  of  the  preceding 
context,  all  referring  to  the  times  of  the  second  temple, 
I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  the  eighth  verse  refers  to  the 
second  temple  also,  and  that  the  difficulty  arising  from 
the  words,  "  No  oppressor  shall  pass  through  them  any 
more,"  is  to  be  solved  by  considering  this  promise  as  of 
the  same  nature  as  most  of  the  others  made  to  Israel, 
that  is,  conditional  upon  their  obedience.  Moses  hae 
repeatedly  laid  down  this  as  the  general  principle  of  God's 
dealings  with  the  Jews,  especially  in  reference  to  the 
possession  of  blessing  and  prosperity  in  the  land.  As  for 
example,  "  See,  I  have  set  before  thee  this  day  life  and 
good,  and  death  and  evil :  in  that  I  command  thee  this 
day  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  his  ways,  and  to 
keep  his  commandments,  and  his  statutes,  and  his  judg- 
ments, that  thou  mayest  live  and  multiply:  and  the  Lord 
thy  God  shall  bless  thee  in  the  land  whither  thou  goest  to 
possess  it.  But  if  thine  heart  turn  away,  so  that  thou 
wilt  not  hear,  but  shalt  be  drawn  away,  and  worship  other 
gods  and  serve  them ;  I  denounce  unto  you  this  day,  that 


104  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.   IX. 

ye  shall  surely  perish,  and  that  ye  shall  not  prolong  your 
days  upon  the  land  whither  thou  passest  over  Jordan  to 
possess  it."  (Deut.  xxx.  15 — 18.)  There  are  similar 
passages,  almost  without  number,  in  which  the  blessings 
are  suspended  upon  the  condition  of  obedience,  so  that 
this  may  fairly  be  considered  as  the  fundamental  prin- 
ciple, according  to  which  the  other  similar  promises  are 
to  be  explained.  If  not,  then  the  Mosaic  law  must  be 
considered  as  absolutely  abolished,  and  it  must  be  ad- 
mitted that  a  new  principle  has  been  introduced,  which 
no  Jew  can  concede,  nor  any  Christian  either.  For, 
though  we  believe,  that,  as  a  religious  dispensation  for  the 
Church  of  God,  the  Mosaic  law  has  been  entirely  ab- 
rogated, yet  we  believe  that,  because  the  Jews  did  not 
receive  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses,  God  has  required  it 
of  them  and  dispersed  them  ;  that  is,  we  believe  that  the 
denunciations  of  the  Mosaic  law  against  the  nation  are 
still  in  force,  and  are  now  actually  fulfilling;  and,  if  so, 
then  the  Mosaic  principle  of  obedience  or  disobedience  as 
the  condition  of  national  weal  or  woe  is  still  in  force,  and 
consequently  by  that  fundamental  principle,  every  promise 
to  the  Jews  must  be  tried  and  interpreted,  no  matter 
whether  the  condition  is  expressed  or  not.  The  law  of 
Moses  is  the  great  foundation  upon  which  all  the  national 
promises  rest. 

The  necessity  and  truth  of  this  principle  may  be  tried 
by  applying  it  to  the  particular  promises,  even  those  made 
before  the  time  of  Moses.  God  said  to  Abraham,  "  I 
will  give  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  the  land 
wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  all  the  land  of  Canaan  for  an 
everlasting  possession/'  But  Israel  has  never  yet  enjoyed 
the  benefit  of  that  promise.  Has  the  Word  of  God  failed 
then  ?  No;  God  gave  it  to  them,  but  they  did  not  fulfil 
the  conditions  of  tenure.  It  is  still  theirs,  just  as  a 
sequestrated  estate  belongs  to  the  lawful  heir,  although 
he  does  not  enjoy  the  possession  until  the  condition  of 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.   IX.  105 

paying  just  debts,  on  which  all  estates  are  enjoyed,  has 
been  fulfilled.  God  has  not  taken  away  the  right  of  pos- 
session and  given  it  to  another.  That  still  belongs  to  the 
Jews,  and  whenever  they  fulfil  the  conditions,  they  shall 
again  have  the  actual  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance. 
Again,  when  God  sent  Moses  to  the  Israelites,  he  gave 
him  this  promise,  "  I  will  bring  you  in  unto  the  land, 
concerning  the  which  I  did  swear  to  give  it  to  Abraham, 
to  Isaac,  and  to  Jacob;  and  I  will  give  it  you  for  an 
heritage :  I  am  the  Lord."  (Exod.  vi.  8.)  This  is  a  very 
solemn  promise,  and  apparently  unconditional.  But  it 
was  not  fulfilled  to  those  to  whom  it  was  made.  Instead 
of  entering  into  the  land,  they  all,  with  few  exceptions, 
died  in  the  wilderness.  Why,  then,  was  it  not  fulfilled  to 
them,  and  why  was  it  fulfilled  to  their  children  ?  Because 
the  condition  of  obedience  was  implied  which  they  did 
not  fulfil,  but  their  children  did. 

It  would  be  very  easy  to  multiply  similar  passages  from 
Moses  and  the  other  prophets,  but  I  shall  content  myself 
with  one  other  instance,  taken  from  Zechariah  himself, 
and  couched  in  terms  very  similar  to  the  passage  under 
consideration.  In  the  second  chapter  we  find  the  fol- 
lowing words,  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  as  towns 
without  walls,  for  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle 
therein.  For  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will  be  unto  her  a  wall  of 
fire  round  about,  and  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of 
her.  Ho,  ho,  Come  forth ;  and  flee  from  the  land  of  the 
north,  saith  the  Lord ;  for  I  have  spread  you  abroad  as 
the  four  winds  of  the  heaven,  saith  the  Lord.  Deliver 
thyself,  O  Zion,  that  dwellest  with  the  daughter  of  Zion." 
(Zech.  ii.  4,  &c.)  Here  is  a  magnificent  promise  made  to 
those  who  should  return  from  Babylon  ,  but  it  has  never 
yet  been  fulfilled.  Jerusalem,  rebuilt  by  the  exiles,  never 
was  inhabited  thus,  nor  did  the  Lord  give  the  miraculous 
protection  here  promised.  Arc  we  then  to  conclude  that 
the  Lord  broke  his  promise?  No  such  thing,  the 


106  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.    IX. 

original  terms  of  Israel's  national  contract  or  covenant 
presuppose  a  condition  here  and  in  all  similar  pro- 
mises ;  that  condition  was  not  fulfilled  by  the  Jews,  and 
therefore  the  promised  blessings  were  withheld.  But, 
whenever  Israel  fulfils  the  condition,  the  Lord  will  ac- 
complish his  promise  to  the  letter. 

A  Jew  may  attempt  to  turn  this  principle  against  Chris- 
tianity.    He  may  say.  Then  the  promise  of  the  coming 
of  Messiah  was  also  conditional  upon  obedience,  but  the 
Jews  have  been  disobedient,  and,  therefore,  Messiah  is  not 
come.     But  this  admits  of  an  easy  answer.    The  promise 
of  a  Messiah  was  not  a  merely  national  promise,  it  was 
made  to  all  mankind,  and  therefore  the  disobedience  of 
the  Jews  could  not  prevent  what  God  had  promised  to  the 
other  nations.     But  the  national  blessings  promised  to  the 
Jews  at  his  coming  were  conditional,  and  as  they  have 
not  fulfilled  the  conditions,    those  blessings  have  been 
withheld.   And  thus  we  have  an  answer  to  R.  Isaac's  next 
objection.      He  explains  the  words,  "  I  will  cut  off  the 
chariot  from  Ephraim,  and  the  horse  from  Jerusalem," 
to  mean,  that  Israel  shall  no  more  have  need  of  weapons 
of  war,  because  there  shall  be   universal  peace.     Israel 
did  not  choose  to  receive  the  Messiah  when  he  came ;  it 
was,  therefore,  utterly  impossible  that  God  could  bestow 
the  blessings.     R.  Isaac's  next  objection  is  founded  on  a 
false  interpretation  of  the  words, "  He  shall  speak  peace  to 
the  heathen."     He  says,   "  This   means,   that  the  King 
Messiah  will  make  peace  between  nation  and  nation,  if 
there  be  wars   between  them,  for  all  the  heathen  shall 
obey  him."  *   Now,  though  we  believe,  on  the  authority  of 
other  prophecies,  that  a  time  shall  yet  come,  when  there 
shall  be  universal  peace,  we  must  deny  that  it  is  pro- 
mised in  these  words.     It  is  not  said,  that  he  will  make 
peace  between  the  heathen,  but  that  "  he  will  speak  peace 

*    It  is  odd  enough  that   Hengstenberg  should   adopt  this  inter- 
pretation. 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX.  10J 

to  the  heathen."  There  is  one  other  passage  where  this 
expression  occurs.  It  is  said  of  Mordecai,  "  He  was 
accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren,  seeking  the 
wealth  of  his  people,  and  speaking  peace  to  all  his  seed, 
ty-if1??1?  C'ibtp  -nyr}."  (Esth.x.  3.)  Here  the  parallelism 
is  against  R.  Isaac's  intepretation ;  but  I  will  give  Aben 
Ezra's  commentary  to  show  how  a  Jew  would  understand 
the  words  in  a  passage  having  no  relation  to  controversy. 
He  says,  "  Seeking  the  wealth  of  his  people.  It  would 
have  been  enough  for  him  to  have  done  good  to  those  that 
sought  it  of  him,  but  behold  he  was  himself  seeking  to 
do  good  to  his  people.  c  His  seed/  These  are  his  sons, 
and  his  son's  sons,  and  sons  are  always  afraid  of  their 
fathers.  But  he  was  in  the  habit  of  speaking  peace  at  first 
even  to  his  sons,  who  were  as  his  servants,  and  still  more 
to  his  people.  This  verse  shows  his  high  moral  attain 
ments  and  his  meekness,  as  it  is  recorded  of  Moses,  our 
master,  that  he  was  a  meek  man  above  all  men."  (Aben 
Ezra  in  loc.)  This  shows,  then,  that  Aben  Ezra  con- 
sidered this  expression  to  mean,  not  that  he  would  make 
peace  between  his  seed,  but  that,  in  all  humility  and 
meekness,  he  should  speak  words  of  peace  to  them.  And 
this  meaning  can  easily  be  confirmed  by  the  general 
usage  of  the  language.  In  the  first  place,  when  "W 
is  construed  with  an  accusative,  it  is  generally  the  ac- 
cusative of  the  thing  spoken;  as  V^W  ^^  BPfc*n  -131^ 
nitt?,"?  -13riS,  "  The  man,  the  lord  of  the  land,  spake  rough- 
nesses with  us."  (Gen.  xlii.  30.)  n$$  spy*,  "  Speak 
the  truth."  (Zech.  viii.  16.)  FT\^\  "ij$,  "  Thou  hast 
spoken  falsehood."  (Zech.  xiii.  3.)  So  that,  following 
the  idiom  of  the  language,  "  He  shall  speak  peace," 
would  naturally  mean,  He  shall  speak  words  of  peace. 
But,  besides,  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  here  it  is  followed 
by  a  dative,  and  that  in  such  cases  the  dative  ah\ . 
signifies  the  person  spoken  to,  as  may  be  soon  on  almost 
page  of  tin-  Hebrew  Bible;  and  "^  then  often 


108  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  IX. 

signifies  to  announce,  or  promise;  as,  of  the  blessings 
which  Jacob  announced  to  his  sons,  it  is  said,  "  This  is 
it  that  their  father  spake  unto  them,  Dtfb  ^?^T.  The  Lord 
God  of  your  fathers  make  you  a  thousand  times  so  many 
more  as  ye  are,  and  bless  you,  as  he  hath  promised  you, 
Dpb  "i$V  (Deut.  i.  11.)  "Prophesy  unto  us  smooth 
things,  nipbq  sttb  sn^V  (Isaiah  xxx.  10.)  The  usage 
of  the  language  therefore  determines,  that  there  is  no 
ground  whatever  for  R.  Isaac's  interpretation,  but  that 
the  true  meaning  of  "  He  shall  speak  peace  to  the 
heathen,"  is,  "  He  shall  promise  or  announce  peace  to  the 
heathen,"  which  sense  will  confirm,  not  weaken,  the  claims 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

In  connexion  with  this  passage  he  makes  another  ob- 
jection ;  he  says,  "  Of  the  King  Messiah  it  is  said,  c  He 
shall  speak  peace  to  the  Gentiles/  But  Jesus,  the  Na- 
zarene,  says,  I  am  not  come  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword/ 
It  is  easy  to  show  that  these  passages  do  not  contradict 
one  another,  but  the  best  answer  is  an  appeal  to  facts. 
Did  Christ  speak  peace  to  the  Gentiles,  and  has  his  pre- 
diction of  the  arising  of  strife  been  fulfilled  ?  If  both 
things  have  really  happened,  which  it  is  easy  to  show, 
then  the  event  shows  that  there  is  no  contradiction,  and 
that,  more  satisfactorily  than  any  argument. 

One  answer  will  suffice  for  his  remaining  objections, 
which  are,  I.  In  the  days  of  the  Messiah  both  Judah  and 
Ephraim  are  to  be  gathered.  II.  That  many  nations  shall 
be  joined  to  the  Lord.  HI.  That  Gog  and  Magog  shall 
come  up  against  Israel,  and  fall  before  the  children  of 
Judah  and  Ephraim.  IV.  That  there  shall  be  peace 
in  all  the  world.  V.  That  King  Messiah's  dominion 
shall  extend  over  the  whole  earth.  The  fourth  objection 
has  been  answered  already.  The  second  is  answered  by 
the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  from  idolatry.  And  to  the 
other  three  it  is  enough  to  reply,  that  the  prophet  does 
not  promise  that  all  these  things  are  to  happen  as  soon  as 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX.  109 

the  Messiah  comes.  The  days  of  Messiah  are  to  last 
from  his  coming  to  the  end  of  the  world,  but  the  prophet 
does  not  mark  out  the  period  of  this  great  interval,  in 
which  these  events  are  to  take  place.  On  the  contrary, 
arguing  only  from  this  prophecy,  without  a  reference  to 
others,  we  may  infer,  that  Messiah's  glory  was  not  to 
commence  with  his  coming.  For  the  prophet  Describes 
him  as  "  a  lowly,  afflicted  man,  and  riding  on  an  ass," 
which  tells  us  plainly  that  his  beginning  is  to  be  in 
humiliation,  not  in  glory.  And,  further,  the  prophet 
gives  a  very  significant  intimation,  that  the  deliverance  of 
Israel  was  to  be  posterior  to  the  spread  of  his  dominion 
amongst  the  Gentiles;  for,  after  the  prediction  that  he 
should  speak  peace  to  the  Gentiles,  and  that  his  dominion 
should  be  from  sea  to  sea,  he  adds,  most  significantly, 
"  As  for  thee  also,  by  the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have 
sent  forth  thy  prisoners  out  of  the  pit  wherein  is  no 
water,"  which  the  Jewish  commentators  interpret  of  the 
deliverance  of  the  Jews :  now,  if  this  deliverance  was 
to  take  place  immediately  on  the  coming  of  the  Messiah, 
why  should  he,  as  it  were,  make  it  a  secondary  event,  and 
connect  it  with  the  preceding  passage  by  an  "  also  ?  " 
The  very  form  of  the  address,  "  As  for  thee  also,"  in- 
timates that  there  should  be  something  wrong  with  Israel, 
but  that,  notwithstanding,  they  should  be  ultimately 
delivered. 

Having  thus  answered  the  objections,  I  will  now  briefly 
show  that  the  circumstances  of  our  Lord's  advent  do 
answer  to  the  prediction. 

I.  The  time  of  his  advent.    The  prophet  here  connects 
the  coining   of   Messiah  with  the  times   of   the   second 
temple,   and   after  the  destruction  of  Damascus,   Tyre, 
and  Philistia,  by  the  Greeks.      At   this  time  Jesus   of 
Na/areth  appeared. 

II.  The  circumstances   of  his   advent.     He  was  just 
or  righteous,  so  that  none  of  his  judges  found  any  fault 


110  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  IX. 

in  him,  and  he  himself  could  challenge  the  Jews  to  con- 
vince him  of  sin.  He  was  saved  by  the  Lord  from  all  his 
enemies,  and  rose  triumphantly  from  the  dead.  He  was 
lowly  and  afflicted,  and  he  did  literally  ride  into  Jeru- 
salem upon  an  ass. 

III.  The  results  of  his  coming.     He  spoke  peace  to 
the  Gentiles,   and   his  dominion   does  even  now  extend 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth.      Within  three  centuries  from 
his   appearance,    Christianity   held    the   sceptre    of    the 
world.     And  though  Mahometanism  offered  a  temporary 
obstacle  to  its  extension,  we  now  see  that  power  pros- 
trated,   and   Christianity   holding   within   its   grasp   the 
means  of  universal  empire.      From   India  to  America; 
from  the  extreme  north,   down  to  the  newly-discovered 
islands   of  the   Southern    Ocean,    Christianity  possesses 
the   ascendancy,    and   Christians,    if    not   restrained   by 
those  principles  of  love,  justice,  and  holiness,  which  Jesus 
has  taught  them,  might,  at  any  moment,  take  possession 
of  the  world.     It  is  true,  we,  as  well  as  the  Jews,  look 
for  something  far  beyond  this,   but  that  which  we   see 
with  our  eyes,  is  a  pledge  that  God  will  accomplish  the 
remainder.     Never  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  did 
any  form  of  religion  possess  such  power,  or  extend  so 
widely  as  the  religion  of  Jesus.     The  most  powerful,  the 
most  civilised,  the  most  scientific  nations  that  the  world 
ever  saw,  acknowledge  Jesus  as  their  Lord,  and  the  sun 
never  sets  upon  his  kingdom. 

IV.  Whilst  his  dominion  has  been  spreading  amongst 
the  Gentiles,  the  Jews  still  remain  in  the  pit  where  there 
is  no  water,  as  the  prophet  intimates,  and  God  still  cries 
to  them,  Turn  to  the  strong-hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope ; 
and  I  will  cause  the  Messiah  to  return  to  you. 


Ill 


CHAPTER  X. 

1.  "  Ask  ye" — In  that  time,  if  ye  ask  of  God,  blessed 
be  He,  rain  in  the  time  of  the  latter  rain,  the  Lord  who 
makes  the  lightnings  will  immediately  hear  your  prayer, 
and  make  lightnings,*  and  will  give  rain.  The  lightnings 
shall  be  with  the  rain,  as  it  is  said,  nWp  Tfnb  T?."P:, 
u  And  a  way  for  the  lightnings  of  the  thunder  ."f  These 
are  they  which  flash  in  the  time  of  rain  before  the  crash 
comes.  The  root  of  this  word  is  njn.  Our  rabbies,  of 
blessed  memory,  have  interpreted  it  to  mean  cloud.  As 
to  that  which  is  said,  u  In  the  time  of  the  latter  rain," 
which  is  the  last  rain,  and  falls  in  the  days  of  Nisan,  the 
meaning  is,  Yea,  even  at  the  last,  if  they  want  rain,  he 
will  give  it  them,  and  the  herb  shall  grow  quickly. 

DI$J  "")££  (rain  of  rain).  Two  synonymes  are  here  put 
together  in  regimen,  as  "ipy  riE"[N,  "  earth  of  dust"  (Dan. 
xii.  2),  and  )Vn  to^sD,  "  out  of  the  miry  clay"  (Ps.  xl. 
3),  to  signify  abundance  of  rain,  which  he  will  give  to 
those  who  live  in  that  time. 

"  To  every  one  grass  in  the  field" — To  every  one  of 
them  he  will  give  grass  in  the  field.  Our  rabbies,  of 
blessed  memory,  have  interpreted  it  thus :  "  In  the  time 
when  Israel  doeth  the  will  of  God,  He  doeth  their  will : 
so  that  if  one  man  alone,  and  not  the  others,  want  rain, 
he  will  give  rain  to  that  one  man,  and  if  a  man  want  one 
herb  alone  in  his  field  or  garden,  and  not  another,  he  will 
give  rain  to  that  one  herb,  according  as  one  of  the  saints 

•  Height  clouds;  compare  margin. 

f  Though  Kimchi  only  quotes  the  last  half  of  this  verse,  his  allusion 
is  really  to  the  whole.  "  When  he  made  a  decree  for  the  rain,"  &c. 
(.loli  xxviii.  24.) 


112  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

used  to  say,  This  plot  of  ground  wants  rain,  and  that  plot 
of  ground  does  not  want  rain,  [and  so  the  rain  fell.]  * 

2.  "  For  the  Teraphim  have  spoken  vanity.1' — Then 
they  shall  know  that  the  Teraphim  have  spoken  vanity, 
for  they  shall  see  that  the  prophecies  uttered  by  the  true 
prophets  are  fulfilled.  The  evil  prophecies  have  been  ful- 
filled in  the  desolation  of  the  land,  and  the  consolations 
shall  be  fulfilled  at  that  time.-  Then  they  shall  know  that 
the  possessors  of  Teraphim  who  led  them  astray  before 
the  desolation  of  the  land,  and  also  the  diviners  and  the 
false  prophets  with  their  dreams,  who,  before  the  desola- 
tion, used  to  promise  them  peace,  then  they  shall  know 
that  they  gave  vain  comfort,  and  that  all  was  lie,  and 
vanity,  and  nothingness. 

"  Therefore  they  went  their  way  as  a  flock" — They 
went  their  way,  and  were  led  in  captivity  from  their  land, 
as  a  flock  that  has  no  shepherd. 

"  They  were  abased  (English,  troubled)  because  there 
was  no  shepherd." — SOJ!  means,  "  They  were  humbled;" 
as  njS!  ^  PjteOS5!,  "  Nor  abase  himself  for  the  noise  of 
them"  (Isa.  xxxi.  4),  where  also  this  root  has  the  mean- 
ing of  humbling,  f 

3.  "Against  the  shepherds." — These  are  the  kings  of 
Greece,  who  oppressed  Israel  before  the  day  when  the 
house  of  the  Hasmoneans  rose  up  against  them.  After 
likening  Israel  to  a  flock,  he  likens  the  kings  that  ruled 
to  shepherds,  or  he-goats  that  go  before  the  flock,  and 
the  flock  after  them. 

"  Upon  the  he-goats  I  will  visit" — Their  sin  upon 
them. 

"For  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  visited.3' — He  hath  re- 
membered their  affliction  and  oppression,  and  hath  pro- 
mised to  save  them. 

*  Talm.  Bab.  Taanith,  fol.  ix.,  col.  2. 

t  And  so  our  translators  have  in  that  passage. 


ON    ZECIIAKIAH,    CHAP.    X.  113 

"  Hisjlock" — He  will  not  leave  them  in  the  hand  of 
the  shepherds  any  longer. 

"  And  lintli  made  t/icm  as  /ii.s  goodly  horse  in  the 
battle" — As  u  horse  whose  strength  and  might  are  seen 
in  the  battle,  as  it  is  said  of  him,  "  He  rejoices  in  his 
strength  :  he  goeth  on  to  meet  the  armed  men."  (Job 
xxxix.  21.) 

4.  "  Out  of  him  is  the  corner." — Corner  is  spoken  para- 
bolically  of  the  head  of  the  people,  as  it  is  said,  "  Draw  ye 
near  hither  all  the  corners  of  the  people  "   (1  Sam.  xiv.  38), 
i.  e.,   the   heads  of  the   people.     The  meaning   here   in 
Zecharmh  is,  that  the  head  over  them  shall  not  be  from 
the  Greeks. 

"  The  nail." — This  is  the  governor  j  and  so  it  is  said, 
"  I  will  fasten  him  as  a  nail  in  a  sure  place."  (Isaiah 
xxii.  23.) 

"  The  battle  bow"— For  they  shall  not  want  the  help 
of  another  people :  their  hands  alone  shall  be  sufficient  for 
them. 

"  Out  of  him  came  forth  every  oppressor  together."— 
For  they  shall  oppress  their  enemies. 

5.  "And  they  shall  be  as  mighty  men  which  tread 
down  in  the  mire  of  the  streets." — Israel  shall  be  as  the 
mighty  men  of  Greece,  such  as  they  were  at  first,  and 
they  shall  be  treading  and  trampling  their  enemies  in  the 
mire  of  the  streets. 

"  In  the  battle  (war).1' — In  that  war  which  they  shall 
wage  with  them. 

"And  the  riders  on  horses  shall  be  ashamed." — The 
enemies  who  came  against  them  riding  on  horses  shall 
have  shame,  for  Israel  shall  overcome  them,  though  on 
foot. 

6.  "  And  I  will  strengthen." — I  will  give  them  strength 
against  their  enemies. 

"  And  I  will  bring  them  again" — D^falprp  is  a  word 
compounded  of  DVpSttfirT],  "  And  I  will  cause  them  to 

i 


114  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 


dwell/'  from  stpi;  and  of  D^ni^ttfrn  (And  I  will  cause 
them  to  return),  from  SUti  ',  and  the  two  ideas  are  here 
both  implied,  that  is  to  say,  He  will  cause  them  to  return 
to  their  land,  and  will  cause  them  to  dwell  there  in  peace 
and  security. 

"  And  they  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast  them  off." 

—  They  shall  be  in  great  honour  and  in  peace,  as  if  I  had 
never  cast  them  off,  for  on  account  of  the  abundance  of 
good  they  will  not  remember  their  afflictions  which  are 
past. 

7.  "And  jEphraim,  they  shall  be  like  a  mighty  man." 

—  They  shall  all  be  in  the  war  as  a  mighty  man,  as  has 
been  said  above,  "  They  shall  be  as  mighty  men." 

"  Their  heart  shall  rejoice"*  —  Their  heart  shall  rejoice 
when  they  overcome  their  enemies. 

t(  As  wine."  —  As  one  that  drinketh  wine,  as  Jonathan 
also  has  interpreted  it,  "As  they  that  drink  wine."  A 
similar  ellipse  occurs  in  nHN  n^TlED,  "  Thou  art  de- 
sires" (Dan.  ix.  23),  i.  e.,  A  man  of  desires.  And  again  : 
"  Wine  is  a  mocker  ;"  i.  e.,  He  that  drinketh  wine.  And 
there  are  many  other  similar  passages. 

"  Their  children  shall  see  and  rejoice."  —  The  little  ones 
and  the  youths,  who  are  not  accustomed  to  make  war, 
shall  see  the  war  of  their  fathers,  and  when  they  overcome 
their  enemies  they  shall  rejoice. 

8.  "  I  will  hiss  for  them"  —  pntz?  signifies  the  moving  of 
the  lips  with  the  voice,  and  it  is  a  sign  of  calling,  as  "  He 
will  hiss  unto  them  from  the  end  of  the  earth."  The  mean- 
ing of  the  word  is,  "  1  will  gather  them"    Some  commenta- 
tors refer  this  to  the  fact,  that  they  had  been  dispersed  by 
reason  of  the  persecutions  by  the  Greek  kings,   but  in 
the  days  of  the  Hasmonean  house  had  returned  to  the 

*  Here  in  English  it  would  seem  as  if  Kimchi  only  repeated  the 
words  of  Scripture.  But  in  the  Hebrew  the  sense  is  expressed  by  a 
perfect  with  Vau  conversive,  and  Kimchi  gives  the  future. 


ON     ZECHAIUAH,    CHAP.    X.  1  15 

land  of  Israel.     Other  commentators  refer  this  verse  to 
the  future. 

"  And  they  shall  increase  as  they  increased" — As  they 
increased  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  so  shall  they  increase  at 
that  time. 

9.  "  And  I  will  sow  them  among  the  peoples." — Some 
commentators  refer  this  to  the  time  when  they  were  scat- 
tered amongst  the  nations  on  account  of  the  persecutions 
by  the  Greek  kings,  but  there  they  remembered  God  and 
his  commandments. 

"And  they  shall  live  with  their  children  and  turn 
again,"  to  their  land,  in  the  days  of  the  Hasmoneans. 
But  others  say,  "  I  will  sow  them  among  the  peoples " 
means,  After  their  salvation,  in  the  days  of  the  Hasmo- 
neans, they  shall  go  amongst  the  Gentiles,  to  trade  or 
make  an  excursion,  and  shall  be  greatly  honoured  amongst 
them,  on  account  of  the  salvation  which  God,  blessed  be 
He,  wrought  for  them. 

"  And  they  shall  live  luith  their  children  and  turn 
again.'1 — When  they  shall  return  to  their  land,  they  shall 
return  with  great  wealth,  wherewith  they  shall  live  with 
their  children. 

10.  "  I  will  bring  them  again  from  the  land  of  Egypt, 
and  from  Assyria." — They  had   gone   forth   thence   on 
account  of  the  afflictions. 

«  To  the  land  of  Gilead  and  Lebanon:'— Gilead  is 
beyond  the  Jordan  eastward;  and  Lebanon  includes  all 
the  land  of  Israel  on  this  side,  as  it  is  said,  "  That  goodly 
mountain,  and  Lebanon."  (Deut.  iii.  25.) 

"  And  there  shall  not  be  found  for  them"— It  will  not 
be  sufficient  for  them,  on  account  of  their  multitude.  But 
Jonathan  has  interpreted  "  Lebanon  and  the  Sanctuary" 
as  Onkelos  has  also  done. 

11.  "And  he  shall  pass  through  the  sea,  affliction  "- 
As  to  the  nations,  who  arc  many  like  the  sea,  affliction 

i2 


116  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

shall  pass  through  them.  The  verb  is  masculine,  i.  e.,  to 
say,  "  the  matter  of  affliction."  * 

"  And  shall  smite  the  waves  in  the  sea." — God,  blessed 
be  He,  will  smite  in  the  sea  and  on  its  waves,  and  will 
dry  them  up,  that  is  to  say,  the  multitude  of  the  nations ; 
and  this  is  what  is  said,  "  And  all  the  depths  of  the  river 
shall  dry  up,"  as  is  explained,  "  The  pride  of  Assyria 
shall  be  brought  down."  Assyria  and  Egypt  are  men- 
tioned because  they  did  more  evil  to  Israel  than  the  other 
nations. 

12.  "And  I  will  strengthen  them  in  the  Lord" — 
Similar  to,  "  And  he  said  unto  Moses,  Come  up  unto  the 
Lord."  (Exod.  xxiv.  l.)f 

Behold  we  have  expounded  this  chapter,  according  to 
the  opinion  of  the  commentators,  of  the  second  temple : 
but  my  own  decided  opinion  is,  that  it  is  entirely  future, 
as  well  as  that  which  preceded.  And  this  is  proved  by 
the  mention  of  Judah  and  Ephraim,  for  in  the  days  of 
Messiah  all  Israel  shall  return  to  their  land,  both  Judah 
and  Ephraim,  who  did  not  return  in  the  second  temple, 
but  only  the  captives  of  Babylon,  who  were  Judah  and 
Benjamin.  Whenever  Judah  is  mentioned,  Benjamin  is 
included,  for  Benjamin  was  joined  with  Judah.  And  the 
mention  of  Greece  (Javan)  includes  Gog  and  Magog,  for 
they  were  brothers,  of  the  sons  of  Japhet ;  and  all  shall 
come  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah.  Jonathan  has  in- 
terpreted, "  against  thy  sons,  O  Greece,"  against  the 
sons  of  the  nations,  as  we  have  written.  The  whole 
chapter  is  plain,  according  to  this  interpretation.  And 
as  to  that  which  is  said,  "  I  will  sow  them  amongst 

*  rra  is  feminine,  and  therefore  cannot  agree  with  the  verb  "££1, 
which  is  masculine.  The  parallelism  shows  that  our  translators  have 
given  the  true  sense. 

f  Here,  again,  plurality  of  persons  in  the  Deity  is  plainly  inti- 
mated, 


ON    ZECHAKIAH,    CHAP.  X.  117 

the  Gentiles,"  the  meaning  is,  according  to  the  opinion 
of  the  Targumist,  as  we  have  written.  Also  the  meaning 
of  "  He  shall  pass  through  the  sea,  affliction,"  is  as 
I  have  given  it,  or  it  may  be  taken  literally,  as  is  said 
in  Isaiah,  "  The  Lord  shall  smite  the  tongue  of  the 
Egyptian  sea,"  &c. 


118 


CHAPTER  XI. 

1.  "  Open  thy  doors,  O  Lebanon" — The  commentators 
have  explained  this  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Hasmonean 
dynasty,  or  of  the  time  of  the  desolation  of  the  second 
temple.     But  it  is  more  consistent  to  interpret  it  in  con- 
nexion with  the  subject  immediately  preceding,  of  the 
destruction  of  the  kings  of  the  nations.     This  was  the 
opinion  of  Jonathan,  who  has  rendered  the  words  "  Ye 
nations,  open  your  gates." 

2.  "  Howl9  fir-tree."   -  Jonathan    says,    "  Howl,    ye 
kings." 

"  Defenced  forest " — "P$3  must  be  interpreted  as  D^ny 
fVm:?!,  "fenced  cities."  (2 Kings  xix. 25.)  T^an  is  writ- 
ten with  1,  but  is  read  with  Yod,  but  the  meaning  is  the 
same.  However  "V$2  may  be  also  interpreted  "  vintage," 
as  T»$a-nw  ttT^T  npb  mbrn.,  "And  your  threshing  shall 
reach  unto  the  vintage."  (Lev.  xxvi.  5.)  They  are  com- 
pared to  trees  of  the  forest,  and  are  put  in  connexion  with 
"  the  vintage,"  because  they  were  bearing  fruit,  i.  e.,  they 
were  rich  and  great,  possessors  of  goods,  and  cattle,  and 
property. 

3.  "  The  howling  of  the  shepherds their  glory" — 

Their  strength,  and  might,  and  their  glory.     The  inter- 
pretation of  the  verse  is  according  to  the  Targum.*     But 
our   rabbies,   of  blessed   memory,  have  interpreted  this 
chapter   of  the   desolation   of   the   second   temple,    and 
Lebanon  is  the  holy  temple.     They  say,  that  forty  years 
before  the  destruction   of  the  temple,  the  doors  of  the 
sanctuary  opened  of  themselves.     Rabban  Johanan   ben 
Zakkai   reproved  them,   and  said,  "  O  sanctuary,   sanc- 

*  The  Targum  says,  "  The  voice  of  the  crying  of  the  kings,  because 
their  provinces  are  desolated." 


KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY,    &C.  119 

tuary  !  how  long  wilt  thou  terrify  thyself?  I  know  that 
thine  end  is  to  be  left  desolate,  for  Zechariah  has  pro- 
phesied against  thce  long  since,  '  Open  thy  doors,  O 
Lebanon.' "  * 

4.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord ;  Feed  the  flock  of  the 
slaughter." — Most  interpreters  explain  this  paragraph  of 
the  past:  that  he  told  the  prophet  to  prophesy  what 
should  happen  to  Israel  until  their  captivity.  Some  in- 
terpret it  of  the  second  temple.  They  are  called  "  the 
flock  of  the  slaughter"  because  they  were'given  into  the 
hands  of  their  enemies  to  be  slain,  when  they  transgressed 
the  commands  of  the  blessed  God.  My  Lord,  my  father, 
of  blessed  memory,  has  explained  njn ,  "  feed,"  as  an  in- 
finitive, "  to  feed,"  and  gives  as  an  example  of  a  similar 
form,  |TJ2  nVn^n  ivtf?,  "that  there  may  be  to  it  a 
glittering"  (Ezek.  xxi.  10,  Heb.  15),  where  rnn.  has 
the  same  signification  as  fYPn1?.  The  meaning  then  is, 

*  The  remarkable  tradition  which  Kimchi  here  quotes,  is  found  in  the 
Talm.  Bab.  Treatise.  Yoma.  fol.  39,  col.  2,  and  is  as  follows  :— "  Our 
rabbies  have  handed  down  the  tradition,  that  forty  years  before  the  de- 
struction of  the  temple,  the  lot  [for  the  goat  that  was  to  be  sacrificed  on 
the  day  of  atonement]  did  not  come  out  on  the  right  side — neither  did  the 
scarlet  tongue  [that  used  to  be  fastened  between  the  horns  of  the  scape- 
goat] turn  white  [as,  according  to  tradition,  it  used  to  do,  to  signify  that 
the  sins  of  the  people  were  forgiven] — neither  did  the  western  lamp  burn 
— the  doors  of  the  sanctuary  also  opened  of  their  own  accord,  until 
11.  Johanan,  the  son  of  Zakkai,  reproved  them.  He  said,  O  sanctuary, 
-..uictuary !  why  dost  thou  trouble  thyself?  I  know  of  thee  that  thine 
end  is  to  be  left  desolate,  for  Zecluiriah,  the  son  of  Iddo,  has  prophesied 
against  thee  long  since,  '  Open  thy  doors,  O  Lebanon,  that  the  fire  may 
devour  thy  cedars/  R.  Isaac,  the  son  of  Tavlai,  says,  Why  is  the 
temple  called  Lebanon  [white  mountain]  ?  Answer:  Because  it  makes 
white  the  sins  of  Israel.  Itav  Zutra,  the  son  of  Tobiah,  says,  Why  is 
temple  called  '  forest'  (Zech.xi.  2)?  Answer:  Because  it  is  written, 
'  The  house  of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  '  (1  Kings  vii.  2),  &c."  Lightfoot, 
on  Matt.  xxvi.  3,  quotes  this  tradition  from  the  Jerusalem  Talmud  in 
iKMily  the  same  words;  and,  on  John  x.  1,  giv- >  ln>  view  t-i 
xitli  chapter  of  Zechariah,  which  is  worth  consulting 


120  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"  The  Lord  said,  to  feed  the  flock,"  but  not  that  he  com- 
manded the  prophet  to  feed  them  himself.  God,  blessed 
be  He,  said  to  feed  them,  as  he  says  in  verse  7?  "  And  I 
will  feed  the  flock  of  the  slaughter." 

5.  "  Whose  buyers  slay  them'1 — And  behold  they  are 
in  the  hands  of  a  buyer  and  seller,  who  has  no  mercy. 

"  And  they  are  not  guilty" — They  do  not  hold  them- 
selves guilty  if  they  kill  them. 

"They  that  sell  them."—-fcfr  irrnpbl.  [The  plural 
noun  and  singular  verb  signify]  that  each  one  of  their 
sellers  says,  when  he  sells  them,  Blessed  be  the  Lord. 

"For  I  am  rich" — Blessed  be  the  Lord,  for  I  am  rich 
from  the  price  of  these  captives.  And  when  the  wicked 
seller  says,  Blessed  be  the  Lord,  it  is  because  he  thinks 
that  God  is  well  pleased  with  the  deed,  as  Sennacherib 
said,  "  Am  I  now  come  up  without  the  Lord  against  this 
land  to  destroy  it  ?  "  (Isa.  xxxvi.  10)  or,  it  is  said  because 
it  is  the  custom  of  the  children  of  men  in  this  world 
to  thank  God  for  every  increase  of  their  gain,  whether  it 
be  gotten  in  the  way  of  righteousness  or  unrighteousness. 
And  on  this  subject  our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory,  say, 
"  A  thief,  when  he  is  in  the  act  of  breaking  in,  calls  upon 
God." 

T'ttfoM}.  The  S  is  quiescent,  the  i  has  pathach,  and 
the  V  only  a  simple  sh'va. 

"  And  their  own  shepherds  pitieth  them  ?iot." — And 
God,  for  he  is  their  own  shepherd,*  has  no  pity  upon 
them  ;  and  therefore  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  their 
enemies,  who  buy  and  sell  them.  DiT^h,  shepherds,  is 
said  in  the  plural  number,  similar  to  the  idiom  in  natt^ 
Vjzto?  bw^p%  "Let  Israel  rejoice  in  his  makers."  (Ps. 
cxlix.  2.)  And  again,  ^B  nib^  n»M,  "  Where  is  God  my 
makers/'  (Job  xxxv.  10.) 

*  This  is  a  remarkable  exposition,  as  furnishing  another  instance  of 
the  plural  being  applied  to  God. 


ON    ZECHAIUAH,    CHAP.    XI.  1*21 

6.  "  For  I  will  no  more  pity  them"  unless  they  better 
their  doings. 

"  Upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  land"  of  Israel. 

"  Every  one  into  his  neighbour's  hand,  and  into  the 
hand  of  his  king" — They  shall  destroy  them:  and  their 
king,  he  also  shall  destroy  them,  whether  it  be  a  king 
of  Israel,  or  a  king  of  the  Gentiles,  that  ruleth  over  them. 
S^PB  has  the  signification  of  r$*S»  "  deliver  into/'  &c., 
as  n^n?b  vbsi  ns^pn  nVton,'  « And  they  presented 
the  burnt-offering  unto  him,  with  the  pieces  thereof." 
(Lev.  ix.  13.) 

"  And  they  shall  smite  the  land." — Between  the  one 
and  the  other  they  shall  destroy  and  waste  the  land  of 
Israel. 

"  And  out  of  their  hand  will  I  not  deliver  them" 
because  they  have  sinned  against  me. 

7.  "  And  I  will  feed  truly  the  poor  of  the  flock? 

— In  truth  the  poor  of  the  flock  I  found  them,  when  I 
took  them  to  feed.  First,  I  will  explain  this  paragraph 
according  to  the  opinion  of  those  commentators  who  refer 
it  to  the  past ;  and  although  I  do  not  find  that  any  one 
of  them  has  given  a  complete  commentary,  I  will  explain 
according  as  I  shall  find  in  my  opinion,  by  the  help  of  the 
Name,  blessed  be  He. 

"  And  I  took  unto  me  two  staves." — It  is  the  way  of 
a  shepherd  to  lead  the  flock  with  the  staff  in  his  hand ; 
but  it  is  said  that  to  feed  Israel  he  took  two  staves,  this  is 
to  signify  that  his  mode  of  leading  them  was  not  uniform, 
but  according  to  their  deeds  so  he  led  them,  and,  there- 
fore, two  staves  are  mentioned.  And  it  is  said,  "  The 
one  I  called  Beauty,  and  the  other  Bands."  "ins1?  is  here 
twice  pointed  with  pathach,  though  it  is  not  in  regimen. 
This  is  not  according  to  the  prevailing  custom,  but  somefe\v 
similar  cases  are  found.  It  is  said,  that  he  called  one  of  the 
staves  "  Beauty,"  for  in  pleasantness  he  led  them  on  tin 
way  :  as  David,  the  king,  says,  "  The  Lord  is  my  >hep 


122  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

herd,  I  shall  not  want.  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down  in 
green  pastures ;  he  leadeth  me  beside  the  still  waters." 
This  was  in  the  time  when  Israel  kept  the  way  of  the 
Lord,  when  their  kings  and  their  judges  were  good,  and 
leading  them  in  the  right  way,  and  then  God  led  them  in 
pleasantness,  full  of  all  goodness,  without  any  adversary 
or  evil  occurrence. 

"  And  the  other "  of  the  staves  he  called  "  Bands  " 
(Destroyers).  D^b^in  is  the  language  of  destruction,  as 
D'to-jp  E^njp,  "  That  spoil  the  vines  (Song  ii.  15) ; 
that  is  to  say,  they  have  corrupted  their  way  and  their 
doings,  and  he  led  them  accordingly,  in  that  he  was  not 
careful  to  preserve  them  from  their  enemies.  Never- 
theless he  still  led  them,  so  that  his  Shechinah  and  his 
protection  did  not  depart  from  them  until  their  captivity, 
for  there  were  good  kings  and  bad  kings  after  them. 
When  they  were  evil,  then  evil  came  upon  them,  and 
then  the  staff  (Destroyers)  was  there;  but  when  they 
did  good,  then  the  good  came  upon  them,  and  the  staff, 
Beauty  (pleasantness),  was  there. 

"  And  I  fed  the  flock"— Whether  good  or  evil,  I  fed 
them. 

8.  "  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  month.''' — 
These  are  the  sons  of  Josiah,  Jehoahaz,  and  Jehoiakim,  and 
Zedekiah ;  these  three  died  by  the  hand  of  their  enemies. 
But  Jehoiakin,  the  son  of  Jehoiakim,  although  he  was  led 
away  captive  was  not  cut  off,  for  from  him  the  kingdom, 
the  kingdom  of  the  house  of  David  was  continued,  but  these 
three  were  cut  off,  for  from  the  seed  of  Jehoahaz  and  Ze- 
dekiah there  was  no  king :  and  Jehoiakin  died  in  dishonour, 
torn  and  cast  out;  and  these  three  were  at  the  end  of  the 
desolation  and  captivity  of  the  land,  for  the  three  together 
did  not  reign  more  than  twenty-two  years  and  four  months, 
and  they  were  all  in  affliction.  The  words, "  In  one  month," 
signify  a  short  time,  as  in  Hosea  v.  7>  "  Now  shall  a 
month  devour  them  and  their  portions." 


ON    ZECIIAKIAII,    CHAI'.   \l.  123 


"  Ami  my  .soul  was  stoutened,"  ^55  ^r\\  This 
is  suit!  figuratively,  as  in  Judges  x,  16,  btt^Si  StZ??3  "iSprn 
^fc*?^),  "  And  his  soul  was  shortened  for  the  misery  of 
Israel."  The  same  idea  is  intended  as  that  expressed  by 
E/ekie),  in  the  words  — 


:t  Then  my  soul  was  alienated  from  her,  like  as  my  soul 
was  alienated  from  her  sister."  (Ezek.  xxiii.  18.)  These 
two  verses  refer  to  the  desolation  of  the  land  in  the  days 
of  Zedekiah.  And  when  it  is  said,  "  Their  soul  also 
abhorred  me,"  the  meaning  is,  My  soul  did  not  loathe 
them  first,  but  their  soul  first  despised  me,  therefore  my 
soul  abhorred  them.  But  Jonathan  has  not  thus  inter- 
preted the  verse,  "  His  soul  was  shortened  for  the  misery 
of  Israel,"  and  he  has  interpreted,  "  My  soul  was  short- 
ened for  them,1'  to  mean,  "  My  word  has  removed 
them;"  and  again,  the  words,  "Their  soul  also  ab- 
horred me,"  he  has  interpreted,  "  Because  their  soul  ab- 
horred my  service."  And  again  the  words,  "  Three 
shepherds  I  cut  off,"  &c.,  he  has  not  expounded  the 
thing,  but  given  the  simple  meaning  of  the  words,  "  And 
I  cast  away  three  governors  in  one  month." 

9.  "  Then  said  I,  I  will  not  feed  yow."—  Before  the 
temple  was  desolated,  in  the  days  of  these  three  shepherds, 
when  I  saw  that  their  deeds  were  evil,  and  that  no  good 
king  would  arise  after  them,  I  said,  1  will  not  feed  them 
any  more;  in  the  same  way  as  it  is  said,  "  I  will  hide  my 
face  from  them,  and  they  shall  be  devoured." 

"  That  that  dieth,  let  it  die,"  by  the  pestilence.' 

"  And  that  that  is  cut  off,  let  it  be  cut  off,"  by  the 
sword. 

"  And  let  the  rest  eat  every  one  the  flesh  of  another," 
in  the  famine. 

10.  "  And  I  took  "  —  And  1  had  already  taken  my  staff. 

'*  ttcunty"  —  Tliis  is  Josiah  ;  for  after  him  then-  \\ 
good  king. 


124  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"  And  I  cut  it  asunder." — By  the  hands  of  Pharaoh 
Necho  I  removed  him. 

"  To  break"  "^on1?,  with  Tsere  and  Yod,  to  make  it  long. 
— He  says,  when  I  saw  that  no  good  king  would  arise 
after  him,  I  removed  him,  in  order  that  the  nations  might 
rule  over  Israel.  For  they  did  not  keep  the  way  of  the 
Lord,  except  in  spite  of  the  king,  as  it  is  written  ; 
therefore  it  is  said,  To  destroy  my  covenant  which  I  had 
made  with  all  people,  as  if  God  had  made  a  covenant 
with  the  nations  not  to  do  evil  to  Israel,  for  they  had 
done  them  no  evil  in  the  days  of  Josiah.  Even  Pharaoh 
Necho  sent  to  him  a  message,  that  he  should  not  make 
war  with  him. 

11.  "  And  it  was  broken  in  that  day'' — That  covenant 
was  broken  in  the  day  that  Josiah  died,  for  the  three  shep- 
herds ruled  over  them,  and  the  nations  plundered  them, 
and  robbed,  and  slew,  and  led  away  captive. 

"  And  so  the  poor  of  the  flock  that  kept  me,  D^iftiEn 
MlbS,  knew  that  it  was  the  word  of  the  Lord." — Those 
righteous  persons  amongst  them  who  were  keeping  me, 
i.  e.,  what  I  said  to  them  through  the  prophets.  But  the 
people  did  not  hearken,  for  they  did  not  believe  them, 
only  the  good  amongst  them,  who  were  keeping  me,  i.  e., 
my  word,  as  "Wrrntf  -ifcttf  VONI,  "  But  his  father  kept 
the  word,"  and  when  the  punishments  came,  they  knew 
that  it  was  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

12.  And  I  said  unto  them" — This  is  the  word  of  the 
Lord  which  he  said  to  them  through  the  prophets. 

"  Give  me  my  price" — Inasmuch  as  I  have  fed  (or  been 
a  shepherd  to  you)  give  my  price  or  hire.  By  hire,  is 
meant  repentance  and  good  works. 

"  And  if  not,  forbear.'1 — Similar  to  what  Ezekiel  said, 
"  Whether  they  hear,  or  whether  they  forbear." 

"  So  they  weighed  my  price,  thirty  pieces  of  silver." — 
There  were  thirty  righteous  persons  amongst  them  in 
the  days  of  these  three  shepherds,  and  of  them  we  find 


ON    ZECHAIUAH,    CHAP.  XI.  125 

Daniel,  Hananiah,  Mishael,  A/ariah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel, 
and  Zephaniah.  But  it  is  impossible  that  there  should 
not  have  been  more,  even  though  they  are  not  mentioned, 
for,  behold,  it  is  written,  "  The  dead  bodies  of  thy 
servants  have  they  given  to  be  meat  unto  the  fowls  of 
the  heaven ;  the  flesh  of  thy  saints  unto  the  beast  of  the 
earth."  (Psalm  Ixxix.  2.)  But  Jonathan  has  interpreted, 
"  If  it  be  right  in  your  eyes,  do  my  will ;  if  not,  forbear. 
And  they  did  my  will ;  the  men  partly/'  i.  e.,  some  of  the 
men  returned  in  repentance. 

13.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the 
potter"  "i^l^n.  The  prophet  says,  that  God  told  him  to 
cast  this  silver  to  the  "^"K  And  some  interpret  this  word 
as  if  it  were  l^iN  (treasure),  for  the  Ehevi  letters  may 
be  interchanged,  and  the  meaning  then  is,  "  The  keeper 
of  the  treasure  ; "  so  Jonathan  has  interpreted  by  "  Trea- 
surer." This  comment  then  signifies,  figuratively,  that 
they  (the  pious  persons  spoken  of  in  the  preceding  verse) 
should  unite  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  be  separate 
from  the  people  that  did  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord. 
The  word  1£V  is  used  to  convey  an  allusion  to  the 
Creator,  "CH  r^$n  V&?  IPO  n^^n,  «  He  fashioneth  their 
hearts  alike,  he  considereth,"  &c.  (Psalm  xxxiii.  15)  ; 
for  he  knoweth  the  good  and  the  evil,  He  searclueth  the 
heart,  and  trieth  the  reins,  for  there  are  some  who  show 
themselves  as  good,  but  are  not  good. 

"  And  I  took." — So  it  appeared  to  him  in  the  prophetic 
vision,  that  he  took  the  silver  and  cast  it  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord  to  the  potter  (or  treasurer) ;  but  this  whole 
matter  had  happened  many  years  before,  for  it  occurred 
in  the  days  of  the  three  shepherds,  and  signifies,  in  a 
figure,  that  the  good  were  united  together,  and  kept 
separate  from  the  people,  and  were  not  seen  with  them  in 
the  streets,  and  this  is  what  Jeremiah  says,  "  Run  ye,  to 
and  fro  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  —  and  seek  in 
the  broad  places  thereof— if  there  bo  a  man  that  seeketh 


12G 

the  truth:  and  I  will  pardon  it"  (Jer.  v.  1),  as  I  have 
explained  it  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah.  The  words, 
"goodly  price,"  *i|y»n  T[.$  (magnificence  of  honour), 
mean,  the  house  of  the  Lord,  according  as  is  said,  "  I 
cast  it  in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  The  meaning  is  [as  if 
it  were  written]  "ijTH  "11$  by,  To  the  magnificence  of 
honour.  The  by,  which  is  written,  [before  "iB^n]  stands 
in  the  place  of  two  [i.  e.,  it  applies  to  both  "n^V  and  "HN]  ; 
and  the  meaning  of  the  words,  pn\b3?p  THf^  "1$??» 
"  That  I  was  prized  at  of  them  "  [that  I  was  honourable 
from  upon  them]  is,  I  was  honoured  in  myself,  and  I 
turned  away  from  them,  on  account  of  the  evil  of  their 
deeds,  and  so  Jonathan  has  interpreted.* 

14.  "  Then  I  cut  asunder:'  —  This  is  said  of  the 
destruction,  when  Zedekiah  was  destroyed,  for  that  was 
the  end  of  the  destroyers  and  corrupters,  the  temple  was 
destroyed  and  Israel  led  captive. 

"  That  I  might  break  the  brotherhood  between  Judah 
and  Israel"  —  The  brotherhood  which  existed  between 
Judah  and  Israel  in  the  service  of  idols  was  broken  then. 
When  Judah  was  led  captive,  there  did  not  remain  an 
idolater  in  Israel  ;  for  Israel,  until  they  were  led  away 
captive,  did  not  cease  from  the  service  of  idols,  in  all  the 
afflictions  that  came  upon  them.  But  when  they  were 
led  captive,  and  saw  that  the  words  of  the  prophets  were 
verified  in  the  desolation  of  the  land,  they  no  more  com- 
mitted idolatry.  And  Judah  also  served  idols,  until  they 
were  led  captive,  but  after  their  captivity,  idolatry  was 
annihilated  from  amongst  them.  Behold,  then,  the 
brotherhood  in  idolatry  which  had  existed  between  them, 
was  destroyed  ;  and  so  Jonathan  has  interpreted. 

Behold,  we  have  interpreted  this  chapter  of  the  past, 


*  The  Michlal  Jophi  on  the  words  »rngj  "I^N,  says,  naj»a  vnp* 
:  orr^sa  tir  >rvn  vb  ^  brrbyo  >mDi»  "  The  words  mean,  I  was  honourable, 
or  precious  in  myself,  but  I  turned  away  from  them,  because  I  was  not 
precious  in  their  eyes." 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.    XI.  J2J 

but  the  following  chapter  is,  in  every  case,  a  prophecy 
of  the  future,  of  the  time  of  the  second  temple,  and  we 
will  explain  it  after  that  we  shall  have  explained  this 
chapter  of  the  time  of  the  second  temple.  My  lord,  my 
father,  has  interpreted  thus : — 

Joseph  Kimchi's  Interpretation. 

God,  blessed  be  He,  says,  I  began  to  feed  the  flock, 
and  I  took  to  me  two  choice  staves  for  the  purpose. 
DSHD  rr'brpn,  and  DSl's— is  the  high-priest,  and  C^^l'n 
—the  king.  Of  the  priest  it  is  said,  "  The  priest's  lips 
should  retain  knowledge;"  and  again  it  is  said,  "  Know- 
ledge shall  be  pleasant,  DS^,  to  thy  soul."  D^b^n  is  the 
king,  because  he  is  like  the  bnSn  :n,  captain  of  the 
sailors  in  a  ship.  (Jon.  i.  6.)  But  this  flock,  although  I 
fed  them  with  these  two  staves,  and  kept  away  from  them 
other  shepherds,  i.  e.,  the  kings  of  the  nations,  did  not 
turn  to  that  which  is  good ;  and  1  sent  them  three 
prophets  to  feed  them  in  my  place,  and  they  are  Haggai, 
Zechariah,  and  Malachi;  but  as  their  reproof  did  not 
profit  them,  I  cut  them  off,  as  it  is  said,  "  Three  shepherds 
also  I  cut  off  in  one  month."  From  this  we  learn, 
that  they  died  in  one  month;  and  after  them  there  was  no 
prophecy  in  Israel,  as  our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory, 
have  said,  "  After  the  death  of  Haggai,  Zechariah,  and 
Malachi,  prophecy  departed  from  Israel."  We  find  also, 
that  the  beginning  of  their  prophecy  was  in  one  time,  in 
the  second  year  of  Darius.  It  is  said,  when  I  cut  off 
these  three  shepherds,  "  my  soul  loathed  them,  and  their 
soul  also  abhorred  me."  n^Cl?  signifies  u  abhorred;"  as 
in  that  rabbinical  saying,  btt^l  blTO  7125*  An  unripe  fig, 
a  ripening  fig,  and  a  ripe  fig.  They  say,  n25  means  the 
days  of  childhood,  ^r-Q  is  when  the  daughter  is  great, 
and  her  father  abhors  her ;  and  the  explanation  of  ^Q^ 
is  nwbtt  nNSS  when  she  is  adult,  and  her  father  despairs 


128  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

of  getting  her  married,  on  account  of  her  abiding  so  long 
in  the  house. 

"  Then  I  said,  I  will  not  feed  you and  I  took 

my  staff  Pleasantness,  and  cut  it  asunder" — This  sig- 
nifies, that  near  the  captivity  they  lost  the  priesthood. 
"  Give  me  my  price."  Turn  in  repentance,  and  they  did 
turn,  but  their  repentance  was  not  perfect,  but  only  thirty 
days  of  the  mourning,  which  they  mourned  on  account  of 
the  high-priest  who  died;  this  is  meant  by  the  thirty 
pieces  of  silver.  "  Cast  it  to  the  potter"  "i§1\  i.  e.,  to  the 
treasure,  as  it  is  explained  "  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to 
the  house  of  the  "isy-"*  The  meaning  is,  Write  this 
prophecy,  and  lay  it  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  And  there 
are  some  who  interpret  "i^n  b$,  to  the  congregation,  as 
^  "1^1%  "  The  former  of  the  grasshopper."  J  (Amos 
vii.  1.) 

"  The  magnificence  of  the  honour  wherewith  I  was 
honoured  from  upon  them" — The  majesty  of  the  glory 
which  I  removed  from  them,  inasmuch  as  in  the  second 
temple  the  Shechinah  did  not  rest. 

^"?I2J  "^*?  means,  "  Which  I  withheld,"  as  ^n  i|2h, 
«  Withdraw  thy  foot/'  (Prov.  xxv.  17.) 

"  Then  I  cut  asunder  mine  other  staff"  D^irf,  that 
is,  the  king,  and  he  is  Agrippas,  for  in  his  days  Titus  led 
them  captive. 

JR.  Abraham  of  Toledo's  Exposition. 

The  wise  man,  R.  Abraham,  the  Levite,  from  Toledo, 
the  author  of  the  "  Book  of  Cabbalah,"  has  interpreted 
this  chapter  thus: — 

"Feed  the  flock  of   the  slaughter:1 —  This  is   the 

*  In  verse  13. 

f  Kimchi  on  Amos,  amongst  other  interpretations  of  these  words,  says, 
They  may  signify  mn«n  r*rD»,  "  A  collection  of  locusts  ;"  and  it  is  in 
this  sense  that  Joseph  Kimchi  here  quotes  the  words. 


ON    ZF.CHARIAH,    CHAP.  XT.  129 

building  of  the  second  temple;  and  this  that  is  said, 
"  And  I  took  to  me  two  staves,  and  I  called  one  Orb,  and 
the  other,  I  called  D^h."  D^b,  This  is  the  prin- 
cipality of  Zerubbabel  and  Nehemiah,  the  Tirshatha,  for 
they  were  of  the  children  of  David,  and  to  them  the 
Lord  gave  the  kingdom  of  Israel  a  covenant  of  salt. 
D^bph,  This  is  the  kingdom  of  the  priests,  for  they 
first  built  the  temple  on  Mount  Geriz/im,  and  inter- 
married with  the  Cutheans,  and  from  them  came  forth  a 
heresy  to  the  world ;  and  at  last  Hyreanus,  who  held  the 
high-priesthood  for  forty  years,  turned  Sadducean  in  the 
end,  and  slew  the  priests,  he,  and  Alexander,  his  son ; 
and  such  was  also  the  mind  of  Aristobulus,  his  son's  son. 

"  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  month." — This 
signifies  these  three  dignities,  The  principality  of  the  sons 
of  David,  and  the  monarchy  of  the  Hasmoneans,  and 
the  monarchy  of  their  servants.  He  calls  the  whole 
duration  of  the  second  temple  "  one  month,"  because  it 
was  in  his  sight  as  a  few  days.  And  this  that  is  said, 
"  I  took  my  staff,  nTO?  and  <-'ut  it  asunder,  that  I  might 
break  my  covenant,"  £c.,  this  is  the  death  of  Zerub- 
babel and  Nehemiah;  for  the  love  was  interrupted,  and 
the  covenant  destroyed,  which  had  existed  between  them 
and  the  kings  of  Persia.  And  this  that  is  said,  "  If  it 
be  good  in  your  eyes,"  &c., — is  what  he  said,  when 
he  was  feeding  them  with  his  second  staff,  D^b^iin;  and 
it  is  as  if  he  said,  If  it  be  good  in  your  eyes  to  walk 
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord. 

"  And  they  weighed  my  price,  thirty  pieces  of  silver  " — 
A  symbol  of  the  thirty  years,  during  which  the  pious 
kings  reigned,  and  these  are  they,  Mattathias,  called 
Hiismoiuu,  one  year;  Judas,  his  son,  six  years;  Jonathan, 
his  son,  six  years ;  Simon,  his  son,  eighteen  years ; 
together  thirty-one  years.  And  if  in  them  there  were  de- 
fect ive  months,  they  amount  to  thirty  years,  during  which 
the  faithful  kings  reigned.  And  the  words,  "  The  Lord 


J30  KIMCHI'S    COMMENTARY 


said  unto  me,  "  Cast  it  to  the  ltf\  to  the  -»fW  TTH,  which 
I  was  honoured  from  upon  them/'  means,  This  reward  is 
magnificent  and  precious,  and  deserves  to  be  amongst  the 
offerings,  and  a  ransom  for  the  souls  of  the  congregation  : 
and  he  calls  them  -»£V,  and  the  meaning  of  n*riN  is  tne 
same  as  in  the  passage,  "OS  i^V  nsm,  "  And  hehold  he 
formed  grasshoppers  "  (Amos  vii.  1)  ;  and  what  follows, 
"  So  I  cast  it  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  to  the  potter,"  is 
the  same  as  the  former. 

"  So  I  cut  asunder  my  second  staff,"  D^b^in.  —  This  is 
the  uprooting  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Hasmoneans  in  the 
days  of  the  D^b^h  (destroyers),  amongst  whom  were 
Hyrcanus  and  Aristobulus,  and  his  sons. 

"  To  destroy  the  brotherhood  between  Judah"  i.  e., 
which  was  intended  to  destroy  the  brotherhood,  as  it  is 
written,  "  As  for  the  beauty  of  his  ornament  he  set  it  in 
majesty"  [or  for  pride].  (Ezek.  vii.  20.)  And  the  meaning 
is,  "  Which  he  set  for  majesty;"*  and  "between  the 
D^b^h,"  means,  that  they  divided  Israel  into  two  king- 
doms, as  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat  did,  in  whose  days 
the  kingdom  of  the  house  of  David  was  divided,  and  the 
brotherhood  between  Judah  and  Israel  was  destroyed,  t 

15.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Take  unto  thee 
yet  the  instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd."  —  These  are 
the  servants.  [The  house  of  Herod.] 

*  He  thinks  that  the  relative  pronoun  is  to  be  supplied  in  both  these 
passages. 

f  R.  Abraham's  meaning  is  not  very  clear,  but  receives  some  light 
from  the  exposition  of  this  same  passage  given  in  the  Chizzuk  Emunah. 
Upon  the  words,  "  I  cut  asunder  my  second  staff,"  R.  Isaac  says, 
"  This  represents  in  a  figure  the  uprooting  of  the  kingdom  of  the  priests, 
for  their  kingdom  was  uprooted,  when  the  love  and  brotherhood  between 
them  was  destroyed  in  the  days  of  Hyrcanus  and  Aristobulus,  his 
brother,  for  then  the  children  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  those  of  the 
other  tribes  who  adhered  to  them,  were  divided  into  two  factions,  and 
this  division  was  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  the  dynasty  of  the 
priests."  (See  Wagenseil's  Tela  Ignea,  part  ii.  p.  416.) 


ON    ZECHAIUAII,    (HAP.    Xf.  131 

"  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the  flock  I    The 

sword  shall  he  upon  his  arm  darkened." — This  is 

Agrippas,  who  brought  up  Vespasian  and  Titus  against 
the  land  of  Israel,  and  the  princes  of  the  robbers  who 
committed  all  the  evils. 

15.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Take  thce  yet  the 
instruments  of  a  foolish  shepherd." — -The  Name,  blessed 
be  He,  said   to  Zechariah,  that  he  should  take  the  in- 
struments of  a  foolish  shepherd  in  the  prophetic  vision, 
and  this  is  a  sign  of  a  foolish  king  who  should  arise  in 
Israel  in  the  time  of  the  second  temple,  who  should  do 
his  deeds  in  folly.     The  vessel  (instrument)  of  a  foolish 
shepherd,  is  different  from  the  vessel  of  another  shepherd. 
The   vessel  of  a  shepherd  is,   for  instance,  a  sack,  into 
which  he  puts  bread  to  eat,  and  a  cup  to  drink  out  of,  and 
such  other  things  as  he  needs  in  the  wilderness,  when  he 
is   feeding   the   sheep.      But   the   vessel   of    the   foolish 
shepherd  is  small  and  diminished,  so  that  his  provision 
fulls  out,  and  when  he  suffers  the  want  of  his  food,  he 
becomes  angry  with  the  flock,  and  beats,  and  has   not 
compassion  upon  them. 

"^S,  "  Foolish,*'  has  got  a  paragogic  Jod,  as  "HpH. 
And  this  is  king  Herod,  who  was  a  servant  of  the  Has- 
moneans,  and  rose  against  them,  and  became  king,  and 
took  a  wife  of  that  family,  and  managed  his  kingdom  in 
madness,  and  slew  his  wife  and  his  sons,  and  did  many 
evils  in  Israel.  Jonathan  has  interpreted,  "  Prophesy 
against  the  stupid  governor." 

16.  "  For,  behold  the  young  one.11 — "123  here 

answers  to  n^TD,  a  lamb. 

"  That  that  standeth  still."— That  which  standeth  in 
its  place,  so  that  it  cannot  go  to  feed,  he  will  not  feed  in 
its  place. 

"  And  tear  their  claws  (hoofs)  in  pieces." — Not  enough 
that  he  should  not  do  good,  but  he  will  do  evil  to  them, 
for  with  his  staff  he  will  break  their  hoofs,  that  they  may 

K2 


132  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.   XI. 

not  be  able  to  walk.     Jonathan  has  interpreted  "  He  will 
consume  the  remnant  of  them." 

17.  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that  leaveth  the  flock. — 
^'")  the  same  as  nyS,  as  it  is  found  in  ^\  ^HN?,  Isaiah 
xxxviii.  12.  ^V3  the  same  as  2$ ;  the  Jod  is  paragogic. 
A  similar  instance  is  rh^  ]$&  npw,  "  Binding  his  foal 
unto  the  vine."  (Gen.  xlix.  10.)  And  again,  DtiQ  X3?h 
"Tpp,  "  He  that  heweth  him  out  a  sepulchre  on  high." 
(Isaiah  xxii.  16,)  &c. 

b^n,  "  The  idol"  (good  for  nothing),  as 
"  physicians  of  no  value."  (Job  xiii.  4.)     Vb«  is  a  thing 
that  is  of  no  use,  and  this  shepherd  is  Herod  or  Agrippas. 

"  The  sword  upon  his  arm" — Inasmuch  as  he  after- 
wards says,  "  His  arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his 
right  eye  utterly  darkened,  sword  is  not  to  be  taken 
literally,  but  for  destruction,  as  the  sword  destroys. 
"  Arm"  is  mentioned  to  signify  the  destruction  of  his 
strength ;  and  "  right  eye,"  to  signify  the  destruction  of 
forethought  and  counsel  in  his  doings.  The  right  eye  is 
the  eye  of  the  heart,  as  R.  Abraham  Aben  Ezra  has 
written ;  but  he  has  not  interpreted  this  chapter  as  we 
have. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  CHAPTER  XI. 

BEFORE  we  proceed  to  the  interpretation  of  this  pro- 
phecy, it  is  necessary,  first,  to  consider  two  of  Kimchi's 
translations.  The  first,  that  of  D>T?5n  in  the  seventh 
verse,  is  not  very  important  with  respect  to  the  con- 
troversy, but  yet  must  not  be  passed  altogether  in  silence. 
Our  translators  have  rendered  this  word  "  Bands/' 
and  in  the  margin  "  Binders."  On  the  other  hand, 
Kimchi  and  all  the  Jewish  commentators  say,  that  it 
means  "  Destroyers,"  and  support  this  translation  by 
citing  DW?  D^nzp,  "  That  spoil  the  vines."  (Song 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XF.  133 

ii.  15.)  In  this  they  are  mistaken;  our  translators  have 
given  in  the  margin  the  true  literal  translation,  and  in  the 
text,  the  true  sense  of  the  word.  In  the  first  place,  the 
authority  which  the  rabbies  quote  is  nothing  to  the 
purpose.  D^b^inp,  which  does,  indeed,  signify  "  De- 
stroyers," is  the  Piel,  but  we  cannot  infer  from  that  con- 
jugation, that  the  word  has  the  same  sense  in  the  Kal. 
To  establish  their  translation,  it  would  be  necessary  to 
show  that  bon  in  the  Kal  signifies  "  to  destroy,"  but  no 
instance  of  this  sense  can  be  produced.  But,  further, 
this  translation  is  inconsistent  with  the  sense  assigned  by 
the  prophet.  He  says,  that  the  consequence  of  cutting 
asunder  the  staff  "  Bands,"  was  the  dissolution  of  the 
brotherhood  between  Israel  and  Judah.  "  Then  I  cut 
asunder  mine  other  staff,  Bands,  that  I  might  break  the 
brotherhood  between  Judah  and  Israel/'  This  plainly 
intimates,  that  this  staff  had  been  the  means  of  binding 
them  together,  or  keeping  them  united,  and  with  this 
sense  the  translation  "  Destroyers,''  is  altogether  at 
variance. 

That  our  translators  are  right,  appears  from  what  has 
already  been  said.  If  this  staff  was  the  means  of  binding 
together  Judah  and  Israel,  "  Bands  "  or  "  Binders  "  is  a 
most  appropriate  name  for  it.  And,  besides,  the  verb 
b?n  has  this  sense  in  the  Kal,  as  appears  not  only  from 
the  derivative  b^O,  a  band,  a  rope,  but  from  b:?h,  the 
singular  of  the  word  under  consideration.  b^H  is  used 
by  Ezekiel  and  Jonah,  to  signify  a  sailor,  i.  e.,  a  binder 
of  the  ship-ropes.  The  literal  translation,  therefore,  is 
"  Binders."  * 

*  Hengstenberg  (whose  Commentary  on  this  chapter  is  one  of  the 
noblest  specimens  of  interpretation  that  I  have  ever  met  with,  and  to 
which  I  am  largely  indebted)  takes  C^h  intransitively  to  signify  Vei-- 
ImndcHcn,  "  Allied  or  united."  But  I  think  that  the  active  signification, 
"  Hinders,"  is  more  agreeable  to  the  prophet's  explanalion,  which  has 
UK!  been  noticed. 


134  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI. 

The  second  difference  of  translation  is  more  important, 
The  words  of  the  thirteenth  verse,  which  our  translators 
have  rendered  "  Cast  it  unto  the  potter  :  a  goodly  price 
that  I  was  prized  at  of  them,"  Kimchi  and  some  other 
rabbies  would  have  translated  thus  :  "  Cast  it  to  the  trea- 
sure, to  the  magnificence  of  honour  (i.  e.,  the  temple,)  in 
which  I  was  honoured  in  myself;  but  I  turned  away  from 
them."  We  must  show,  therefore,  that  this  translation  is 
erroneous,  and  that  the  Christian  version  is  correct.  In 
the  first  place  "H^V,  "  potter,"  cannot  by  any  possibility 
signify  "  treasure."  Kimchi's  own  words  show  that  he 
did  not  believe  in  this  translation.  "  Some  interpret  this 
word  as  if  it  were  *iS*1N  (treasure),  for  the  Ehevi  letters 
may  be  interchanged.''  He  does  not  dare  to  say,  This  is 
the  true  meaning,  but  "  Some  interpret."  The  reason 
assigned,  namely,  that  the  Ehevi  letters  may  be  inter- 
changed, is  nothing  to  the  purpose,  for  this  will  not 
account  for  the  difference  of  punctuation.  Jf  the  word 
had  been  pointed  "IS'P,  there  would  have  been  some 
colour  for  this  interpretation  ;  but  the  present  points 
show  that  *"i£t»  can  be  nothing  else  but  the  present  parti- 
ciple of  nXJ,  "  to  form."  The  rabbies  have  not  even  the 
excuse,  that  this  word  occurs  but  seldom.  It  is  one  of 
the  most  common  words  in  the  language,  and  never  once 
has  any  thing  like  the  sense  which  they  here  endeavour 
to  force  upon  it.  Indeed  this  miserable  perversion  hardly 
deserves  a  refutation,  for  it  is  given  up  by  some  of  the 
most  learned  of  the  Jewish  commentators.  Alshech  says 
that  "i^V  is  to  be  taken  in  its  literal  sense,  "  Former,"  and 
that  it  refers  to  7-arP  "1SV,  "the  blessed  Creator."  Abar- 
banel  takes  it  in  the  same  sense,  and  says,  "  Cast  this 
matter  upon  the  Lord,  for  he  is  the  true  former  and 
Creator."*  And  even  Kimchi  himself  says,  "  The  word 

V  is  used  to  convey  an  allusion  to  the  Creator/'  &c., 


imam  "isvn 


-pan  * 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XI.  135 

which  is  a  plain  confession  that  he  did  not  believe  it 
could  signify  "  treasure." 

This  second  translation,  however,  differs  also  from  the 
Christian  version,  and  must  therefore  be  considered.  It 
would  make  the  sense  to  be,  "  Cast  it  to  the  Creator,"  &c. 
But  to  this  translation  I  object ;  first,  because  it  makes  a 
very  harsh  transition  to  the  third  person,  and  then  back 
again  to  the  first.  It  is  the  Lord  that  is  speaking,  and  we 
might  therefore  expect,  if  he  were  speaking  of  himself,  he 
would  not  say,  "  Cast  it  to  the  Creator,"  but,  "  Cast  it  to 
me;"  especially  as  in  the  following  words,  VT"]}^  "i?PN,  he 
speaks  of  himself  in  the  first  person.  But,  in  the  second 
place,  the  word  "i^V  is  never  used  absolutely  of  the 
Creator.  Whenever  it  is  applied  to  God,  it  has  either  an 
accusative  case  or  a  suffix,  as  in  the  example  given  by 
Kimchi,  DSib  in^_  -i^Pn,  "He  fashioneth  their  hearts 
alike."  (Ps.  xxxiii.  15.)  And  again  :  fc^a:  ^bq  T.2  ~>SV, 
"  He  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see  ?"  (Ps.  xciv.  9.) 
And  again:  TIN  ^\  "  I  form  the  light."  (Isa.  xlv.  /.) 
And  again,  in  Zechariah  himself:  CHN  rrn  -nn,  "  Which 
formeth  the  spirit  of  man."  Often  as  the  word  occurs,  it 
is  never  applied  to  God  absolutely,  but  always  has  an  ac- 
cusative; and  therefore,  as  it  has  no  accusative  here, 
I  infer  that  it  cannot  apply  to  God,  and,  therefore,  cannot 
be  translated  "  to  the  Creator/'  Having  shown  that 
-)^  cannot  signify  "  treasure"  nor  "Creator,"  it  follows 
that  the  only  other  translation  which  it  can  have,  namely, 
"  potter,"  is  the  true  one  :  and  this  may  be  further  seen 
in  Jer.  xviii.  and  xix.,  where  it  is  universally  admitted 
that  -i^>n  does  mean  "  potter." 

Having  been  obliged  to  fix  the  translation  of  "^"H, 
"  the  potter,"  it  may  be  convenient  to  consider,  here,  the 
meaning  of  the  words  "  Cast  it  to  the  potter."  They 
mean  the  same  as  "  Cast  it  to  an  unclean  place."  The 
place  where  the  potter  worked  was  in  the  valley  of  the  son 
of  Hinnom,  which  had  been  defiled  first  by  the  Moloch- 


]36  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI. 

worship  of  the  Israelites,  and  afterwards  by  Josiah,  who 
burned  human  bones  there  upon  the  idolatrous  altar.    This 
appears  from  tlje  two  chapters  of  Jeremiah  just  cited. 
The  Lord  says,  "  Arise,  go  down  to  the  potter's  house  :*' 
and  Jeremiah  says,  "  Then  I  went  down  to  the  potter's 
house"  (Jer.  xviii.  1 — 3)  :  from  which  it  appears  that  the 
potter's  house  was  situated  in  the  valley  beneath  the  city. 
But  in  the  following  chapter  the  locality  is  still  more  dis- 
tinctly marked  out.     "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Go,  and  get 
a  potter's  earthen  bottle,  fenn  "i^V1  p2f?3,  and  take  of  the 
ancients  of  the  people,  and  of  the  ancients  of  the  priests, 
and  go  forth  to  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  which 
is  by  the  entry  nip-inn  "i^ttf  of  the  pottery-gate,"  not  the 
cast-gate,  or  sun-gate,  as  our  translation  has  it.     That 
this  is  the  right  translation,  appears  from  the  play  upon 
the  word  ttT}O ,  "  potter's  vessel/'  in  the  first  verse,  and 
which,  but  for  this  play,  would  be  quite  superfluous,  as 
-i^t4    itself     signifies    '*  potter,"    without     having    tcnr-j 
appended  to  it.     This  play  upon  words  did  not  escape 
Rashi,  who  says,  that  this  gate  had  its  name  from  the 
circumstance  of  their  throwing  broken   earthen  vessels 
there.*     The  Vulgate  also   translates  "Juxta  introitum 
portae  fictilis."     Hence,  to  cast  any  thing  to  the  potter 
was,   in   fact,  to  cast   it   into   the  valley  of  the   son  of 
Hinnom,  and,  therefore,  signified  to  cast  it  into  an  unclean 
place,  or  to  reject  it  with  disdain. 

I  now  proceed  to  the  remaining  words,  which,  according 
to  Kimchi,  ought  to  be  thus  translated :  "  To  the  magnifi- 
ence  of  honour,  in  which  I  was  honoured  in  myself,  but  I 
turned  away  from  them."  To  this  translation,  if  indeed 
it  can  be  called  a  translation,  I  object,  because  it  inserts 
gratuitously  all  the  words  marked  in  Italics,  without  the 
shadow  of  authority  in  the  Hebrew  text.  The  only  word 
for  the  insertion  of  which  Kimchi  even  pretends  to  account, 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.   XI.  137 

is  the  preposition  "  to."  He  says  that  the  preposition 
V^  applies  hoth  to  n^vn  and  to  TTjsJ;  but  this  assertion 
is  built  on  the  supposition  that  T/vn  signifies  "The 
treasure,"  and  that  "if£n  "17$  (the  magnificence  of  honour) 
means  "the  temple;"  and  that,  thus,  these  two  words  are 
in  apposition.  JSut  we  have  already  proved  that  the  true 
translation  of  "i^n  is  "  the  potter,"  and,  therefore,  it 
cannot  be  in  apposition  with  TT§5  and,  therefore,  the  one 
preposition  b^ ,  "  to,"  cannot  apply  to  both  words. 
Indeed,  a  mere  inspection  of  the  accents  would  determine 

that  "if£n  119  is  not  to  be  connected  with  ~^Vn,  but  with 
the  following  words.  The  second  Sakeph  Katon,  over 

"T?'!?  >   being   nearer   the   Athnach,   has   necessarily  less 
power  than  the  first,  and  shows  that  this  word  is  to  be 
connected  with  those  that  follow.     For  the  insertion  of 
the  other  words,  Kimchi  has  given  no  reason,  and  they 
must,  therefore,  be  rejected ;  and  when  this  is  done,  the 
translation  will  not  differ  much  from  the  Christian  inter- 
pretation.    Stripped    of    the   unauthorised   additions,    it 
would  stand  thus :  "  Cast  it  to  the  potter — the  magnifi- 
cence  of  honour,  which   I  was  honoured  from  them ;" 
which,  in  sense,  does  not  differ  much  from  the  English 
version,  "a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  them;" 
and  is,  owing  to  the  double  sense  of  ripy,  almost  a  literal 
translation  of  one  of  the  variants  given  in  Bos's  Septuagint, 
uTrcpjufy&D?  rf  TI/XII  rfv  m/xtfS'tji/  JTT'  aurcoK.     With  this  transla- 
tion we  should  not  quarrel,  though  we  are  sure  that  the 
English  version  is  more  accurate.     Kimchi  is  wrong  in 
rendering  V-PI2J,  «  I  was   prized/'  by  vmaa  ,   "  I  was 
honoured."     The  meaning  of  npj  is  "  to  be  precious,  or  to 
be    valued,"    as,    for    instance,   Va^S  C?7 1|2^1 ,   "  And 
precious  shall  their  blood  be  in  his  sight"  (Fs.  Ixxii.  14); 
and  again  T?^3  "^92  "i»Tfl  nn^j,  "Therefore  let  my  life 
now  l)e  precious  in  thy  sight,"  in  both  which  passages  the 
meaning  obviously  is,  not  that  t  lie  blood  or  the  life  of  those 


138  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.   XI. 

persons  should  be  honoured,  but  be  valued.  And  that 
-)pi  and  "O23  are  not  synonymous,  appears  still  more 
plainly  from  those  words  of  Isaiah, 


"  Since  thou  wast  precious  in  my  sight,  thou  hast  been 
honourable/'  (xliii.  4.)  From  these  and  many  other 
passages  which  might  be  adduced,  it  appears  that  the 
meaning  of  VT"]|?J  is,  I  was  precious,  or  valued,  or  as  our 
translators  have  given  it,  "I  was  prized;"  and  this 
determines  the  meaning  of  the  words  ")|7jn  "ilfcj  (connected 
with  it  by  the  accents)  to  be,  Magnificence  of  price,  or 
value,  or,  as  the  English  version  has  it,  "  goodly  price."* 

In  considering  the  meaning  of  the  whole  passage,  the 
first  question  is,  how  are  we  to  understand  the  command 
to  Zechariah  to  act  the  part,  first  of  a  good,  and  then  of 
a  foolish  shepherd.  But  this  cannot  occasion  much  dif- 
ficulty or  controversy.  Zechariah's  preceding  visions  of 
the  four  carpenters,  the  candlestick,  the  flying  roll,  &c. 
&c.,  lead  us  at  once  to  the  conclusion  that  this  vision  is 
also  a  symbolical  representation,  and  to  this  all  the  com- 
mentators, Jewish  and  Christian,  agree.  Abarbanel  says 
expressly,  what  may  be  inferred  from  the  commentaries 
of  the  others,  (i  God  commanded  him  to  perform  a  real 
action,  and  in  a  waking  state,  which  action  was  to  be 
an  intimation  and  a  sign  of  that  which  was  to  happen  in 
God's  dealings  with  Israel  ;"f  and  adds,J  "  By  attending 

*  Rosenmiiller  translates  in  like  manner,  Magnificentiam  pretii,  quo 
pretiosus  habitus  sum  ab  eis.  (Scholia  in  loc.)  And  Gesenius,  — 
Den  herrlichen  Preis  den  ich  von  ihnen  werthgeachtet  worden  bin,  "  The 
glorious  price  at  which  t  was  valued  by  them,"  (Lexicon  in  "lj2J.) 

narmi  rrrrra  nnb  p>m  rrc-nrr  rrrrw  f  pnn  to  rroyo  nww  iron  ms  f 


vos*to  orrtN  msn  rn"pn  rrrr  DWDID  owaan  »r»o  snn  nn«i  J 
1031  cm  rrmu  •pvn  '•Dn  D^yon  DIYW  ms*  rro!?  nrrt  -wao  rrm 
rjm  oiny  *pbn  p  «an  "]ba"»  wo  yiVnn  -jbysi  i»3no  ^°  P^n  rinnci  -p 
m«  D":-®  «A»  pjrn  oinj>  irnw  nay  *^n  TDMD  IIDINI  mn  nwon  ora  "\ 
n  «?n  bVci  ino  i1?  i^isn  133.  n«  NI^ID  i1?  ms  pi  xi:i  urn  Vyi  onso  Vy 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    XI.  139 

to  the  affairs  of  the  prophets  thou  mayest  know,  that 
God,  blessed  be  He,  sometimes  commanded  them  to  per- 
form real  actions,  and  in  a  waking  state;  and  afterwards 
explained  to  them  the  reason  of  the  command  according 
to  the  sign  that  was  in  them.  Thus  he  commanded 
Isaiah,  saying,  '  Go,  and  loose  the  sackcloth  from  off 
thy  loins,  and  put  off  thy  shoe  from  thy  foot.  And  he 
did  so,  walking  naked  and  bare  foot*  (Isaiah  xx.  2); 
and  then  explained  to  him  the  meaning  of  this  action, 
saying,  '  Like  as  my  servant  Isaiah  hath  walked  naked 
and  barefoot,  three  years,  for  a  sign  and  wonder  upon 
Egypt  and  Ethiopia,  &c.*  In  like  manner  he  commanded 
him  to  call  the  name  of  the  son  born  to  him,  Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz,  and  says,  *  For  before  the  child  shall 
have  knowledge  to  cry,  My  father  and  my  mother,  the 
riches  of  Damascus  and  the  spoil  of  Samaria  shall  be 
taken  away.'  (Isaiah  viii.  4.)  And  again,  in  Jeremiah 
(xiii.  1,  &c.),  the  hiding  of  the  girdle  by  the  Euphrates, 
and  '  behold,  it  was  marred,'  as  is  there  mentioned.  In 
Ezekiel  also  there  are  many  things  of  the  same  kind,  real 
actions  performed  in  a  waking  state,  to  which  the  mean- 
ing and  explanation  are  immediately  attached,  as  I  have 
expounded,  in  the  book  of  Hosea.  But  sometimes  the 
blessed  God  commanded  the  prophets  to  do  things  foreign 
to  their  character,  and  unnecessary  for  them  to  do,  which 
things  were  also  to  be  a  sign  and  a  type  of  coming  events, 
and  did  not  expound  the  meaning,  because  he  knew  that 

pi  'lai  pot?  Vro  riNi  P«?OT  'rn  nw  war  naw  'a«  vnp  twn  rr  trroa  'a  TONI 
onrr  vrro  cm  n^to  bNpm'ai  DW  TDWB  ica  nrroa  rum  mca  Tiwn  n:^r  marva 
'n  rrn  D'nroi  yrain  icoa  'rwrvD»  toa  msa  carsi  cnwai  ypnai  Vrna  DW3 
'oa  cnvrf?  -pis  cm  rrn  vbv  IN  Dipra  am  cmcro  IWID  ovoo1?  mso  *j-an* 
-QVT  rrmo  rr«  ^b  win  rroron  era  cnb  «nc'  tVn  rrrro  rrob  ram  p*o  p 
na  )v^  -]1?  np  +M  7n  -ION"I  irrrura  mai  STITD  VN  -p-^'  H<ri  ^s?3  pia 
i1?  "wa  »*bi  'lai  D'2ON3  DHJ?  ^  rrvsw  n  «n  bS»  vnob  CD:M  TCTTQ  i^y 
tj  rnpm  '121  njnb  -^  np  bspirra  )3i  lo^ri  nr  rrmo  'cb  mn  -QTH  ano 
no  CN  %D  rnn  nwyon  err  ^  1:1  K'TI  'iai  TW  rrh?  nn:i  cSnr  nw 
"a?  marm  -|b  n:npn  c'aton  -crn  mn  ann  -]1?  np  pi  Sntr  n'a1? 
:  'iai  in  nise  C'la-nro  inn  Va  mv  no  "?r  mn  mrron  py  ib  121  «Vi  'i;i 


140  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI. 

the  thing  itself  could  be  understood,  and  did  not  need  an 
explanation.  Thus  he  said  to  Isaiah,  (  Take  thee  a  great 
roll,  and  write  in  it  with  a  man's  pen  concerning  Maher- 
shalal-hash-baz.  And  I  took  unto  me  faithful  witnesses, 
&c.'  (Isaiah  viii.  1,  2),  but  did  not  expound  the  meaning, 
because  it  was  plain  in  itself.  Thus  also  in  Ezekiel, 
6  Take  thee  a  tile  ....  and  pourtray  upon  it  the  city, 
even  Jerusalem,  and  lay  siege  against  it,  &c.'  (Ezekiel 
iv.  1,  2)  where  the  meaning  of  this  action  is  not 
given,  excepting  that  it  is  said  at  the  end,  '  This  shall  be 
a  sign  to  the  house  of  Israel/  And  again,  '  Take  thee  a 
sharp  knife,  take  thee  a  barber's  razor,  and  cause  it  to 
pass  upon  thine  head  and  upon  thy  beard/  &c.  (Ezekiel 
v.  1),  where  the  subject  of  the  action  and  the  meaning 
of  the  details  are  not  mentioned."  &c.  (Abarbanel  Com- 
ment, in  loc.)  Here,  though  we  may  not  agree  with 
Abarbanel's  idea,  that  this  action  was  performed  really 
and  in  a  waking  state,  it  is  evident  that  he  looked  upon 
the  vision  before  us  as  symbolical,  and  that  this  view  is 
fully  confirmed  by  the  similar  passages  in  the  other  pro- 
phets, to  which  he  refers. 

The  next  question  is,  Does  this  symbolical  repre- 
sentation refer  to  the  past,  or  to  the  then  future,  that  is, 
to  the  times  of  the  first  or  of  the  second  temple  ?  Here 
the  rabbies  are  divided.  Jonathan,  Rashi,  and  David 
Kinichi  interpret  it  of  the  first  temple.  The  two  Talmuds, 
Joseph  ben  Gorion,*  Aben  Ezra,  Joseph  Kimchi,  and 
Abraham  the  Levite,  Abarbanel,  Alshech,f  and  even  R. 
Isaac,  the  author  of  the  Chizzuk  Emunah,J  agree  with 
Christians  in  thinking  that  it  refers  to  the  time  of  the 
second  temple.  Abarbanel  refutes  the  first  opinion  at 
great  length;  his  second  argument  is,  however,  in  itself 

*  Breithaupt's  edition,  p.  889. 

f    The   title   of   Alshech's   Commentary   on   the    major  and   minor 
prophets  is  nihuisn  rwra  "CD. 
J  Part  ii.  c.  25. 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI.  141 

decisive.  He  asks,  "  To  what  purpose  should  God  show 
the  prophet  past  events,  which  he  had  seen  with  his  own 
eyes,  and  with  the  eyes  of  his  father ;  and  what  necessity 
was  there  to  make  known  to  him  the  captivity  of  the 
tribes  and  the  desolation  of  the  first  house,  which  had 
occurred  but  a  short  time  before ;  and  [above  all]  to  do 
this  in  parables,  which  are  only  employed  in  reference  to 
the  future,  to  make  events  known  before  they  happen? 
but  with  regard  to  the  past,  information  is  not  conveyed 
in  parables."  *  It  is  not  possible  to  suppose  that  God 
would  communicate  a  plain  matter  of  recent  history  in 
obscure  symbols,  and,  therefore,  the  symbolical  repre- 
sentation cannot  refer  to  the  past,  and  must  predict 
what  was  to  happen  during  the  time  of  the  second 
temple.  Here,  however,  there  is  again  a  difference  of 
opinion.  The  Talmud  refers  the  first  verses  immediately 
to  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  the  second  temple,  the 
Jewish  commentators  expound  the  vision  as  including  the 
whole  time  from  the  restoration  from  Babylon  to  the 
desolation.  This  latter  opinion  does  not  agree  with  the 
circumstances  pointed  out  in  the  text.  The  whole  chapter 
describes  a  state  of  things  exactly  answering  to  the  con- 
dition of  the  Jews  immediately  preceding  the  desolation, 
but  totally  different  from  their  state  after  their  return. 
First,  the  prophet  describes  the  nation  as  ready  for 
destruction,  and  therefore  calls  them,  "  The  flock  of 
slaughter."  Secondly,  as  forsaken  of  God,  "  I  will  no 
more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  Thirdly,  as 
about  to  be  given  over  to  foreign  enemies  and  intestine 
feuds,  "  I  took  my  staff,  Beauty,  and  cut  it  asunder,  that 
I  might  break  my  covenant  which  I  had  made  with  all  my 
people."  "  Then  I  cut  asunder  my  other  staff,  even 
Bands,  that  I  might  break  the  brotherhood  between  Judah 
-pis  rroi  TON  »rrai  vm  mo  vnmcn  rrr»  -uarc  rro  M^:1?  rn"j?n  rmr  mm  no1?  • 
D'to  vto  nvwto  DTDyn  0*0*  m  rrrt  iw  pwi  rva  p-im  o^aawn  rnto  imw  ir-nrra 
>oan  H1?  vrrw  "O3«  rroo  baw  invn  onp  irTirf?  rnrn  fr  DH  »a  rror  *h  m  o 


142  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    XI. 

and  Israel."  These  particulars  show  that  the  symbolical 
representation  refers  to  the  concluding  period  of  the  Jewish 
history. 

Having  fixed  the  nature  of  the  prophecy,  that  it  is 
symbolical,  and  the  time  to  which  it  refers,  the  next 
question  is,  What  is  meant  by  feeding  the  flock,  and  who 
is  intended  by  the  shepherd.  The  figure  of  feeding  a 
flock  is  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  is  applied  to  God, 
and  also  to  the  governors  and  teachers  of  Israel.  Thus 
Isaiah  says,  "  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd." 
(xl.  11.)  Jeremiah  says,  "  I  will  give  you  shepherds 
according  to  my  heart,  which  shall  feed  you  with  know- 
ledge and  understanding."  (iii.  15.)  And  again,  "  Woe 
to  the  shepherds  that  destroy  and  scatter  the  sheep  of 
my  pasture."  (xxiii.  1 .)  And  in  like  manner  Ezekiel  is 
commanded  to  prophesy  against  the  shepherds  of  Israel ; 
"  Woe  to  the  shepherds  of  Israel,  that  do  feed  themselves ! 
Should  not  the  shepherds  feed  the  fiock  ? "  (Ezekiel 
xxxiv.  2.)  The  only  difficulty,  therefore,  that  can  exist, 
is  in  fixing  the  person  intended  by  the  shepherd.  Kimchi 
and  the  other  Jewish  commentators  affirm  that  God  is  the 
shepherd,  and  that  feeding  the  flock  means  his  dealings 
towards  the  house  of  Israel.  But  this,  though  true  to  a 
certain  extent,  is  not  an  accurate  interpretation.  The 
prophet  does  not  speak  of  God's  dealings  generally,  but 
of  a  special  attempt  to  be  made  for  their  deliverance, 
because  God  himself,  in  his  character  of  Deity,  refuses 
to  feed  them  any  longer.  God  says  to  the  symbolical 
shepherd,  "  Feed  the  flock  of  slaughter ; "  and  adds  as  a 
reason,  "  For  I  will  no  more  pity  the  inhabitants  of  the 
land."  The  symbolical  shepherd  cannot,  therefore,  re- 
present the  Deity,  for  he  is  commanded  to  do,  what  God 
declares  that  he  will  not  do.  We  must  therefore  inquire, 
Who  is  the  shepherd  elsewhere  promised  to  feed  the  flock, 
"  whom  their  own  shepherds  pity  not  ? "  and  as  soon  as 
we  turn  to  the  prophets,  we  find  that  the  promised 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI.  143 

shepherd  is  the  Messiah.  Jeremiah  has  a  very  similar 
passage  to  the  one  we  are  considering,  where,  after 
denouncing  woes  against  the  shepherds  who  scattered 
the  flock,  he  promises  to  set  up  shepherds  over  them 
which  shall  feed  them  ;  and  then  adds,  "  Behold  the  days 
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  raise  unto  David  a 
righteous  branch"  (Jer.  xxiii.  1 — 6)  ;  thus  pointing  out 
the  Messiah  as  the  true  shepherd.  Ezekiel  also,  after 
announcing  the  judgments  to  be  poured  out  on  the 
wicked  and  selfish  shepherds,  promises  the  Messiah  as 
the  hope  of  the  flock.  "  I  will  set  up  one  shepherd  over 
them,  and  he  shall  feed  them,  even  my  servant  David : 
he  shall  feed  them,  and  he  shall  be  their  shepherd, 
(xxxxiv.  23.)  And  again,  "  David,  my  servant,  shall 
be  king  over  them :  and  they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd" 
(xxxvii.  24) ;  both  of  which  passages  confessedly  refer 
to  the  Messiah.  On  the  words,  "  My  servant  David," 
Rashi  says,  ly-itE  ^D,  "A  king  from  his  seed;"  and 
Kimchi  says  still  more  expressly, 

:  mntzrrr  n»  ly-ina  •rosptz?  mtpan 
'  The  Messiah,  who  shall  arise  from  his  seed  in  the 
time  of  the  salvation."  The  great  similarity  that  exists 
between  the  passage  of  Zechariah,  and  those  others 
of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  plainly  shows,  that  they  all 
speak  of  one  person.  There  is  also  one  feature  in  the 
character  of  the  shepherd  represented  by  Zechariah,  which 
is  also  given  elsewhere  as  a  character  of  the  Messiah;  and 
that  is,  care  for  the  poor.  After  the  command  to  feed  the 
flock,  Zechariah  adds,  "  And  so  I  fed  the  flock  of 
slaughter,  even  you,  O  poor  of  the  flock."  *  And  in  the 
Ixxiid  Psalm  it  is  predicted  of  the  Messiah,  "  He  shall 
judge  the  poor  of  the  people,  he  shall  save  the  children 
of  the  needy." — "  He  shall  spare  the  poor  and  needy,  and 
shall  save  the  souls  of  the  needy." 

*  Our  version  has  the  future,  "  I  will  feed,"  but  nrvn   ought,  cer- 
tainly, to  be  translated  in  the  past  time. 


144  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    XT. 

But  one  point  remains  more  to  be  settled,  before  we 
proceed  to  the  meaning  of  the  whole,  and  that  is,  the 
explanation  of  the  second  representation  of  a  t(  good-for- 
nothing"*  shepherd.  The  preceding  statements,  that 
the  regular  shepherds  of  Israel  should  be  cut  off,  as  it  is 
said,  "Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one  month,"  i.e., 
in  a  very  short  time — and  that  the  good  shepherd  should 
give  up  his  office  before  the  good-for-nothing  shepherd 
arises,  point  us  unequivocally,  to  those  lawless  and 
wicked  leaders  of  the  Jewish  factions,  who  usurped  the 
power  in  the  very  last  period  of  the  national  existence. 
This  is  also  acknowledged  by  Abendana,  in  his  notes  to 
the  Michlal  Jophi;  for,  after  interpreting  the  words, 
"  Woe  to  the  good-for-nothing  shepherd"  of  King  Agrippa, 
he  adds,  "  They  are  also  spoken  in  reference  to  John,  and 
Simon,  and  Eleazar,  the  princes  of  the  robbers,  who 
caused  and  wrought  all  the  great  evils  that  were  done  in 
Jerusalem." -(- 

Having  settled  these  preliminaries,  we  now  return  to 
consider  the  meaning  of  the  whole  chapter.  It  consists 
of  two  parts;  the  first,  from  verse  1 — 4,  containing  a 
verbal  prophecy  of  the  coming  destruction ;  the  second, 
from  verse  5 — 17,  a  symbolic  prophecy  of  the  particulars. 
The  first  part  is  plain,  and,  therefore  needs  no  comment. 
The  second  part  subdivides  into — first,  the  symbol  of  the 
good  shepherd;  and,  secondly,  of  the  foolish  shepherd; 
of  which  we  give  the  following  paraphrase.  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God  to  the  Messiah,  Feed  my  people  Israel,  the 
flock  of  slaughter;  for  I  will  no  more  pity  them.  And 
so  Messiah  undertook  the  office  of  shepherd.  Instead  of 
one  shepherd's  staff,  he  took  two ;  the  one  to  protect  them 

*  Our  translators  have  "idol  shepherd;"  but  WN  signifies,  first, 
"  good  for  nothing,"  "  of  no  value,"  as  Kimchi  has  shown  in  the  Com- 
mentary, by  a  reference  to  Job. 

nwirr  to  n«  wan  iaao  -TON  ranon  TD  iwbwi  pyotn  pnv  to  m  TON  TWI  f 

nrawn 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI.  145 


from  foreign  foes ;  the  other,  from  intestine  feuds.  But 
the  other  shepherds,  who  had  previously  had  the  care  of 
the  flock,  hated  him :  "  My  soul  loathed  them,  and  their 
soul  also  abhorred  me  ; "  so  he  gave  them  all  three  over 
to  speedy  destruction;*  and  at  last  was  compelled  to 
give  up  his  office,  for  none  but  the  poor  acknowledged 
him.  "  The  poor  of  the  flock  that  waited  upon  me,  knew 
that  it  was  the  word  of  the  Lord/'  To  show  them  their 
ingratitude  to  the  Messiah,  the  symbolical  shepherd  asks 
them  for  payment,  "  Give  me  my  price."  But  they,  in 
derision,  offer  him  the  value  of  a  common  slave,  "  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,"  which  the  Lord  commands  him  to  cast 
to  the  potter,  i.  e.,  to  an  unclean  place,  just  as  Jeremiah 
had  been  commanded  to  break  the  potter's  vessel  in  the 
valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom"  (Jer.  xix.).  Zechariah, 
to  make  the  matter  visible  to  the  people,  casts  it  down  in 
the  house  of  the  Lord  for  the  potter,  and  breaks  his  two 
staves,  to  show  that  Messiah's  care  of  the  people  should 
cease,  and  that  then  they  should  be  given  up  to  foreign 
enemies  and  civil  dissensions.  He  then  having  finished 
the  symbolical  representation  of  the  good  shepherd  the 
Messiah,  proceeds  to  take  the  implements  of  a  foolish 
shepherd,  to  show  that,  as  they  rejected  the  care  of  the  Mes- 

*  We  have  seen  above  in  the  Commentary,  that  R.  Abraham  of 
Toledo  explains  the  words,  "  Three  shepherds  also  I  cut  off  in  one 
month, "  of  the  destruction  of  the  three  dynasties,  the  principality  of 
David,  the  monarchy  of  the  Hasmoueans,  and  the  kingdom  of  Herod's 
family,  during  the  existence  of  the  second  temple,  of  which  he  says, 
"  He  calls  the  whole  duration  of  the  second  temple  "  one  month," 
because  it  was  in  his  sight  "  a  few  days."  But  it  is  plain  from  what 
is  said  above,  that  this  must  also  refer  to  the  destruction  of  the 
rulers  and  governors  immediately  before  the  destruction.  Lightfoot 
thinks  that  the  three  shepherds  mean,  the  Pharisees,  the  Sadducees,  and 
the  Essenes.  But  I  rather  think  with  Hengstenberg,  that  it  refers  to 
the  prophets,  priests,  and  civil  rulers,  who  were  essentially  the  shepherds 
of  Israel.  All  three  are  enumerated  to  signify  the  total  destruction  of 
the  Jewish  polity. 

L 


146  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XI. 

siah,  they  should  feel  the  yoke  of  wicked  and  ungodly  men. 
This  prediction,  then,  informs  us,  first,  That  before  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  the  Messiah  should  appear  as 
shepherd  of  the  people.  Secondly,  That  none  but  the 
poor  should  attend  to  his  words.  Thirdly,  That  the  rulers 
of  the  people,  the  shepherds,  should  "  abhor  "  him,  and 
should,  therefore,  be  deprived  of  their  power.  Fourthly, 
That  the  Messiah  should  be  valued  at  the  price  of  a 
common  slave.  Fifthly,  and  lastly,  That  the  people 
should,  for  their  sin,  be  torn  by  civil  feuds,  and  oppressed 
by  ungodly  rulers.  The  great  question  then,  is,  whether 
these  particulars  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  history  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth.  The  most  superficial  knowledge  of  the  Gospel 
will  compel  us  to  answer  in  the  affirmative.  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  did  appear  before  the  destruction  of  the  second 
temple.  He  wa&  rejected  by  the  great  and  learned,  but "  the 
common  people  heard  him  gladly."  He  was  hated  and  per- 
secuted by  the  rulers,  but  in  a  short  time  their  power  was 
annihilated  by  the  total  destruction  of  the  Jewish  common- 
wealth. He  was  valued  exactly  at  the  sum  of  thirty 
pieces  of  silver,  and  the  money,  after  being  cast  down  in 
the  temple,  as  a  public  reproof  to  the  people,  was  de- 
voted to  a  ceremonially  unclean  purpose,  the  purchase  of 
the  potter's  field  as  a  burial-place.  And,  lastly,  con- 
fusion, anarchy,  and  slaughter,  were  the  awful  conse- 
quences of  his  rejection.  The  prophecy  is  sufficiently 
obscure,  except  when  illustrated  by  the  fulfilment,  to 
prevent  the  possibility  of  a  fraudulent  adaptation  of  the 
history.  The  excessive  difficulty  which  the  rabbies  found 
in  interpreting  it,  and  the  wide  difference  of  their  sen- 
timents as  to  the  meaning,  show  that  it  is  not  a  passage 
that  would  readily  occur  to  an  impostor  :  and  the  nature 
of  the  circumstances  predicted,  rendered  the  acomplish- 
ment  impossible  by  the  will  of  any  such  character.  The 
valuation  at  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  depended  on  the 
will  of  the  rulers ;  the  rejection  by  all  but  the  poor  of 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XI.  147 

the  flock  was  not  in  his  own  power.  The  purchase  of 
the  potter's  field  was  the  act  of  the  council.  Put  all  these 
minute  details  together,  and  the  conclusion  must  be,  that 
the  history  of  Jesus  is  authentic,  and  that  it  accurately 
fulfils  the  prophecy.  But  if  not,  then  the  prophecy  has 
never  been  fulfilled,  and  the  words  of  the  prophet  are 
found  false. 

If,  therefore,  there  had  been  no  allusion  to  this  pro- 
phecy in  the  New  Testament,  the  mere  Gospel  nar- 
rative would  have  led  us  to  see  that  it  was  fulfilled  in  the 
history  of  Jesus.  But  Matthew  expressly  cites  it ;  for 
after  narrating  that  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  were 
applied  to  the  purchase  of  the  potter's  field,  and  that  this 
field  was  called  "  the  field  of  blood,"  he  adds,  "  Then  was 
fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremy,  the  prophet, 
saying,  And  they  took  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver,  the 
price  of  him  that  was  valued,  whom  they  of  the  children 
of  Israel  did  value,  and  gave  them  for  the  potter's  field, 
as  the  Lord  appointed  me  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  9,  10).  This 
citation  is,  however,  made  the  ground  of  an  objection 
against  St.  Matthew.  It  is  said,  first,  that  he  quotes 
the  words  of  the  Old  Testament  inaccurately;  and,  se- 
condly, that  he  falsely  ascribes  the  words  of  Zechariah 
to  Jeremiah.  We  reply,  in  the  first  place,  that  even 
admitting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  both  charges 
are  true,  they  will  not  in  any  wise  invalidate  the  claims 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Whether  St.  Matthew  was  or  was 
not  mistaken,  we  have  already  shown  that  his  history 
exactly  agrees  with  the  Hebrew  prediction.  Whatever 
then,  may  become  of  St.  Matthew,  Jesus  is  the  person  of 
whom  Zechariah  spake,  that  is,  he  is  the  Messiah.  If 
we  should  admit  that  St.  Matthew  was  so  ignorant  as  to 
quote  Jeremiah  instead  of  Zechariah,  it  is  plain  that  we 
must  acquit  him  of  all  fraudulent  alteration  of  the  text; 
for  if  he  did  not  know  the  author  of  the  words  which  he 
was  quoting,  it  is  certain  that  he  could  not  have  gone 

JL2 


148  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI. 

to  the  original  in  order  to  falsify  it.     And   if  he  was, 
generally,  so  ignorant  of  prophecy,   it  is  equally  plain, 
that  he  could  not  have  falsified  the  history,  in  order  to 
make  it  agree  with  prophecy,  of  which  he  was  ignorant : 
he  is,  therefore,    a   most   unexceptionable  witness   as  to 
the  facts  which  he  relates  ;    and    the   ignorance  of   St. 
Matthew,  if  admitted,  would  thus  render  the  proof  from 
prophecy  doubly  cogent.     Either  the  Jews  must  admit 
that  he  was  acquainted  with  the  prophecies,    and  then 
they  must  acquit  him  of  mistake;  or  they  must  acknow- 
ledge that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  prophecies,  and  thus 
add  to  the  weight  of  his  testimony  as  to  the  facts  which 
fulfilled  the  prediction.      But,  in  the  second  place,  we 
deny  both  charges.     We  say  of  the  first,  that  he  did  not 
quote  inaccurately,    but   that  he  intentionally  gave   the 
sense  of  the  passage,  instead  of  citing  it  verbatim ;  and 
that  this  mode  of  citation  is  fully  justified,  not  only  by 
the  rabbies,  but  by  the  inspired  writers  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament.    Nehemiah  says,  "  Remember,   I  beseech  thee, 
the  word   that  thou   commandedst   thy   servant   Moses, 
saying,  If  ye  transgress,  I  will  scatter  you  abroad  among 
the  nations  ;  but  if  ye  turn  unto  me,  and  keep  my  com- 
mandments, and  do  them;  though  there  were  of  you  cast 
out  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the  heaven,  yet  will  I  gather 
them  from  thence,  and  will  bring  them  unto  the  place 
that  I  have  chosen  to  set  my  name  there  "  (Neh.  i.  8,  9.). 
Now  there  is  no  such  passage  in  the  law,  though  there 
are  several,  of  which  it  gives  the  sense.     Compare  also 
chapter  x.  34 — 38,  where  the  same  method  of  citation 
appears.     Daniel  also,  in  his  prayer,  proves  that  the  pre- 
dictions of  Moses  were  accomplished  in  the  calamities 
that  had  come  upon  the  Jews,  and  yet  does  not  accu- 
rately cite  the  words  of  any  one,  but  contents  himself 
with  giving  the  sense.     "  Therefore  the  curse  is  poured 
upon  us,  and  the  oath  that  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses, 
the  servant  of  God,  because  we  have  sinned  against  him. 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI.  149 

And  lie  hath  confirmed  his  words  which  he  spake  against 
us,  and  against  our  judges  that  judged  us,  by  bringing 
upon  us  a  great  evil ;  for  under  the  whole  heaven  hath 
not  been  done  as  hath  been  done  upon  Jerusalem ;  as  it  is 
written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  All  this  evil  hath  come  upon 
us,"  &c.  What,  therefore,  is  esteemed  perfectly  con- 
sistent with  the  character  for  inspiration  of  the  Old 
Testament  writers,  can  never  be  charged  as  a  fault  upon 
St.  Matthew. 

As  to  the  second  charge,  several  answers  have  been 
given,  any  one  of  which  is  sufficient  to  vindicate  the 
character  of  St.  Matthew.  It  has  been  said,  that  the 
abbreviations  for  Jeremiah  and  Zechariah,  Z^iou  and 
Igiw,  are  so  alike  as  to  be  easily  mistaken  by  the  copier  of 
the  MS.  It  has  been  urged  that  some  copies  do  really 
read  "  Zechariah,"  or,  that  in  the  original  there  was  no 
prophet  named,  and  that  this  mistake  arose  from  the 
insertion  of  a  marginal  gloss.  But  Hengstenberg,  fol- 
lowing a  hint  thrown  out  by  Grotius,  appears  to  me  to 
give  the  true  answer ;  and  that  is,  that  St.  Matthew 
intentionally  ascribed  the  words  of  Zechariah  to  Je- 
remiah, because  he  wished  to  impress  upon  his  readers 
the  fact,  that  Zechariah's  prediction  was  a  reiteration  of 
two  fearful  prophecies  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xviii.  xix.),  and 
should,  like  them,  be  accomplished  in  the  rejection  and 
destruction  of  the  Jewish  people.  He  wished  to  remind 
them,  that  "The  field  of  blood,"  purchased  with  the 
money  that  testified  the  fulness  of  their  guilt,  was  a 
part  of  that  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  which  their 
fathers  had  made  a  "  field  of  blood"  before  them,  and 
where  Jeremiah  had  twice,  by  the  symbol  of  a  potter's 
vessel,  announced  their  coming  destruction.  The  words 
of  the  prophet,  "  Cast  it  to  the  potter,"  were  in  them- 
selves sufficient  to  direct  the  attention  of  readers  ac- 
quainted with  the  prophecies,  to  those  two  chapters  of 
Jeremiah;  but  the  manner  in  which  St.  Matthew  in- 


150  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XI. 

troduces  his  quotation,  makes  the  allusion  still  more  plain. 
He  first  relates  the  purchase  of  the  potter's  field,  thereby 
pointing  out  the  locality  of  Jeremiah's  prophecy — then  he 
mentions  the  fact  that  it  was  called  "  the  field  of  blood/' 
thereby  referring  to  a  very  similar  expression  in  that 
prophet ;  "  Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that 
this  place  shall  no  more  be  called  Tophet,  nor  the  valley 
of  the  son  of  Hinnom,  but  The  valley  of  slaughter" 
(Jer.  xix.  6.) ;  and  then  cites  the  words  of  Zechariah,  as 
spoken  by  Jeremiah,  in  order  to  make  all  mistake  im- 
possible. St.  Matthew  had,  therefore,  a  direct  purpose 
in  introducing  the  name  of  Jeremiah  ;  it  was  to  warn  the 
Jews  against  the  coming  judgments.  They  fondly  hoped 
that,  as  the  chosen  people  of  God,  they  were  safe.  St. 
Matthew  points  them  to  the  potter's  field,  and  thus 
reminds  them  of  the  calamities  which  had  already  come 
upon  them  for  past  sin,  less  heinous  than  that  of  which 
the  potter's  field  now  testified. 


151 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  "  The  burden  of  the  word  of  the  Lord." — After 
mentioning   the   punishments  of  Israel,  and  the  several 
desolations  of  the   land,   he  prophecies   concerning   the 
good  of  Israel,  and  the  punishments  of  the  nations,  and 
says,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  which  stretcheth  forth  the 
heavens,  and  layeth  the  foundations  of  the  earth  5"  i.  e., 
He  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  the  universe  is 
in  his  hand,  to  pull  down  and  to  throw  down,  to  build 
and  to  plant.     a  Man  "  is  mentioned,  as  Isaiah  says,  "  I 
have  made  the  earth,  and  created  man  upon  it "  (xiv.  12) : 
that  is  to  say,  And  I  led  Israel  captive,  and  it  is  in  my  hand 
to  lead  them  up  from  captivity,  and  to  take  vengeance  on 
their  enemies.     The  wise  man,  R.  Abraham  ben  Ezra,  of 
blessed   memory,    has   written,    that    the   words   "  And 
formeth  the  spirit  of  man  within  him,"  are  connected  with 
"  stretching  forth  the  heavens,  and  laying  the  foundations 
of  the  earth,"  because  man  is  a  little  world,  as  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  are  the  great  world.     As  to  these  words, 
l2pf?3  DIN  rrn  "nrh,  we  do  not  find  the  word  ->!P,  ex- 
cept of  things  which  have  solidity  and  are  perceptible  to 
the  senses,  which  the  Spirit,  rFP ;  is  not.     These  words 
therefore,  are  spoken  in  reference  to  the  formation  of  the 
organs  of  the  body  which  receive  the  power  of  the  Spirit, 
and  these  are  the  marrow  and  the  heart. 

2.  "  Behold  I a  cup  of  trembling"— *T?  *19  is 

similar  to  nb^rirt  D13,  "  a  cup  of  trembling,'*  which  he 
that  drinks  dies ;  so  all  that  go  up  against  Jerusalem  shall 
perish  and  be  cut  off. 

"And  also  against  Judah  shall  it  be  in  the  siege ,-" 
that  is  to  say,  that  Judah  will  be  joined  with  the  enemies 


152  KIMCHl's   COMMENTARY 

in  the  siege  against  Jerusalem.  And  the  meaning  of  the 
words  "  against  Judah "  is,  that  the  cup  of  trembling 
shall  be  at  first  upon  them,  when  they  come  against  their 
will  to  besiege  Jerusalem,  and  behold  this  great  affliction 
shall  be  upon  them.  The  sense  of  the  whole  passage  is, 
That  when  Gog  and  Magog  come  against  Jerusalem  after 
the  redemption,  they  will  go  up  by  the  land  of  Judah,  for 
the  desire  of  their  faces  will  be  to  come  against  Jerusalem 
first,  and  they  will  not  be  anxious  first  to  subdue  the 
whole  land  of  Israel,  for  they  will  think,  when  we  have 
subdued  Jerusalem,  the  whole  land  will  fall  before  us. 
But  they  will  go  up  to  Jerusalem  by  the  way  of  the  land 
of  Judah,  which  is  their  natural  route,  and  they  will  take 
with  them  the  children  of  Judah  against  their  will  to  go 
with  them  to  besiege  Jerusalem ;  and  so  Jonathan  has  in- 
terpreted. 

3.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  in  that  day  I  ivill  make 
Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone" 

He  first  compared  it  to  "  a  cup  of  trembling ;"  he  now 
further  compares  it  to  a  burdensome  stone,  i.  e.  all  who 
labour  to  make  war  against  Jerusalem  shall  be  punished 
by  it,  as  a  great  stone  which  is  to  them  that  burden  them- 
selves with  it  a  great  burden  and  a  heavy  weight ;  and 
even  in  raising  it  from  the  ground  to  place  it  on  their 
shoulders,  they  cut  their  hands  with  it,  and  many  men 
exhaust  their  strength,  and  in  moving  it  cut  their  hands; 
thus  all  the  Gentiles  of  the  earth  shall  be  gathered  against 
Jerusalem,  and  shall  be  destroyed  by  the  Lord. 

np»9p3  «  burden,"  is  from  DES,  as  "bbrrbs  ttTN  Db^l 
"  And  every  man  loaded  his  ass  "  (Gen.  xliv.  13.).  And 
again,  D^bqrrbs  D^pp^l,  «  and  lading  asses  "  (Nehem. 
xiii.  15).  The  word  expresses  the  idea  of  burden.  Jonathan 
has  interpreted  it,  "  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a  stumbling- 
stone  to  all  nations.  All  who  do  violence  to  it  shall 
assuredly  be  spoiled." 

4.  "  In  that  day /  will  open  my  eyes,"  to  keep 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.    XII.  153 

them  from  the  Biniting  which  I  will  bring  upon  the 
nations.  Although  they  be  amongst  them,  they  and  their 
horses,  they  shall  be  delivered  from  the  smiting,  but  I 
will  smite  every  horse  of  the  nations  with  blindness. 
'*  Blindness "  is  mentioned  after  "  madness,"  for  they 
shall  be  smitten  with  these  two  plagues.  Madness  applies 
to  the  heart,  and  blindness  to  the  eyes. 

5.  "And   the  governors  of  Judah  shall  say  in  their 
heart;'3    i.e.  when  in  the  midst  of  their  enemies,  they 
shall  say  that  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  are  a  strength 
and  defence  to  them,  for  they  shall  go  forth  to  fight  with 
them  in  the  help  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  by  them  they 
shall  be  delivered. 

rrszpM,  "  strength,"  is  a  noun  of  the  same  form  as  JlblS 
(unrighteousness),  rn?2  (humility),  nb^S  (a  lamb),  nV?C7 
(prosperity). 

6.  "//i  that  day  the  governors  of  Judah" — The  great 
men  of  Judah  who  are  outside  I  will  make  like  a  hearth 
of  fire  among  the  wood,  for  by  the  fire  which  I  shall  send 
among  the  Gentiles  is  meant  the  madness  and  blindness, 
for  it  is  from  the  Lord.     And  they  and  the  children  of 
Judah  who  are  with  them  shall  smite  the  Gentiles  on  the 
right  hand  and  on  the  left.     The  meaning  of  tZ?N  ")V3  is 
"  a  coal  of  fire."     It  belongs  to  such  words  as  "Win  and 
D^S,  furnace  and  oven,  for  as  the  wood  and  the  sheaf 
are  ready  to  be  kindled  by  the  fire,  so  the  heathen  shall 
be  ready  for  destruction  and  consumption  by  the  madness 
and  insanity  which  the  blessed  God  shall  send  amongst 
them ;  and  the  governors  of  Judah  shall  be  in  the  midst  of 
them  like  fire  to  consume  them. 

"  And  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  again  in  her  own 
place,  even  in  Jerusalem" — For  the  Gentiles  thought  to 
annihilate  it  from  being  a  city,  but  it  shall  be  inhabited 
again  in  its  own  place,  the  place  that  in  this  day  is  called 
Jerusalem. 

7.  "  The  Lord  also  will  save  the  tents  of  Judah  first." 


154  KlMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

—As  the  besiegers  of  the  city  dwell  in  tents,  therefore  he 
mentions  "  the  tents  of  Judah."  Some  say  that  this 
refers  to  the  house  of  the  Rechabites,  for  they  dwell  in 
tents  for  ever,  and  they  were  living  amongst  the  children 
of  Judah.  Jonathan  has  interpreted  "  the  tents  of  Judah  " 
by  "  the  cities  of  the  house  of  Judah." 

"First." — Before  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  are  saved, 
the  children  of  Judah,  who  are  outside,  shall  be  saved  from 
the  fear  of  their  enemies  with  whom  they  came  to  the 
siege. 

"  That  the  glory  of  the  house  of  David do  not 

magnify  themselves." — For  the  house  of  David  will  be 
inside  the  city  with  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and 
if  they  should  be  saved  first,  they  would  boast  themselves 
over  the  children  of  Judah,  who  are  outside,  and  would 
say  that  by  their  hand  they  have  been  saved. 

8.  "  In  that  day— the  stumbler  amongst  them." — 

He  that  is  weak  amongst  them,  shall  be  as  David,  who 
was  a  mighty  man  of  valour  and  a  man  of  war. 

"And  the  house  of  David  "  i.  e.  the  King  the  Messiah, 
as  "  Hear  ye  now,  O  house  of  David "  (Isa.  vii.  13)  is 
.said  of  Ahaz  the  king.  And  the  king  shall  go  out  before 
them  to  fight  against  those  nations. 

"As  God"— The  explanation  follows,  "  As  the  angel 
of  the  Lord." 

9.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  I  will  seek 
to  destroy." — I  will  seek  and  I  will  do;  that  is  to  say, 
I  will  make  it  all  my  pleasure  to  destroy  them. 

10.  "  And  I  will  pour the  spirit  of  grace  and 

supplications.'" — i.  e.  They  shall  find  grace  in  my  sight, 
and  I  will  save  them  from  the  Gentiles  who  come  against 
them.     He  repeats  the  same  thing  in  different  words,  for 
the  sake  of  confirmation.     Jonathan  has  interpreted  it, 
"  The  spirit  of  grace  and  mercy."     My  lord  my  father,  of 
blessed  memory,    has  interpreted  this,  "  that  they  shall 
have  favour   in  the  eyes  of  every  man,   and  that  their 


ON    ZECHARIAH,   CHAP.  XII.  155 

prayers  shall  be  accepted  before  me."  And  behold  he 
says  that  he  will  defend  them.  Behold  he  had  mentioned 
the  highest  degrees  that  exalt  them ;  afterwards  he  says  if  it 
should  happen  that  they  pierce  any  one  of  them  in  the  war, 
even  a  common  man,  there  will  be  a  great  astonishment 
amongst  them  how  this  thing  could  happen;  and  they 
will  look  upon  it  as  the  beginning  of  a  fall  and  defeat 
before  their  enemies  ;  as  Joshua  did  when  the  men  of  Ai 
smote  thirty-six  men  of  Israel.  He  said,  "  Alas  !  O  Lord 
God,  what  shall  I  say  when  Israel  turn  their  backs  before 
their  enemies  "  (Josh.  vii.  8).  The  feeling  will  be  similar 
at  that  time,  if  they  should  see  any  one  of  theirs  pierced : 
though  it  should  be  only  one,  they  will  wonder. 

"  And  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced" 
because  they  have  pierced. 

"  And  they  shall  mourn  for  him"  as  a  man  that  has 
only  one  son  and  he  dies,  or  as  a  man  whose  firstborn 
dies.  Our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory,  have  interpreted 
this  of  Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph,  who  shall  be  killed  in 
the  war.  But  I  wonder,  according  to  their  interpretation, 
how  he  is  here  spoken  of  unconnectedly,  without  any 
previous  mention  at  all. 

-ipn  signifies  bitterness,  grief  of  heart. 

11.  "  In  that  day as  the  mourning." — "*?P9?  is 

pointed  with  Pathach  on  account  of  the  Regimen. 

"  Hadadrimmon  in  the  valley  of  Megiddon." — It  was 
known  to  them,  but  we  have  not  seen  any  mention  of  it 
in  the  Bible. 

12.  "And  the  land  shall  mourn"—  The  men  of  the 
land  shall  mourn  on  account  of  this  piercing. 

"  Every  family  apart"  —  Each  in  its  place.  The 
families  here  mentioned,  as  Nathan  and  Shimei,  will  be 
great  and  known  at  that  time,  and  the  prophet  mentions 
them  prophetically.  And  that  which  is  said,  "  and  their 
wives  apart,"  is  for  the  sake  of  modesty.  Or  the  meaning 
may  be,  that  as  the  women  lament  and  urnum  more  than 


156  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XII.  10. 

the   men,  it  is  said,  that  the  women    shall   be   gathered 
together  apart  to  mourn  according  to  their  manner. 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  CHAPTER  XII.  10. 

KIMCHI,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  Commentary,  differs 
from  our  translators  as  to  the  sense  of  the  words  ^Sni 
JnfT-T  -)$$  ns  tb«,  which  they  have  rendered,  "And  they 
shall  look  upon  me  whom  they  have  pierced,"  but  which 
he  would  translate,  "  They  shall   look  upon    (or  unto) 
me,   because  they  have  pierced,   T)p"T27  TnVD."     Now, 
whatever  be   the   sense   of   the  words,  it   is  plain  that 
Kimchi   is   in   error;    for   according   to   his   sense,    the 
transitive  verb  *n\y*,  "  they  pierced,"  is  left  without  an 
accusative  case,  and  the  whole  sentence  is  deprived  of 
meaning.     Just  read  the  whole  verse  according  to  this 
translation  :  "  I  will  pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  and 
upon  the  inhabitants   of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace 
and  of  supplications ;  and  they  shall  look  upon  me  because 
they    pierced,    and    they   shall   mourn   for  him   as    one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son,"  &c.     The  mere  inspection  of 
the  words  is  sufficient  to  show  that  this  translation  is 
wrong;  and  it  cannot  be  pretended  that  the  accusative 
case  is  omitted,  for  in  every  other  passage  where  the  verb 
ifn  occurs,    the   accusative   is   plainly   expressed.     The 
fact  is,  however,  that  Kimchi  intended  to  insinuate  more 
than  he  has  expressed.     He  meant  to  make  the  words 
ntpy  ns  ("  whom  ")  signify  not  simply  "  because,"  but 
"  because  of  him  whom,"  so  that  the  whole  sense  should 
be,  "  They  shall  look  to  me  because  of  him  whom  they 
pierced  : "  and  thus  R.  Isaac,  who  follows  Kimchi,  fairly 
gives    it.       He    says,    "  Whom    they   pierced,    means, 
Because  of  him  whom  they  pierced.      "i$fc$  HW   in   this 
place  has  the  meaning,  of  because,  TO3D,  as  in  those 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.    XII.   10.  157 


words  of  Ezekiel  (xxxvi.  27),  soff  ^n?  -itfy  ntf,  [which 
he  appears  to  translate,  '  Because  ye  walk  in  my 
statutes']."*  But  this  honesty  of  R.  Isaac  at  once 
furnishes  the  reply,  and  shows  why  Kimchi  contented 
himself  with  an  insinuation.  By  saying  that  ">#$  HH 
[whom]  signifies  "  because  of,"  the  latter  preserved 
an  appearance  of  truth.  But  by  asserting  that  it  sig- 
nifies, t{  Because  of  him  whom,"  the  latter  betrays  the 
untenableness  of  the  proposed  interpretation.  The  truth 
is,  that  ")$$  ntf  may  sometimes  signify,  "  because,"  but 
never  does  mean,  "  Because  of  him  whom/'  For  instance, 
,  in  Levit.  xxvi.  35,  "  As  long  as  it  lieth  desolate  it  shall 
rest  ;  ~it£fc$  ntf,  because  it  did  not  rest  in  your  Sabbaths, 
when  ye  dwelt  upon  it.  "  Here  we  have  the  sense 
"  because  ;  "  but  it  cannot  thence  be  inferred  that  it  also 
signifies  "  because  of  him  whom."  This  translation, 
therefore,  as  leaving  Tij^ff  without  an  accusative  case, 
shows  that  it  is  incorrect,  whilst  the  fact  that  this  verb 
must  have  an  object,  and  that  if  "itpN.  ntf  be  not  the 
accusative,  it  has  none,  proves  that  our  translation, 
"  whom,"  is  necessarily  correct.  But  even  should  we 
admit  the  translation,  still  Kimchi's  interpretation  of  the 
whole  verse  would  be  far  from  the  truth.  It  is  thus 
given  in  the  Chizzuk  Emunah,  "  If  it  should  happen  that 
any  of  the  Israelites  should  be  pierced,  namely,  in  that 
war,  even  though  it  should  be  one  of  the  most  incon- 
siderable, they  shall  wonder  greatly  how  this  could 
happen,  and  will  think  that  this  is  the  beginning  of  a 
fall  and  defeat  before  their  enemies,  as  Joshua  did, 
When  the  men  of  Ai  smote  thirty-six  of  Israel,  he 
said,  *  Alas,  O  Lord  God,  why  didst  thou  cause  this 
people  to  pass  the  Jordan/  And  again,  '  What 
shall  I  say,  when  Israel  turn  their  backs  before  their 
enemies'  (Josh.  vii.).  So  will  it  be  at  that  time, 
if  they  should  see  any  of  them  pierced,  they  will  be 
*  Tela  Ignea,  part  ii.  p.  308. 


158  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XII.    10. 

astonished  and  look  to  me  on  account  of  him  whom  they 
have  pierced. "     Now,    in  the  first  place,   this  interpre- 
tation introduces  a  new  subject  to  the  verb   "  pierce," 
for  which  there  is  no  authority.     No  one  who  reads  the 
words,  "  They  shall  look  upon  me  on  account  of  him 
whom  they  have  pierced,"  would  ever  suppose  that  those 
who  pierced  are  different  from  those  who  shall  look  ;   and 
still  less  that  the  one  are  the  Gentiles,  and  the  other  the 
Jews.     There  is  not  the  slightest  intimation  of  a  change 
of  subject.     The  only  persons  spoken  of  are  "  The  house 
of  David  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."     And,  se- 
condly,  to  suppose   that   when  the   Jews    are   in  Jeru- 
salem, and  as  Kimchi  supposes,  have  the  Messiah  in  the 
midst  of  them,  and  therefore  must  know  that  it  is  the 
time  of  their   deliverance, — to  suppose  under   such  cir- 
cumstances, that  they  should  indulge  in  such  excessive 
fear  and  grief  because  of  the  death  of  any  obscure  person, 
is  perfectly  absurd  :  and  still  more  so  to  suppose  that  the 
outpouring  of  the   Spirit   of  God    should  produce  such 
manifest  unbelief  in  God's  promises.     Kimchi  and  Rashi, 
of  whose  interpretation  this  is  only  a  modification,  must 
have  felt  a  very  urgent  necessity  for  getting  rid  of  the 
old  opinion,   that  the  person  pierced  was  the  Messiah, 
when  they  made  up  their  minds  to  adopt  so  vapid  an 
exposition.     It  has,  however,  failed  in  obtaining  general 
adoption  amongst  the  Jews.     Some  of  the  greatest  names 
have  declared   against  it.      Aben  Ezra,  who  wrote  after 
Rashi  had  first  started  the  idea ;    Abarbanel  and  Alshech, 
with  Kimchi  before  them,  have  all  rejected  it,  and  assert, 
in  conformity  with  the  Talmud,  that  it  refers  to  Messiah, 
the  son  jof  Joseph.     Aben  Ezra  says,  "  All  the  heathen 
shall    look    to    me    to    see    what    I    shall    do  to  those 
who  pierced  Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph."*     Abarbanel, 
after  noticing  the  interpretations  of  Rashi  and  Kimchi, 
says,  "  It  is  more  correct  to  interpret   this  passage  of 
pi  TON  rr/?o  nxt#«  no  nwrh  ^ 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XII.  1().  ]59 

Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph,  us  our  rabbles  of  blessed 
memory  have  interpreted  in  the  treatise  Succah,*  for 
he  shall  be  a  mighty  man  of  valour,  of  the  tribe  of 
Joseph,  and  shall,  at  rirst,  be  captain  of  the  Lord's  host 
in  that  war,  but  in  that  war  shall  die."  This  second  ex- 
position, however,  though  nearer  the  truth  than  the 
former,  is  also  untenable.  Even  if  we  were -to  admit  a 
Messiah  ben  Joseph,  this  verse  cannot  possibly  apply  to 
him.  Why  should  the  house  of  David  and  the  inhabit- 
ants of  Jerusalem  mourn  so  bitterly  for  a  son  of  Joseph, 
especially  as,  according  to  Abarbanel,  his  death  is  to 
make  way  for  the  object  of  their  hopes  and  prayers, 
Messiah,  the  son  of  David  ?  "  It  is  not  meet,"  he  says, 
"  that  any  one  should  think,  that  the  death  of  Messiah 
ben  Joseph  should  be  by  chance.  On  the  contrary,  by 
the  providence  of  God,  and  in  order  that  the  kingdom  may 
return  to  the  seed  of  David,  Messiah  ben  Joseph  shall  die  in 
that  war  in  such  a  manner,  as  that  Israel  will  say,  Has 
he  not  been  killed  because,  being  of  the  tribe  of  Ephraim, 
he  took  to  himself  the  crown  of  the  kingdom  ?"  f  If  this 
be  true,  instead  of  mourning,  they  would  rejoice  that 
the  last  obstacle  to  their  long-expected  felicity  had  been 
removed.  Even  on  the  showing  of  the  rabbies  them- 
selves, the  death  of  the  Messiah  ben  Joseph  must  be  an 
occasion  of  joy,  not  of  grief,  and  therefore  cannot  be 
the  event  alluded  to  in  this  verse,  which  is  of  so  dis- 
tressing a  nature,  as  to  call  forth  the  most  vehement  sorrow 
from  those  who  had  received  the  spirit  of  grace  and  sup- 
plications. But,  secondly,  there  is  no  Messiah  ben  Joseph. 
To  enter  into  the  whole  question  of  the  two  Messiahs 
here,  would  exceed  the  limits  of  these  observations. 
•  Fol.  52,  col.  1.  miD  'coi  V'n  WVK>  102  »pv  p  rrrco  to?  rcnsh  pa  -tfrn 
Him  rmwu  manto  rrmwi  'n  »os  TO  'TH  rpv  crao  H»  TOJ  «TM  mrr  KITTO  tft 

•  ntjn*hj  MTIVQ  mo* 

>-ow  otrrr  nrowro  vb*  mpa  rmm>  DTK  rwrrw  *vo  f*  TCV  p  rrm  nn^i  f 
»3  to?  vfm  Srrcr  TTOHTO  jcwa  nontoa  rpv  p  mara  nw  TIT  nrt  no^on  -mnrw 
•  '131  rvn  oncH  Cairo  WTO  rotfon  vo  rt  npV 


160  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    XII.   10. 

Here  let  it  suffice  to  say,  that  if  there  are  two  Messiahs, 
they  must  either  be  contemporary,  or  one  must  come  after 
the  other.  But  they  cannot  exist  together,  for  Ezekiel 
promises,  that  when  God  saves  his  people,  they  shall  have 
only  one  Shepherd,  and  that  he  shall  be  Messiah,  the  son  of 
David.  "  Therefore  will  I  save  my  flock,  and  they  shall 
no  more  be  a  prey  :  and  I  will  judge  between  cattle  and 
cattle.  And  I  "will  set  up  one  shepherd,  in^t  n^h ,  over 
them,  and  he  shall  feed  them,  even  my  servant  David  " 
(Ezek.  xxxiv.  22,  23  ;  compare  also  xxxvii.  21 — 24). 
Neither  can  they  be  in  succession,  for  Hosea  says  ex- 
pressly, that  until  they  seek  Messiah,  the  son  of  David, 
they  shall  have  neither  king  nor  prince.  "  For  the 
children  of  Israel  shall  abide  many  days  without  a  king 

and  without  a  prince,  "ib  T^  tf?®  T$ Afterwards 

shall  the  children  of  Israel  return,  and  seek  the  Lord 
their  God,  and  David  their  king :  and  shall  fear  the  Lord 
and  his  goodness  in  the  last  days  "  (Hosea  iii.  4,  5).  In 
neither  case,  therefore,  can  there  be  two  Messiahs  :  and 
therefore  this  passage  of  Zechariah  cannot  refer  to  Mes- 
siah, the  son  of  Joseph. 

It  now  remains  only  to  consider  the  Christian  inter- 
pretation, which  is,  that  Messiah,  the  son  of  David,  is  the 
person  pierced,  and  that  the  Israelites  shall  mourn  because 
of  the  national  and  personal  guilt  incurred  by  piercing  and 
rejecting  him.  That  this  is  the  true  and  obvious  inter- 
pretation, appears, 

First,  from  the  Jewish  tradition  that  the  place  refers  to 
Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph.  It  cannot  be  said  that  the 
disciples  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  found  a  passage  that 
seemed  to  suit  their  purpose,  and  wrested  it  from  the 
received  exposition  of  the  nation.  On  the  contrary,  their 
learned  men  were  of  opinion  that  this  passage  referred  to  a 
Messiah  :  and  even  after  the  New  Testament  had  applied 
it  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  there  was,  therefore,  a  motive 
for  rejecting  their  opinion,  this  exposition  has  still  main 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XII.  10.  161 

tained  its  ground.  Abarbanel,  whose  commentaries  are 
avowedly  controversial  against  Christianity,  is  still  com- 
pelled by  the  context  to  apply  the  whole  passage  to  the 
times  of  the  Messiah,  and  to  acknowledge  that  the  person 
pierced  is  a  Messiah.  This  fact  shows,  either  that  this 
exposition  had  taken  such  hold  of  the  Jewish  mind,  as  to 
make  it  impossible  to  get  rid  of  it  —  or,  that  the  sense  of 
the  passage  is  so  obvious  as  to  overcome  even  prejudice 
and  inclination. 

And,  Secondly,  this  argument  is  much  strengthened  by 
the  determination  which  Rashi  displays  to  get  rid  of  this 
explanation.  In  his  commentary  on  the  Bible,  he  denies 
that  it  applies  to  Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph  :  but  in  his 
commentary  on  the  Talmud,  he  asserts  the  correctness  of 
the  application.  In  the  former  he  says,  "  They  shall  look 
back  to  mourn,  because  the  Gentiles  had  pierced  some 
amongst  them,  and  killed  some  of  them."  *  But  in  the 
latter  he  says,  "  The  words,  '  The  land  shall  mourn/  are 
found  in  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah,  and  he  prophesies  of 
the  future,  that  they  shall  mourn  on  account  of  Messiah, 
the  son  of  Joseph,  who  shall  be  slain  in  the  war  of  Gog 
and  Magog  "  f  (Succah.  fol.  52,  col.  1).  That  this  mani- 
fest contradiction  is  not  accidental,  but  intentional,  ap- 
pears from  the  fact,  that  this  writer  has  dealt  similarly 
by  other  controverted  passages  ;  for  instance,  Isaiah  liii., 
which,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Bible,  he  expounds  of 
the  Jewish  people,  but  which,  in  his  commentary  on  the 
Talmud,  J  he  explains  of  Messiah.  Indeed  his  determina- 
tion to  get  rid  of  any  explanation  that  could  favour 
Christianity,  is  plainly  avowed  in  his  commentary  on  the 
xxist  Psalm,  where  he  says,  "  Our  rabbies  have  expounded 
it  of  the  King  Messiah,  but  it  is  better  to  expound  it 


i  omba  DTO  irvn  'ioi«n  DTO  i^pn  TON  by  pwnb 


rrarteo  arrow  rpv  p  rrwo  to  ncaw  Tny1?  Kuniyi  rr-oi  rvoaaa  p«n  meet  f 

•  aiaoi  au 
I  Sanhedrin,  fol.  93,  col.  1. 


162  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XII.   10. 

further  of  David  himself,  in  order  to  answer  heretics  " 
(see  also  Ps.  ii.,  which  he  treats  in  the  same  way).  Now, 
when  an  adversary  is  driven  to  deny  in  controversy  what 
he  elsewhere  acknowledges  to  be  true,  he  tacitly  acknow- 
ledges the  power  of  the  argument  which  he  thus  tries  to 
evade.  Rashi's  want  of  ingenuousness  in  the  present 
instance  is  no  small  confirmation  of  the  correctness  and 
obviousness  of  the  Christian  exposition. 

Thirdly,  the  Christian  interpretation  agrees  with  the 
context.  The  Jewish  commentators  all  acknowledge, 
that  the  whole  chapter  refers  to  the  times  of  the  Messiah. 

Fourthly,  it  connects  naturally  with  the  preceding  and 
following  words :  "  I  will  pour  out  upon  the  house  of 
David,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of  grace 
and  supplication :  and  they  shall  look  upon  me  whom 
they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall  mourn  for  him  as  one 
mourneth  for  his  only  son/'  &c.  The  looking  and  the 
mourning  are  represented  as  the  consequences  of  the  out- 
pouring of  the  Spirit,  but  elsewhere  true  repentance  is 
represented  as  the  fruits  of  this  spiritual  influence,  as  in 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  25 — 31,  where,  after  the  promise  of  the 
Spirit,  the  prophet  adds,  "  Then  shall  ye  remember  your 
own  evil  ways,  and  your  doings  that  were  not  good,  and 
shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight,  for  your 
iniquities  and  your  abominations  :"  which  would  lead  us 
to  infer,  that  the  great  mourning  over  him  that  was 
pierced  is  the  sorrow  of  repentance;  and  which  is  ren- 
dered still  more  probable  by  the  further  effect  described 
in  the  xiiith  chapter,  namely,  the  cessation  of  idols 
and  of  false  prophets.  Now,  on  the  Christian  hypothesis, 
this  is  perfectly  intelligible  and  consistent.  The  Jews 
rejected  and  pierced  the  Messiah,  and  therefore,  when  the 
Spirit  is  poured  out,  they  will  repent  and  mourn  in  bitter- 
ness of  soul  over  him  whom  they  pierced.  Here  is 
a  cause  adequate  to  the  profundity  of  the  grief,  and  a 
result  exactly  corresponding  with  the  gift  of  the  Spirit. 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XII.  JO.  163 

Every  word  in  the  passage  has  its  full  force,  and  the  con- 
nexion is  easy  and  natural.  Indeed  so  natural  is  this 
sense,  that  it  has  been  seen  by  one  of  the  most  celebrated 
rabbies.  Alshech,  in  his  Commentary  on  Zechariah,  has 
the  following  remarkable  passage : — "  I  will  do  yet  a 
third  thing,  and  that  is,  that  e  they  shall  look  unto  me,'  for 
they  shall  lift  up  their  eyes  unto  me  in  perfect  repentance, 
when  they  see  him  whom  they  pierced,  that  is  Messiah, 
the  son  of  Joseph ;  for  our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory, 
have  said,  that  he  will  take  upon  himself  all  the  guilt  of 
Israel,  and  shall  then  be  slain  in  the  war  to  make  an 
atonement,  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  shall  be  accounted 
as  if  Israel  had  pierced  him,  for  on  account  of  their  sin  he 
has  died ;  and  therefore,  in  order  that  it  may  be  reckoned 
to  them  as  a  perfect  atonement,  they  will  repent,  and  look 
to  the  blessed  One,  saying  that  there  is  none  beside  Him 
to  forgive  those  that  mourn  on  account  of  him  who  died 
for  their  sin :  this  is  the  meaning  of  '  They  shall  look 
upon  me."*  Excepting  the  mention  of  Messiah  ben 
Joseph,  the  rabbi  has  exactly  given  the  Christian  sense. 

There  is  but  one  objection  that  can  be  made  to  the 
Christian  interpretation,  and  that  is,  that  the  Christian 
version  makes  God  himself  the  victim  whom  they  pierced, 
but  that  shall  be  considered  in  the  observations  on  the 
next  chapter. 

TON  oniwo  rro'to  rniwra  'b«  orrry  rtrno  ^N  is'in  «D  MVP  rropN  '*a*ro  Tin  • 
TKL  TD3b  'ortos  IN  Jim  'w  'IOTDN  te  ros»  to  byp^o  VINO  rpv  p  rrcn  wn  rijn 
TTrto  Tncch  crrt  awrr  \ttb  p  toi  no  Drwcm  »a  WIN  njn  V  1^*3  arcmo  JDIM 
irm  Daws  no  TON  to  D^NDO"?  Virrab  wVii  pw  o  -noNa  'rv  vto  imm  mwn  w 


M    -J 


164 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

1.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to 
the  house  of  David" — It  is  possible  that  this  is  to  be  in- 
terpreted according  to  its  literal  sense,  and  so  our  rabbies, 
of  blessed  memory,   have  connected  it  with  the  verse, 
"  Living  waters  shall  go  forth  from  Jerusalem."  (ch.  xiv.) 
They  have  said  it  may  be  interpreted  that  other  springs 
shall   be    mixed  with    them.     But   the    words,    "  there 
shall  be  a  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David/'  show 
that  it  is  only  one  fountain  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness. 
They  have  further  said,  that  when  the  waters  reach  the 
door  of  the  house  of  David,  they  become  a  great  river, 
for  it  is  said,   "  In  that   day  there  shall  be  a  fountain 
opened  to  the  house  of  David."     And  so  far  as  the  verse 
is  interpreted  literally,  then  the  meaning  of  the  words, 
"for  sin  and  for  uncleanness"  will  be,  that  before  that  day 
no  waters  went  forth  in  Jerusalem  in  the  midst  of  the 
city,  but  then  living  waters  shall  go  forth  in  the  city,  and 
they  shall  not  be  obliged  to  go  forth  outside  the  city  for 
the  waters  of  purification,  for  which  living  water  is  re- 
quired, as  it  is  written ;  and  thus  also  for  her  that  labours 
under  uncleanness  for  whom  living  water  is  necessary. 

2.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass I  will  cut  off  the 

names  of  the  idols,"  either  of  those  that  were  there  for- 
merly before  their  captivity,  or  the  idols  which  the  uncir- 
cumcised  worship  there  at  this  day. 

"And  the  prophets  also." — The  false  prophets   who 

were  there  during  the  first  temple. 

"  And  the  unclean  spirit" — The  evil  affection  snn  "IS^  • 
"'6.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  when  any  shall  yet 

prophesy." — I  will  cause  the  prophets  to  pass  out,  but  if 


KIMCHl's   COMMENTARY,   &C.  165 

there  should  be  a  sinner  who  will  prophesy  by  a  lying 
spirit,  and  lie,  and  say  that  he  prophesies  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  Israel  shall  at  that  time  possess  such  knowledge  and 
understanding,  that  they  will  recognise  the  words  of  that 
prophet  whether  they  be  lies  or  truth  :  and  his  father  and 
mother  that  begat  him  shall  say  to  him,  Thou  shalt  not. 
live,  for  thou  speakest  lies  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

"  That  begat  him."  —  This  is  to  make  the  matter  clearer, 
for  he  had  already  mentioned  his  father  and  mother. 

"  His  father  and  his  mother  shall  thrust  him  through." 
—  They  shall  beat  him  and  wound  him  to  chastise  him,  or 
the  meaning  of  "  shall  thrust  him  through  "  is,  They 
shall  kill  him  ;  as  it  is  said,  Thou  shalt  not  live. 

4.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  they  shall 
be  ashamed."  —  When  they  see  that  their  prophecies  are 
not  fulfilled,  they  shall  be  ashamed. 

inw:?3n:p  is  the  infinitive  with  the  addition  of  n.  And 
so  in  the  Mishna  is  a  similar  form  mwnnb  in  the  words, 


"  Neither  shall  they  wear  a  garment  of  hair  to  de- 
ceive" —  This  was  the  custom  of  the  false  prophets  to 
wear  sackcloth,  or  a  garment  of  hair. 

"  In  order  to  deceive.  —  That  they  may  be  able  to 
deceive,  and  that  the  children  of  men  may  believe  in 
them  :  for  they  show  themselves  before  the  children  of 
men  that  they  are  separate,f  and  righteous,  and  upright 
men,  and  that  would  not  speak  lies.  But  when  they  see 
that  their  prophecy  is  not  fulfilled,  they  shall  have  shame, 
and  leave  off  their  deeds,  and  their  visions,  and  their 
garments,  and  shall  deny  their  prophecy,  and  shall  say 
that  they  are  not  prophets,  and  have  never  prophesied, 
but  are  tillers  of  the  ground.  They  shall  not  busy  them- 
selves with  these  things,  but  with  the  tilling  of  the 
ground,  and  with  cattle  and  property. 

*  Pirke  Avoth.  c.  v.  1.  t  Literally  Pharisees. 


166  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

5.  "  But  he  shall  say." — He  shall  say  to  him  that  asks 
him,  where  is  his  prophecy.     He  shall  deny  and  say,  1  am 
not  a  Prophet. 

"OSpn . — He  taught  me  to  be  a  shepherd  of  cattle,  and 
to  employ  myself  with  tilling  the  ground. 

6.  "  And  one  shall  say  to  him,  What  are  these  wounds 
in  thy  hands  ?  " —  If  it  be  so,  that  thou   hast  not  been 
a  prophet,  what  are  these  wounds  in  thy  hands,  for  the 
wounds  are  a  sign  that*  thou  hast  prophesied,  and  that 
thy  father  and  mother  have  smitten  thee  and  chastised 
thee,  that  thou  shouldest  not  prophesy. 

"  Those  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the  house  of  my 
friends." — He  shall  say,  these  wounds  are  not  on  account 
of  prophecy,  but  my  friends  wounded  and  chastised  me 
because  I  was  abandoned,  and  was  not  industrious  in  cul- 
tivating the  land  in  my  youth,  and  they  beat  me  that 
I  should  cease  from  the  profligacy  of  young  men,  and 
should  set  to  my  work.  And  the  reason  of  the  wounds 
being  in  the  hands  is,  that  they  used  to  bind  his  hands 
and  feet  that  he  should  not  go  out. 

The  sense  of  the  whole  passage  refers  to  the  future,  for 
God  has  appointed  as  to  the  future,  and  has  said,  "  It 
shall  come  to  pass  afterwards,  that  I  will  pour  out  my 
Spirit  upon  all  flesh,  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters 
shall  prophesy,"  &c.  (Joel).  But  those  persons  who 
cannot  prophesy  will  envy  the  others  who  can  prophesy, 
and  will  make  themselves  prophets  like  the  others,  but 
their  fathers  who  hear  their  prophecy  will  know  that  it  is 
a  lie,  and  will  say  to  them,  Thou  shalt  not  live,  for  thou 
hast  spoken  lies  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  But  my  lord, 
my  father,  may  his  memory  be  blessed,  has  interpreted 
this  of  the  future,  in  the  time  of  the  resurrection,  and  has 
said,  "  When  the  dead  live,  as  is  written  in  Daniel,  Many 
of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake,  some 
to  everlasting  life,  i.  e.,  the  righteous,  and  some  to  ever- 
lasting shame  and  contempt,  i.  e.,  Those  who  have  denied 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.  XIII.  167 

a  fundamental  article,  and  who  deny  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead,  and  those  middle  sort  of  persons  who  have  not 
denied  a  fundamental  article,  but  have  been  dreamers  of 
false  dreams,  and  have  prophesied  out  of  their  own  heart, 
but  have  not  committed  idolatry ;  when  these  persons  live 
again,  there  will  be  marks  in  their  hands,  like  the  marks 
of  an  ulcer,  or  the  itch.  And  this  will  be  the  reward 
of  their  deeds  and  the  punishment  of  their  lying  pro- 
phecy, that  the  children  of  men  shall  recognise  it,  and 
they  shall  have  shame,  as  it  is  said,  "  The  prophets  shall 
be  ashamed  every  one  of  his  vision  when  he  prophesied," 
on  account  of  his  false  prophecy  in  former  days.  "  And 
they  shall  no  longer  wear  a  garment  of  hair,  as  they  did 
at  first  when  they  used  to  wear  sackcloth  and  the  clothes 
of  the  separate,  and  of  the  servants  of  God,  that  the 
children  of  men  might  believe  their  lies.  But  in  the  time 
to  come  when  the  children  of  men  shall  see  and  know 
them,  each  one  of  them  will  deny  and  say,  the  things  have 
never  been,  for  I  was  an  husbandman." 

"  For  man  taught  me  to  keep  cattle  from  my  youth." — 
DIM  means  an  amhaaretz,  unlearned  man.  ^f^n  made  me 
a  shepherd  of  cattle  and  an  husbandman  ;  and  when  they 
say  to  him,  What  are  these  wounds  in  thine  hands  ?  he 
will  say,  they  are  those  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the 
house  of  my  friends,  in  the  Beth  Hamedrash  (house  of 
study)  my  friends  beat  me  on  account  of  my  writing, 
when  we  used  to  write,  or  were  learning,  or  some  such 
thing. 

7.  "  Awake,  O  &word,  against  my  shepherd." — Rashi, 
of  blessed  memory,  has  interpreted  this,  "Against  the 
prince  whom  I  have  appointed  over  my  sheep  of  the  cap- 
tivity ;"  and,  "Against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,"  whom 
I  have  associated  to  myself  to  keep  my  flock  as  I  do. 

"  Smite  the  shepherd." — The  wicked  prince.  But  the 
wise  man,  R.  Abraham  Aben  Ezra,  has  interpreted  this 
prophecy  of  the  great  wars  which  shall  be  in  all  the 


168  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY,   &C.  • 

world  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph. 
And  the  meaning  of  "  my  shepherd"  is.  Every  king  of  the 
Gentiles  whom  God  has  caused  to  rule  over  the  earth, 
and  he  thinks  himself  to  be  as  God,  therefore  he  says, 
"  Against  the  man  my  fellow  j"  i.  e.,  who  thinks  of  him- 
self that  he  is  my  fellow. 

"  Smite  the  Shepherd"— God,  blessed  be  He,  will  cut 
off  every  king  from  the  Gentiles,  and  his  flock  shall  be 
scattered.  "  The  little  ones "  are  the  governors  and 
princes,  who  are  less  than  the  kings.  Jonathan  has  in- 
terpreted, "  O  sword,  be  revealed  against  the  king,"  &c. ; 
i.  e.,  those  who  are  next  to  the  kings  and  the  governors. 

8.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  all  the  land." — In  all 
the  land  of  Israel.     And   some  interpret,  in   the   whole 
world,  for  even  of  the  nations  none  will  be  left,  but  those 
who  are  good  and  serve  God. 

D?3tf  ^S.— Two  parts  of  them. 

"  Shall  be  cut  off  shall  die" — Some  of  them  shall 
be  cut  off  by  the  sword,  and  some  shall  die  by  the 
pestilence. 

"  But  the  third  shall  be  left  therein."— Shall  remain  in 
the  land  of  the  living. 

9.  "  And  I  will  bring  them  through  the  fire" — Through 
severe  afflictions  like  unto  fire.     And  fire  is  mentioned, 
because  the  figure  is  taken  from  a  refiner  of  silver  and  gold, 
for  they  refine  and  prove  it  with  fire.     Thus  they  shall  be 
refined  and  proved  by  bearing  severe  afflictions  cheerfully 
at  the  time  when  they  bear  them.     Jonathan   also  has 
thus  translated,  "  I  will  bring  the  third  part  into  affliction 
in  a  furnace  of  fire.'* 


169 


OBSERVATIONS  ON  CHAPTER  XIII.  7—9. 

IN  attempting  to  vindicate  the  Christian  interpretation 
of  this  remarkable  passage,  "Awake,  O  sword,  against 
my  shepherd,  and  against  the  man  that  is  my  fellow,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts/'  we  are  spared  the  trouble  of  defend- 
ing our  translation.  The  rabbies  understand  the  words, 
and  construe  the  whole  passage  as  we  do.  We  can, 
therefore,  proceed  at  once  to  the  interpretation,  respect- 
ing which  the  rabbies  all  differ  one  from  the  other. 
Kimchi,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  Commentary,  interprets 
"  my  shepherd,"  of  "  every  king  of  the  Gentiles,  whom 
God  has  caused  to  rule  over  the  earth,  and  who  thinks 
himself  as  God.  Therefore  it  is  said,  '  Against  the  man 
my  fellow;'  i.  e.,  who  thinks  of  himself  that  he  is  my 
fellow."  R.  Isaac,  the  author  of  the  Chizzuk  Emunah, 
says  that  these  words  mean,  "  Awake,  O  sword,  against 
the  King  of  Ishmael,  called  also  the  King  of  Turkey,  and 
ruling  over  Asia  and  Africa,  under  whose  hand  the 
majority  of  the  people  of  Israel  are  in  captivity.  God 
calls  him  '  my  shepherd/  because  He  has  given  His  sheep 
into  his  hand,  to  feed  them  in  their  captivity.  'The 
sheep  '  mean  Israel.  He  calls  him  *  The  man  my  fellow,' 
and  companion,  because,  in  the  pride  and  haughtiness  of 
his  heart,  he  thinks  himself  like  God,  and  similar  to  this 
is  that  passage,  '  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as  one 
of  us.'  "  *  Abarbanel  confesses  that  this  passage  puzzles 
him,  for  he  offers  three  different  interpretations.  He 
says,  "  It  appears  to  me  that  the  words  '  Awake,  O  sword, 
against  my  shepherd,  and  the  man  that  is  my  fellow/  may 
be  interpreted  in  one  of  three  ways.  The  first,  that  as 
the  prophets  of  the  Gentiles  and  their  saints  and  devout 
persons  will  say,  that  they  inherited  lies,  and  that  they 
wish  to  be  '  husbandmen/  or  feeders  of  sheep,  as  Rashi 
*  Tela  ignea,  p.  ii.,  page  310. 


170  OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.   XIII.  7  —  9- 

has  explained  on  the  words  t  Man  hath  taught  me  to  keep 
cattle'  (verse  5),  therefore  God  says,  with  reference  to 
that  prophet,  who  wishes  to  make  himself  a  shepherd, 
'Awake,  O  sword,  against  my  shepherd,'  that  is  to  say, 
the  sword  shall  come  upon  that  shepherd  who  was  in  his 
own  eyes  formerly  *  a  man,  my  fellow/  near  to  me,  and 
adhering  to  me,  but  now  makes  himself  a  shepherd,  &c."* 
"  The  second  mode  of  interpretation,  and  that  which  is 
more  appropriate  in  my  eyes,  is  that  the  words  '  my 
shepherd  '  are  spoken  of  the  prophet  of  the  Ishmaelites, 
whom  they  call  Mahomet,  of  whom  they  say  that  God 
sent  him  into  the  world  to  feed  his  sheep,  the  children  of 
men;  and  that  the  words  'the  man  my  fellow/  are 
spoken  of  Jesus  the  Nazarene,  for,  according  to  the 
sentiments  of  the  children  of  Edom,  and  their  faith,  he 
was  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  same  substance,  and 
therefore  he  is  called  according  to  their  words,  '  The  man 
my  fellow/  &c,"  f  "  The  third  interpretation  is,  that  the 
words  '  my  shepherd,  the  man  my  fellow/  are  spoken  of 
Messiah,  the  son  of  Joseph,  &c."  J  These  interpretations 
necessarily  destroy  one  another.  This  diversity  shows 
the  great  difficulty  which  the  rabbies  found  in  getting 
any  interpretation  that  would  satisfy  their  understanding, 
as  is  especially  apparent  in  Abarbanel,  a  man  of  great 
learning  and  consummate  talent;  and  yet  so  far  is  he 
from  being  satisfied  either  with  what  his  predecessors 
had  written,  or  he  himself  could  devise,  that  he  proposes 


vsrnpi  omn  waarc  TOWD  ^b  ra  irwn  D»aD  rrohoD  TTOQ  iffincb  ^  n*na  * 
»aapn  'bna  •'"tinD'O  no  'D3  JNS  ^yn  IN  HQIN  naiy  nvrf?  o^m  nrroi  ibn:  Tpiuttj  "now 
y-i  rsm  to  niy  Tin  mm  ins»  n«#b  rnrrvo  ^n  im»  naaa  Dtnrr  TOM  pb  napo  pwto 
u  pan  ^«  ai-ip  'n^ny  na:  va^ya  rrn  '3i«»na»  mrr  nyiirr  to  won  ain 


to  vn  ia«TU  Nirr  wa  ;iaa  Tnvn  wim  WTBHO  'aiun  piMm  f 
'n'03?  naa  TDMIDI  DTM  »aa  iaMS  n«  'isnb  abiya  own  inbtJ-iU  'noiwo  *rarra  D^SM  Nnpan 
vosj?o  Dsy  b^n  p  rrn  Nirr  onaiaxi  DIIN  *aa  natt?na  '23135  n^i3rr  itr  to 


*pv  p  n»\»o  to  woy  1121  »yn  ^rs^ia  Nin  ajiTDrto  'nybwrr  pm  + 


ODSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.   XIII.    7 — 9.  17  I 

three  interpretations,  and  does  not  venture  to  decide  upon 
any  one  as  certain  and  true.  Such  diversity  and  doubt  is 
a  strong  presumption  against  them  all,  and  an  examina- 
tion of  the  passage  shows  that  they  are  decidedly  false. 
The  first  step  is  to  ascertain  who  are  meant  by  "  The 
sheep,"  in  the  words  "  Smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep 
shall  be  scattered."  Do  they  represent  Israel  or  the 
Gentiles  ?  The  whole  Old  Testament  testifies  that  where 
shepherd  and  sheep  are  used  figuratively,  the  sheep  repre- 
sent Israel.  Thus  Moses,  when  praying  for  a  successor, 
gives  us  the  reason,  "  That  the  congregation  of  the  Lord 
be  not  as  sheep  which  have  no  shepherd "  (Numb. 
xxvii.  17).  The  Psalms  are  full  of  this  figure,  as,  "  We 
are  the  people  of  his  pasture,  and  the  sheep  of  his  hand  " 
(xcv.  7).  And  again,  "  We  are  his  people,  and  the  sheep 
of  his  pasture"  (c.  3).  And  so  are  the  prophets,  as  "  He 
that  scattered  Israel  will  gather  him,  and  keep  him  as  a 
shepherd  doth  his  flock  "  (Jer.  xxxi.  10).  And  again, 
"  As  a  shepherd  seeketh  out  his  flock  in  the  day  that  he 
is  among  his  sheep  that  are  scattered :  so  will  I  seek  out 
my  sheep,  and  will  deliver  them  out  of  all  places  whither 
they  have  been  scattered  in  the  dark  and  cloudy  day" 
(E/ek.  xxxiv.  7)-  Similar  passages  are  so  many  and  so 
plain,  that  we  must  come  to  the  same  conclusion  as  R. 
Isaac,  in  the  citation  given  above,  that  '•  sheep "  mean 
Israel :  and  therefore  the  scattering  of  the  sheep  means 
the  scattering  of  Israel,  and  therefore  the  smiting  of  the 
shepherd,  whoever  he  be,  must  have  taken  place  before 
Israel  was  scattered :  and  therefore  all  the  Rabbinic  inter- 
pretations which  refer  the  smiting  of  the  shepherd  to  the 
time  to  come  are  false.  In  the  time  to  come,  Israel  is  not 
to  be  scattered,  but  to  be  gathered.  The  scattering  took 
place  nearly  1800  years  ago,  and  antecedent  to  that  i*\vnt 
the  shepherd  must  have  been  smitten ;  it  therefore  cannot 
mean  the  destruction  of  any  Gentile  kings,  nor  of  Messiah 
ben  Joseph  in  the  time  to  come. 


172  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XIII.    7 9- 

The  next  step  is  to  inquire  who  is  meant  by  "the 
shepherd."  No  particular  epithet  is  added,  and  he  may, 
therefore,  either  be  a  bad  shepherd  or  a  good  shepherd. 
But,  as  the  scattering  of  the  flock  is  consequent  upon  his 
death,  it  follows,  that  before  his  death  they  were  not 
scattered,  but  that,  before  he  was  smitten,  he  held  them 
together.  He  cannot,  therefore,  be  a  bad  shepherd;  for 
the  peculiar  characteristic  which  the  Scripture  gives  of 
a  bad  shepherd  is,  that  he  scatters  the  flock.  Thus 
Jeremiah  says,  "  Woe  be  unto  the  shepherds  that  destroy 
and  scatter  the  sheep  of  my  pasture  !  saith  the  Lord. 
Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  against  the 
shepherds  that  feed  my  people,  Ye  have  scattered  my 
flock,  and  driven  them  away,  and  have  not  visited  them : 
behold,  I  will  visit  upon  you  the  evil  of  your  doings,  saith 
the  Lord"  (Jer.  xxiii.  1,  2).  As  this  shepherd  then, 
kept  them  together,  and  did  not  suffer  them  to  be 
scattered,  until  he  was  smitten,  it  follows  that  he  must  be 
a  good  shepherd.  And  therefore  the  words  "  My  shep- 
herd, the  man  that  is  my  fellow,' '  cannot  be  spoken 
ironically,  but  must  be  strictly  applicable.  "  My  shep- 
herd "  must  designate  some  one  peculiarly  appointed  by 
God  to  feed  his  flock ;  and,  if  we  search  the  prophets,  we 
shall  find  that  He  who  is  promised  as  the  shepherd  of 
Israel  is  the  Messiah,  as  was  shown  at  pages  142,  143. 
The  Messiah,  therefore,  is  the  person  to  be  smitten  before 
the  scattering  of  the  sheep. 

Such  is  the  conclusion  to  which  an  examination  of  the 
passage  itself,  and  a  comparison  of  the  language  with  that 
of  the  prophets,  would  lead,  and  this  conclusion  is  ren- 
dered absolutely  certain,  by  comparing  Zechariah  with 
himself.  In  the  xith  chapter  we  have  seen  the  same  figure 
employed.  The  people  of  Israel  are  compared  to  sheep 
committed  to  the  care  of  a  good  shepherd,  and  when  he 
ceases  to  perform  the  office,  calamity  and  ruin  are  the 
consequence.  The  identity  of  the  symbols  and  the  things 


OBSERVATIONS' ON  CHAP.  xm.  7—0.  173 

symbolized,  in  both  visions,  shows  that  they  refer  to  the 
same  persons  and  the  same  events.  It  is  true  that  in  the 
xith  chapter,  Zechariah  does  not  mention  the  death  of 
the  Messiah,  but  he  does  in  the  xiith.  "  They  shall  look 
upon  me  whom  they  pierced  "5  and  in  both  he  intimates 
that  the  Messiah  is  a  divine  person,  as  God  here  calls 
him  "The  man  that  is  my  fellow."  In  xi.  13,  we  read 
"  The  LORD  nirP  said  unto  me,  Cast  it  unto  the  potter : 
a  goodly  price  that  I  was  prized  at  of  them,"  where  the 
Lord  identifies  himself  with  the  shepherd.  In  xii.  10,  He 
who  pours  out  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication, 
identifies  himself  with  Him  that  is  pierced,  so  that  the 
words  under  consideration,  "  The  man  that  is  my  fellow," 
exactly  agree  with  the  character  of  Messiah,  as  previously 
given  by  Zechariah.  That  VTB2,  "my  fellow,"  implies 
that  He  of  whom  it  is  spoken  is  a  divine  person,  is  plainly 
acknowledged  by  those  rabbies  who  oppose  Christianity. 
R.  Isaac  says,  "He  calls  him  'The  man,'  my  fellow,'  and 
companion,  because  in  the  pride  and  haughtiness  of  his 
heart,  he  thinks  himself  as  it  were  God."  And  Abarbanel, 
who  endeavours  to  interpret  the  words  in  a  bad  sense  of 
our  Lord,  acknowledges  still  more  plainly  that  these 
words  signify  one  of  the  same  substance.  "  The  words, 
*  The  man  my  fellow/  are  spoken  of  Jesus  the  Nazarene, 
for,  according  to  the  sentiments  of  the  children  of  Edom, 
and  their  faith,  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  same 
substance,  and  therefore  he  is  called,  according  to  their 
words,  '  The  man  that  is  my  fellow.' "  He  here  plainly  and 
positively  asserts,  that  these  words  express  the  Christian 
doctrine  of  the  Deity  of  Messiah,  and  thinks  that  they 
were  selected  on  that  account  These  two  testimonies 
of  two  controversialists,  writing  professedly  against 
Christianity,  are  of  the  greatest  value.  They  show  that 
the  grammatical  sense  assigned  to  the  passage  by  Chris- 
tians, and  on  which  Christians  rest  their  interpretation, 
is  so  obvious,  and  so  necessarily  true,  that  the  most 


174  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    XIII.  7 — 9. 

acute  adversaries  are  compelled  to  admit  it ;  and  can  only 
escape  from  it  by  saying  that  the  words  are  ironical.  This 
concession  is  rendered  doubly  valuable  by  the  considera- 
tion that  they  had  before  them  another  explanation, 
proposed  by  a  rabbi  of  great  renown,  and  that  they 
rejected  it.  Rashi,  as  quoted  by  Kimchi  in  the  Com- 
mentary, page  167,  says  that  kings  are  called  God's 
fellows,  because  they  are  associated  with  him  in  feeding 
his  sheep,  but  R.  Isaac  and  Abarbanel  preferred  expounding 
WE2  "  My  fellow/'  of  a  similarity  in  nature  and  sub- 
stance ;  and,  no  doubt,  their  reason  for  this  preference 
was  the  fact  that,  in  all  the  other  passages  where  it  occurs, 
it  can  have  no  other  meaning.*  Except  in  this  passage 
it  only  occurs  in  the  Pentateuch  as  follows : — Levit.  v.  20, 
(English,  vi.  2),  "  If  a  soul  sin,  and  commit  a  trespass 
against  the  Lord,  and  lie  unto  his  neighbour  or  fellow 
VTE37.21  in  that  which  was  delivered  to  him  to  keep,  or  in 
fellowship,  or  in  a  thing  taken  away  by  violence,  or  hath 
deceived  his  neighbour  "WTpl?." — Lev.  xviii.  20,  "  More- 
over, thou  shalt  not  lie  carnally  with  thy  neighbour's  wife 
*HT9?  nptf ."— xix.  11,  "Ye  shall  not  steal,  neither  deal 
falsely,  neither  lie  one  to  another  (a  man  with  his  neigh- 
bour) irrpsa  t^H."— verse  15,  "  In  righteousness  shalt 
thou  judge  thy  neighbour  ?fOs95." — verse  17,  "Thou 
shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine  heart ;  thou  shalt  not 
in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighbour  *JJTP5." — xxiv.  19, 
"  And  if  a  man  cause  a  blemish  in  his  neighbour  Srpp^a ; 
as  he  hath  done  so  shall  be  done  to  him." — xxv.  14, 
"  And  if  thou  sell  ought  unto  thy  neighbour  fpTPSb,  or 
buyest  ought  of  thy  neighbour' a  hand,  ye  shall  not  oppress 
a  man  his  brother.  According  to  the  number  of  years 
after  the  jubilee,  thou  shalt  buy  of  thy  neighbour  *[JT£9. 
Ye  shall  not,  therefore,  oppress  a  man  his  neighbour 
;  but  thou  shalt  fear  thy  God,"  &c.  These  are  the 

*  Hengstenberg  Christologie,  p.  ii.  p.  334. 


OBSERVATIONS   ON    CHAP.  XIII.    7 — 9. 

only  places  where  it  occurs,  and  in  all  these  it  is  synony- 
mous with  brother,  or  fellow.  It  expresses  the  relation 
of  fellow-Israelite,  or  fellow-man,  and  points  out  an 
identity  of  nature,  which  is  the  very  ground  on  which 
doing  evil  to  our  neighbour  is  forbidden.  When,  there- 
fore, God  calls  any  being  i;vo?  "  My  fellow,"  it  neces- 
sarily implies  that  that  being  stands  in  the  same  relation 
to  God  as  one  Israelite  or  man  does  to  another;  that  is, 
that  he  is  of  the  same  nature  or  substance,  that  is,  that 
he  is  very  God.  It  cannot  be  urged  that  there  is  no  being, 
who  can  be  considered  as  God's  fellow,  for  Zechariah 
himself,  in  ch.  ii.  and  iii.,  speaks  of  a  being  who  is  sent, 
and  is,  therefore,  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  yet  who  is 
the  Lord,  and  we  have  shown,  in  the  observations  on 
ch.  i.,  that  this  is  the  general  representation  of  the  Old 
Testament  Scriptures.  Neither  can  it  be  said  that  this 
divine  character  is  inconsistent  with  the  other  representa- 
tions of  Messiah.  Malachi  says,  "  The  LORD  filNrr 
whom  ye  seek  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple," 
(Mai.  iii.  1.),  where  the  divine  title  fVTM  with  the  article 
n,  which  is  never  given  to  any  being  but  God,  is  applied 
to  the  Messiah,  as  the  Jewish  commentators  acknowledge. 
R.  Alshech,  in  his  Commentary  on  the  passage,  even  goes 
so  far  as  to  assert  that  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  includes 
in  it  the  coming  of  God.  He  says,  "  It  is  well  known 
that  in  the  coining  of  the  Messiah  is  [included]  the 
coming  of  the  blessed  God  into  the  world  to  fulfil  the 
verse,  4  Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  come/  and  again, 
*  I  will  dwell  in  the  midst  of  thee/  "  *  And  again,  Jere- 
miah says,  "  This  is  his  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called, 
The  LORD  mm  our  Righteousness,"  (xxiii.  6),  both  of 
which  names  imply  a  participation  of  the  divine  attributes, 
as  the  same  Rabbi  well  expounds  in  his  Commentary  on 

nix  'oip  airon  >npo  Q"pV  oton  •?«  -p^v  wo  wn  rrroon  rwrn  '3  rm  • 

TOW  TOW  pv*  wa  *3 


1J6  OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.  XIII.   7  -  9. 

Jeremiah  :  "  Messiah  is  called  the  Lord  our  Righteous- 
ness, that  is  to  say,  through  the  superabundance  of  his 
righteousness  and  purity,  righteousness  will  be  communi- 
cated to  Israel  from  heaven.  Messiah  will  be  like  a 
reservoir  into  which  it  is  poured,  and  from  whence  it  is 
spread  amongst  all  the  people  ;  and  this  is  the  meaning  of 
e  The  Lord  our  Righteousness/  That  is  to  say,  that  as 
the  LORD  sends  forth  righteousness  to  him  that  comes 
to  be  cleansed,  and  still  more  to  the  clean,  so  also  the 
Messiah  shall  be  like  the  blessed  God,  and  his  name  shall 
be  called  'The  Lord  our  Righteousness/  for  from  Thee  our 
righteousness  shall  be  derived  as  from  the  Lord.'1*  Many 
other  similar  passages  might  be  adduced,  but  these  are 
sufficient  to  remove  the  objection  that  the  description  of 
divinity  is  foreign  from  Messiah's  character.  The  sum  of 
all  that  has  been  said  is,  that  the  words,  "  Awake,  O 
sword,  against  my  shepherd,  and  the  man  that  is  my 
fellow  —  Smite  the  Shepherd,  and  the  sheep  shall  be 
scattered,"  are  spoken  of  the  Messiah  —  that,  therefore, 
Messiah  was  to  come  before  the  scattering  of  the  sheep, 
i.  e.,  before  the  destruction  of  the  temple  ;  that  he  was  to 
be  smitten,  and  that  then  the  Jews  were  to  be  dispersed. 
It  is  very  easy  to  show  that  these  particulars  were  fulfilled 
in  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  He  came  at  the  time  here  predicted, 
he  was  smitten,  and  very  soon  after  the  Jews  were  dis- 
persed, and  remain  dispersed  to  this  day. 

The  only  objection  that  can  be  made  is,  that  he  was  not 
slain  by  the  sword,  whereas  Zechariah  says,  lt  Awake,  O 
sword,"  but  this  is  easily  answered,  as  Hengstenberg  has 
shown  :  "  Sword  "  is  employed  figuratively  to  express 
violent  death  by  the  hands  of  others,  as  Nathan  says  to 
David,  "  Thou  hast  killed  Uriah,  the  Hittite,  with  the 


ips  yc«  >"j>  ioib  upis  'n  moan 
yn  b3i  TDIDDJV  IODOI  11  osyn  pnvrc 
rrc>T  rrurarr  *p  TirTOb  02  rroi  "irro^  toft 
:  'rro 


OBSERVATIONS    ON    CHAP.    XIII.  177 

sword,"  2  Sam.  xii.  9,  whereas  it  appears,  from  xi.  24, 
that  he  had  been  shot  with  a  missile  weapon.  A  similar 
instance  occurs  in  the  words  of  the  Israelites  to  Moses  and 
Aaron,  "  Ye  have  made  our  savour  to  be  abhorred  in  the 
eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and  in  the  eyes  of  his  servants,  to  put  a 
sword  into  their  hands  to  slay  us."  (Exod.  v.  21). 


178 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  "  Behold  the  day  cometh  to  the  Lord:'— That  day 
shall  be  to  the  Lord,  for  his  glory  and  his  might  shall 
be  seen  at  that  time,  and  that  is  the  time  when  Gog 
and  Magog  shall  come  against  the  land  of  Israel,  as  the 
Prophet  Ezekiel  has  prophesied. 

<f  And  thy  spoil  shall  be  divided  in  the  midst  of  thee" 
— This  is  spoken  of  Jerusalem,  for  the  heathen  shall 
divide  the  spoil  of  the  city  in  the  midst  of  it,  as  it  is 
said,  "  The  houses  shall  be  rifled."  But  Jonathan  has 
interpreted,  "  Behold,  the  day  that  shall  come  from  before 
the  Lord,  and  the  house  of  Israel  shall  divide  the  wealth 
of  the  nations  in  the  midst  of  thee,  Jerusalem." 

2.  "  For  I  will  gather ;"  that  is  to  say,  he  will  put  it 
into  their  heart  to  come  to  Jerusalem  to  war,  as  it  is  said 
in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel,  "  And  I  will  cause  thee  to 
come  up  from  the  north  parts,  and  will  bring  thee  upon 
the  mountains  of  Israel"  (xxxix.  2.). 

"  And  the  city  shall  be  taken."— This  affliction  shall  be 
for  the  purifying  of  the  third  which  shall  be  left  in  it; 
and  in  reference  to  this,  it  is  said  in  the  prophecy  of 
Isaiah,  "  Hide  thyself,  as  it  were,  for  a  little  moment, 
until  the  indignation  be  overpast"  (xxvi.  20.).  And  it  is 
said,  in  the  prophecy  of  Daniel,  if  There  shall  be  a  time 
of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation," 
&c.  (xii.  1.). 

And  the  houses  rifled" — -IDttb  one  of  the  reduplicating 
verbs,  the  root  is  DptP,  and  so  we  find  in  HDttJpb  "jra  ^p 
3p5!  "  who  gave  Jacob  for  a  spoil"  (Isaiah  xlii.  24),  the 
meaning  is  plundering  or  spoiling. 

"  And  half  of  the  city  shall  go  forth  into  captivity  ; 


KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY,    &C. 

i.  e.,  They  shall  lead  them  from  the  city  forth  as  captives 
to  their  tents,  which  are  outside  the  city.  Thus  far  the 
blessed  God  will  leave  them  in  the  power  of  their  enemies 
to  purify  them,  and  every  one  that  is  written  in  the  book 
shall  be  delivered,  and  shall  receive  the  affliction  cheer- 
fully. 

"  And  the  residue  of  the  people  ahull  not  be  cut  off' 
from  the  city? — For  God  will  not  give  them  again 
into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  but  Israel  shall  prevail 
against  their  enemies,  by  the  help  of  God,  who  is  with 
them,  and  this  is  what  is  said,  "The  Lord  shall  go 
forth." 

3.  "  Then    the    Lord    shall    go    forth as    0^5 

in  the  day  of  battle"     The  Chaldee  for  nnnbD  is 
.     And  so  we  read  nnp  ^9*?  nttpn  ru'lfc ,  "  Wisdom 

is  better  than  weapons  of  war  "  (Eccles.  ix.  18),  and 
there  are  other  like  instances.  Here  it  is  said,  "  in  the 
day  of  battle;'*  but  what  battle  is  not  explained.  The 
meaning  is  according  to  the  Targum,  "  As  the  day  when 
he  waged  war  at  the  Red  Sea,"  for  then  Israel  was  in  great 
affliction,  for  the  Egyptians  were  pursuing  after  them, 
and  Moses,  our  master,  peace  be  upon  him,  said,  "  The 
Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your  peace  " 
(Exod.  xiv.  14.).  And  so  it  is  said, "  And  fight  against 
those  nations." 

4.  "And  his  feet  shall  stand." — This  is  said  figuratively, 
because  a  sign  and  wonder  shall  be  exhibited  in  the  Mount 
of  Olives,  in  its  cleaving  asunder.     And  that  great  wise 
man,  our  master,  Moses,  may  his  memory  be  blessed,  has 
interpreted  "his  cause"  as  '•brnb  "fnN  "P^l,  "and  the 
Lord  hath  blessed  thee  at  my  foot"  (Gen.  xxx.  30),  i.  e., 
on  my  account.     In  the  same  way  [he  would  take]  V^jn, 
i.  e.,  "  His  causes  shall  stand,  that  is  to  say,  the  miracles 
which  shall  then  be  seen  in  that  place,  of  which  God  is 
the  cause,  i.  e.  the  author."  *     And  Jonathan  has  inter- 
preted," And  he  shall  be  revealed  in  his  might  at  that  time." 

•  See  Moreh  Nevuchim,  part  i.  cap. 


180  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

"  The  Mount  of  Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem" — 
i.  e.  near  Jerusalem,  on  the  east  of  it. 

"  In  the  midst  thereof,  toward  the  east  and  toward  the 
west." — From  the  east  to  the  west  the  whole  mountain 
shall  be  split,  half  of  it  to  the  north,  and  half  of  it  to  the 
south,  and  there  shall  be  between  them  a  very  great 
valley.  E7E-1  signifies  shall  be  removed;  that  is  to  say, 
one  half  of  the  mountain  shall  be  moved  out  of  its  place 
to  the  north  side,  and  the  other  half  to  the  south,  and  the 
valley  between.  So  Jonathan  has  interpreted  ttta , 
"shall  remove/'  by  ttfbm,  "shall  be  torn  up."  And 
this  sign  is  a  type  of  the  cleaving  of  the  Gentiles 
who  come  against  Jerusalem,  and  who  shall  fall  scattered 
about. 

5.  "  And  ye  shall  fie  e  to  tlie  valley  of  the  mountains" 
— When  the  mountain  is  split,  they  shall  flee  from  before 
the  voice  of  the  earthquake,  and  they  shall  flee  to  the 
valley  of  the  mountains. 

"  F^r  the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  to  Azal" 
— For  the  valley  which  shall  be  made  by  this  cleft  shall 
extend  and  reach  to  Azal,  which  is  the  name  of  a  place. 
That  is  to  say,  outside  the  mountains  this  cleft  shall 
extend  to  Azal,  and  they  shall  flee  thither,  thinking  to  be 
delivered  outside  the  mountains  ;  but  'they  shall  find  the 
valley  there  as  elsewhere,  "nn  is  the  same  as 
There  are  other  examples  of  this  form,  as  ^ 
(armholes,  Ezek.  xiii.  18,)  for  D^P .  And  again,  ft 
^Ibn,  "And  cutteth  him  out  windows"  (Jer.  xxii.  14), 
for  D\3lbn  .  And  again,  Httf  ^brf ,  the  same  as  D^EWO 
(Isaiah  xx.  4).  And  there  are  other  similar  instances,  as 
we  have  written  in  the  book  Michlal. 

"Like  as yefied" — That  is  to  say,  as  your  fathers  fled, 
and  so  it  is  said,  "And  he  brought  us  out  from  thence  " 
(Deut.  vi.  23),  and  other  similar  passages. 

"  Before  the  earthquake" — Some  say  that  this  is  what 
is  said  in  Isaiah,  "And  the  posts  of  the  door  moved,"  that 
the  earthquake  took  place  at  that  time.  And  that  is  what 


ON    ZECHAKIAH,    CHAP.  XIV.  181 

is  said  at  the  beginning  of  Amo.s,  "  Two  years  before  the 
earthquake  "  (Amos  i,  1.). 

"And  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come" — Mn-1  signifies 
to;  TW,  then  he  shall  come,  as  it  is  said,  "The  Lord  shall 
go  forth."  "All  the  saints,"  is  to  be  interpreted  as  if 
there  were  a  conjunction,  "And  all  the  saints."  Similar 
cases  are  m; tt7£t£ ,  "The  sun  and  moon  "  (Hab.  iii.  11); 
.W| ,  Reuben  and  Simeon  (Exod.  i.  2);  7jJ?p 
fo  , "  King  and  princes"  (Hos.  viii.  10),  &c.  "  Saints  " 
means  angels,  as  it  is  said,  "  He  shall  give  his  angels 
charge  over  thee  "  (Ps.  xci.  11) ;  and  "  thither  cause  thy 
mighty  ones  to  come  down,  O  Lord"  (Joel  iii.  11.).  lys?, 
"  with  thee,"  refers  to  Jerusalem,  just  as  "  in  the  midst  of 
thee"  does  in  the  first  verse.  Jonathan  has  interpreted 
~fDtf  by  JTBB  ,  "  with  him ;"  and  that  great  wise  man, 
Rambam,*  of  blessed  memory,  has  interpreted  this  of 
the  good  promise  which  he  promised  Israel  by  the  hands 
of  his  holy  prophets.  And  he  has  interpreted  "  The  Lord 
my  God  shall  come,"  by  means  of  all  the  saints  with  thee 
who  spake  to  Israel. 

Jonathan  has  interpreted  QtfP.?1 ,  at  the  beginning  of 
the  verse,  by  Drnj-lpV],  "  It  shall  be  shut ;"  as  if  he  read 
Dnp31:  similar  to  Tpi?  Cn.D? ,  u  Thine  iniquity  is  marked" 
(Jer.  ii.  22),  and  so  it  is  found  in  some  copies  ;  and  it  is 
said  that  the  men  of  the  East  read  thus  2nD31 .  If  this 
.be  the  reading,  the  meaning  will  be,  that  after  the 
cleaving  open  of  the  Mount  of  Olives,  it  will  be  shut 
again,  an  hour  or  hours,  a  day  or  days  after,  and  thus  the 
miracle  will  be  so  much  the  greater,  that  it  should  be 
shut  after  splitting  open ;  for  in  the  common  earthquakes, 
by  which  the  earth  is  split  open,  it  does  not  close  again. 
Such  was  the  opening  of  the  earth  which  happened  to 
Korah  and  his  company,  for  the  earth  closed  after  it  had 
been  split  open,  as  it  is  said,  "And  the  earth  covered 
them,"  and  this  was  a  great  miracle.  The  meaning  of 
*  IMoreh  Nevuchim,  part  i.  22. 


182  KIMCHI'S    COMMENTARY 

the  words,  "  The  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  unto 
Azal,"  will  then  be,  that  as  to  the  valley  which  was  made 
between  the  two  halves  of  the  mountain,  when  it  is  closed 
up,  its  closure  shall  reach  to  the  highest  place  in  the  moun- 
tain, so  that  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  is  half,  or  two  parts, 
closed,  but  that  it  is  entirely  closed,  even  to  the  highest  spot 
in  the  mountain.  b^S  means  something  high,  as  ''V^  b^: 
bsntp"]  vjsi ,  "  and  upon  the  nobles  of  the  children  of 
Israel"  (Exod.  xxiv.  11),  where  '•V^N  means  the  great 
ones  of  Israel.  As  to  the  expression,  "  mountains," 
though  the  Mount  of  Olives  is  only  one  mountain,  yet 
when  split  it  becomes  two. 

6.  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day." — In  that 
day  in  which  he  says  that  this  miracle  shall  occur,  there 
shall  also  be  this  circumstance,  that  the  light  shall  neither 
be   rrhj1!,   "precious,"    nor  VISSp,   "thickness."      The 
meaning  is  figurative,  that  the  light  of  that  day  shall  not 
be  bright,  which  is  the  meaning  of  JThp  TM ,  as  i|?J  rrtj."! 
"sfrin ,   "  or    the    moon   walking    in    brightness "    (Job 
xxxi.  26),  nor  light  of  thickness,  i.  e.  dense  and  thick, 
which  is  like  darkness.     The  sense  is,  the  day  shall  not 
be  entirely  light  nor  entirely  dark,  i.  e.  it  shall  not  pass 
entirely  in  tranquillity  nor  in  affliction,  for  they  two  shall 
be  in  it,  and  so  he  says  afterwards,  not  day  and  not  night. 
Jonathan  has  interpreted,  "  There  shall  be  nothing  that 
day,  but  privation  and  coagulation"     [Scil.  of  the  light.]. 

7.  "  But  it  shall  be  one  day"— That  day  shall  be  a  day 
set  apart  to  the  Lord,  in  which  he  shall  be  known  by  his 
mighty  deeds  and  his  wonders,  which  he  shall  then  do. 

"  Not  day  nor  night'' — Not  entirely  day,  nor  entirely 
night ;  that  is  to  say,  it  shall  not  be  all  affliction,  nor  all 
tranquillity. 

"  But  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  light." — At  the  time 
when  the  affliction  is  the  greatest,  when  the  city  goes 
forth  into  captivity,  then  the  Lord  shall  go  forth  and  fight 
with  those  nations. 


ON       /h<  1IAKIAH,    CHAP.     XIV.  183 

8.  "And  it  shall  be  that  living  waters." — This  is  what  is 
said  in   the   prophecy  of  Joel,  "A  fountain  shall  come 
forth  from  the  house  of  the  Lord"  (Joel  iii.  18);  and,  as  is 
said  in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel,  "  And  behold,  there  ran 
out  waters"  (Ezek.  xlvii.  2.).     And  it  is  said  there,  that 
they  became  a  great  river,  as  is  written  in  that  chapter. 

"  T lie  former  sea." — The  eastern. 

"  The  hinder  sea." — The  western.  That  is  what  is  said 
in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel,  "  And  go  into  the  sea"  (Ezek. 
xlvii.  8.) 

"In  summer  and  in  winter  shall  it  be;"—\.  e.,  Their 
going  forth,  for  these  streams  shall  not  dry  up,  and  their 
waters  shall  not  fail.  And  Jonathan  has  interpreted,  "  In 
summer  and  in  winter  they  shall  go  forth."  The  wise 
man,  R.  Abraham  Aben  Ezra  Zal  has  written,  that 
summer  and  winter  are  mentioned  because  they  are  the 
dry  seasons,  for  the  days  of  summer  are  hot  and  dry,  and 
the  days  of  winter  are  cold  and  dry,  and  at  these  times 
the  rivers  fail. 

9.  "  And  the  Lord  shall  be  King."— When  the  Gentiles, 
who  come  against  Jerusalem,  see  these  wonders  that  are 
mentioned,  they  will  acknowledge  that  the   Lord  reigns 
over  all  the  earth,  and  disposes  all  sublunary  things,  and 
does  therein  according  to  his  will,  and  reverses  the  course 
of  nature  to  do  the  will  of  those  that  fear  him :  for  all 
things  are  the  work  of  his  hands. 

"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name 
one." — For  they  shall  acknowledge  that  the  Lord  is  one, 
and  there  is  no  God  beside  him,  and  thus  his  name  shall 
be  one,  for  in  the  whole  world  they  shall  not  mention  the 
name  of  another  God,  but  shall  mention  his  name  only, 
as  it  is  written  above,  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day, 
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  that  I  will  cut  off  the  names  of 
the  idols  out  of  the  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be 
remembered"  (xiii.  2).  But  the  wise  man,  11.  Abraham 
Aben  Ezra  Zal,  has  explained  this  of  the  Shem-hammr- 


184  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY 

phorash,  which  is  the  four-lettered  *  name,  and  he  has 
written  thus : — "  His  name  one,  this  is  the  glorious  name 
made  known  to  us  through  Moses  our  master,  peace  be 
upon  him,  and  it  shall  be  pronounced  then  by  the  mouth  of 
all,  as  it  is  written."  The  great  wise  man,  the  Rav,  f  Rabbi 
Moses,  has  also  explained  it  of  the  Shem-hammephorash, 
for  all  the  names  given  to  God  are  derivative  names,  taken 
either  from  the  nature  of  his  works,  or  as  an  intimation 
of  his  perfection;  and  as  these  derivative  names  are 
many,  some  of  the  children  of  men  have  thought  that 
the  blessed  God  has  as  many  attributes  as  the  number  of 
the  works  from  which  the  names  are  derived ;  and  therefore 
he  has  promised  to  communicate  to  the  children  of  men  so 
much  understanding  as  will  remove  this  doubt,  and  says, 
"  In  that  day  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name 
one ;"  that  is  to  say,  that  as  he  is  one,  so  he  shall  then  be 
called  by  only  one  name,  and  that  shall  point  out  his 
substance,  arid  shall  not  be  derivative.  Jonathan  has  also 
interpreted,  "The  kingdom  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed." 
10.  "All  the  land  shall  be  compassed  as  a  plain." — All 
the  land  which  is  round  about  Jerusalem,  which  is  now 
mountains,  as  it  is  said,  "  The  mountains  are  round 
about  Jerusalem"  (Ps.  cxxv.  2),  shall  then  be  level  as 
a  plain,  but  it  itself  shall  be  exalted,  and  high  above  all 
the  earth.  Although  it  is  at  present  higher  than  all  the 
land  of  Israel,  yet  on  account  of  the  mountains  which  are 
round  about  it,  its  height  does  not  appear ;  but  in  that 
time,  when  all  the  country  round  about  it  is  a  plain,  its 
height  above  all  the  land  will  be  visible;  as  it  is  said  in 
the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  "  The  mountain  of  the  Lord's 
house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains, 
and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills."  And  although  the 
meaning  there  is,  exalted  in  greatness  and  dignity,  it 
shall  be  fulfilled  in  both  senses. 

*  Literally,  son  of  four  letters, 
f  Moreh  Nevuchim,  part.  i.  c,  61. 


ON    ZECHARIAH,    CHAP.    XIV.  185 

"  From  Gebah  to  Rimmon." — From  thence  the  plain 
shall  commence  pbttfv^  2:25,  south  of  Jerusalem. 

nohn-j ,  "  It  shall  be  lifted  up,"  with  an  Aleph  mobile, 
instead  of  the  1  ,  the  second  radical,  like  the  Aleph  in 
pSK7  DNfT],  "a  tumult  shall  arise"  (Hos.  x.  14),  except 
that  the  Aleph  here  is  quiescent.  The  meaning  of 
is,  as  we  have  written,  that  it  shall  be  exalted,  and 
above  all  the  earth. 

"  And  inhabited  in  her  place" —  rp£inn  ,  She  shall  be 
in  her  place,  only  that  she  shall  be  lengthened  and 
widened. 

B^.Sn  "isttf . — This  is  what  is  called  in  Jeremiah  T?tt? 
nasn  ,  "  the  gate  of  the  corner/'  and  there  the  tower  of 
Hananeel  is  also  mentioned  (Jer.  xxxi.  38.). 

"  The  king's  wine-presses." — The  threshing-floor  and 
the  wine-press,  and  it  was  known  to  them  that  they  were 
near  the  outside  of  the  city.  Jonathan  has  interpreted 
"  To  the  king's  pits." 

11.  "  And  men  shall  dwell  in  it.'9 — The  meaning  is, 
They  shall  dwell  in  it  for  ever. 

" And  there  shall ' be  no  more  utter  destruction" — It 
shall  not  become  an  anathema  and  desolation  for  ever, 
according  as  it  is  said  in  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah,  "  It 
shall  not  be  plucked  up,  nor  thrown  down  any  more  for 
ever"  (Jer.  xxxi.  40.). 

12.  "  And  this  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith  the  Lord 

will  smite Their  flesh   consume  away"  —  This   is 

the  falling  off  of  the  limbs. 

"  While  they  stand  upon  their  feet."— That  it  should 
not  happen  after  sickness,  but  whilst  still  standing  upon 
his  feet,  his  flesh  and  limbs  should  melt  away. 

"  In  their  holes." — When  their  eyes  consume  away, 
their  place  will  be  a  hole.  Jonathan  has  interpreted 
"  Their  eyes  shall  melt  away  in  their  orbs."  This  plague 
is  that  which  is  said  in  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  "  And  I 
will  set  a  sign  amongst  them,  and  I  will  send  those  that 
escape  "  (Isaiah  Ixvi.  19.). 


186  KIMCHI'S   COMMENTARY 

13.  "  And  his  hand  shall  rise  up  against  the  hand  of 
his  neighbour." —  nnb^   [means]  his  hand  shall  consume 
away,  when  he  lays  hold  of  the  hand  of  his  neighbour, 
as  it  is  said,  "Their  flesh  shall  consume  away."     nV9 
is  taken  in  this  sense  in  fo¥f!  E^l^  nib^S ,  "like  as  a 
shock  of  corn  cometh  in  in  his  season  "  (Job  v.  26.).    And 
again,  bten  raptt?  bsttl,   when   the   lying   of  the   dew 
ceased"  (Exod.xvi.  14.)  ;  and  again,  nby  rrn.:f|,  "  Her 
cities  have  ceased  "  *  (Jer.  xlviii.  15) ;  and  so  Jonathan 
has   interpreted,  "  His  hand  shall  be  torn  off  with  the 
hand  of  his  fellow." 

14.  "  And  Judah  also" — The  meaning  is,  Judah  also, 
who  came  along  with  the  Gentiles,  and  made  war  with 
them  at  Jerusalem,  when  they  shall  see  the  plague  which 
the  Lord  will  send  amongst  them,  they  shall  gather  their 
wealth,  gold  and  silver,  and  apparel ;  as  it  is  said,  "  They 
shall  devour  on   the  right  hand  and  on  the  left."     The 
expression  fjB^1] »  "  shall  be  gathered,"  means  it  shall  be 
gathered   by  their  hands   first,   and   afterwards   the   in- 
habitants of  Jerusalem  shall  go  forth,  and  they  shall  also 
plunder.     Jonathan  has  interpreted,  "They  also  of  the 
house  of  Judah,"  £c. 

16.  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  every  one  that  is  left" 
— Those  that  are  left  are  they  who  have  laid  it  to  heart 
during  the  battle,  and  have  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all 
their  heart. 

"  The  King  the  Lord  of  Hosts:'— For  they  have  ac- 
knowledged him  as  king  over  all  the  earth. 

"  The  feast  of  tabernacles" — According  as  the  war 
has  been  at  that  time,  and  they  have  seen  the  wonders  of 
the  Creator,  blessed  be  He,  so  they  shall  come  from  year 
to  year  to  the  remembrance  of  that  day. 

17.  "  And  it  shall  be upon  them  shall  be  no  rain" 

— Upon   the  land  whose  inhabitants  will  not  go  up,  no 
rain  shall  descend  in  that  year. 

18.  And  if  the  family  of  Egypt that  have  no  rain" 

*  So  Kimchi  explains  these  words. 


ON    ZECHAUIAH,   CHAP.    XIV.  187 

— But  upon  them  no  rain  descends  any  year,  and  they 
have  no  need  of  rain.  If  so,  what  will  be  their  punish- 
ment ?  (Answer.)  There  shall  be  the  plague  wherewith 
the  Lord  shall  smite  all  the  heathen  who  come  up  against 
Jerusalem,  as  it  is  said,  "Their  flesh  shall  consume  away. 
"  That  come  not  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles" 
— Because  the  children  of  Egypt  come  not  up  to  keep  the 
feast  of  tabernacles,  they  shall  have  this  punishment,  that 
the  plague  shall  be  upon  them.  Jonathan  has  interpreted, 
"  The  Nile  shall  not  rise  for  them,  but  there  shall  be  upon 
them  the  plague  wherewith  the  Lord  will  smite,"  &c. 

19.  "  This  shall  be  the  sin  of  Egypt,  and  the  sin  of  all 
nations." — The  sin  of  Egypt  is  the  plague,  and  the  sin  of 
all  the  nations  is,  that  the  rain  shall  not  descend,  as  has 
been  mentioned. 

nstsn  [sin]  means  punishment,  that  is  to  say,  the 
punishment  of  sin;  and  in  this  way  it  is  said,  "The 
iniquity  of  the  Amorite  is  not  yet  full;"  that  is  to  say, 
the  punishment  of  the  iniquity.  Jonathan  has  interpreted 
it  by  n  WV13  • 

20.  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the 
horses,  Holiness  to  the  Lord." —  rfib^p   are  those  that 
hang   on  the  necks  of  the  horses,  and  they  are  scales. 
These  bells  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord,  for  they  shall 
make  of  them  pots  wherein  to  boil  in  the  house  of  the 
sanctuary.     And  as  to  these  horses,  some  interpret  that 
they  are  the  horses  which  shall  die  in  the  plague,  as  has 
been  said.     And  others  interpret  that  they  are  the  horses 
of  tiiose  who  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  keep  the  feast  of 
tabernacles,  who  will  devote  the  bells  of  their  horses  in 
order  to  make  pots  of  them,  wherein  to  boil  in  the  temple. 
And  the  meaning  of  "  upon  the  bells,"  is,  it  shall  be,  as  it 
were,  written  and  engraved  upon  them,  "  Holiness  to  the 
Lord,"  so  they  shall  be  known  that  they  are  holiness,  and 
no  man  will  take  of  them  for  himself,  not  even  one.     And 
in  the  words  of  our  rabbies,  of  blessed  memory,  it  ia  said, 
"  What  is  the  meaning  of  upon  the  nibvP  of  the  horse 


188  KIMCHl's    COMMENTARY,    &C. 

R.  Joshua,  the  son  of  Levi,  says,  the  Holy  One,  blessed 
be  He,  will  enlarge  Jerusalem,  until  the  hour  when  the 
horse  runs  arid  makes  a  shadow.  (The  meaning  is,  until 
midday,  for  then  the  horse  makes  a  shadow  underneath 
himself.)  *  R.  Eliezer  says,  the  bells  which  hang  between 
the  horses'  eyes  shall  be  holiness  to  the  Lord. 

{<  The  pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls" 
— The  meaning  is,  as  many  as  the  bowls,  and  so  Jonathan 
has  interpreted,  "Many  as  the  bowls,"  according  as  the 
bowls  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  for  sprinkling  the  blood, 
shall  be  many,  for  the  sacrificers  shall  be  many.  For  all 
who  come  up  to  keep  the  feast  of  tabernacles  shall  bring 
sacrifices. 

21.  "  Yea,  every  pot." — They  shall  increase  the  pots, 
on  account  of  the  multitude  of  the  sacrifices  ;  for  they 
shall  not  have  sufficient  in  those  which  are  in  the  house 
of  the  Lord;  but  every  pot  in  Jerusalem  and  Judah  shall 
be  holiness  to  the  Lord,  therein  to  boil  the  sacrifices  of 
the  peace-offerings.  And  when  the  Gentile  sacrificers 
shall  come,  they  shall  take  of  them,  and  cook  in  them. 

"  There  shall  be  no  more  the  Canaanite" — Jonathan 
has  interpreted  this,  "There  shall  be  no  more  he  that 
maketh  merchandise;"  as  "her  merchants,  iTO^EO,  are 
the  honourable  of  the  earth ;"  that  is  to  say,  her  rmmD  . 
That  is  to  say,  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  no  longer 
need  a  merchant  to  sell  pots  there,  or  brass  whereof  to 
make  pots ;  for  the  voluntary  devoters  of  property  will  be 
many.  But  my  lord  my  father  says,  that  this  refers  to 
the  Gibeonites,  for  it  is  said  of  them  that  they  were 
hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water  in  the  temple ;  but 
they  shall  not  be  there  any  more,  for  the  great  ones  of  the 
Gentiles  shall  serve  the  priests,  and  this  is  the  meaning 
of  the  words,  "  I  will  take  of  them  for  priests  and 
Levites." 

*  Pesachim,  fol.  50,  1.  See  also  Wagenseil.  Tela  Ig,  on  the  last 
page  of  vol.  i. 


Macintosh,  Printer,  20,  Great  New-street,  London. 


YC158780 


