hind wean 
7) 


ot 
eeerrss 
ee 


Presented to the Salvation Army 
School for Officer Training 


Central Territory, In Memory of 


COMMISSIONER SAMUEL HEPBURN 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/realsalvationwhoO0O00O0rato_k8a4 


REAL SALVATION 


WORKS BY R. A. TORREY 
Superintendent of the Moody Bible'Institute, Chicage 


Talks to Men. About the Bible and The Christ of 
The Bible. Addresses delivered to large audiences 
of mostly business men. 12mo. cloth, 75 cents, net. 


Revival Addresses, <A Series of Effective Addresses. 
1xmo, cloth, net, $1,00. 


What the Bible Teaches. (Fifth edition.) A 
thorough and comprehensive study on what the 
Bible has to say concerning the great doctrines of 
which it treats. Large 8vo, 560 pages, $2.50. 


How to Work for Christ. A compendium of effec- 
tive methods. Uniform with ‘What the Bible 
Teaches,”’ 8vo, cloth, $2.50, 


How to Promote and Conduct a Successful 
Revival. Edited by Mr. Torrey. 12mo, cloth, 358 
pages, gilt top. $1,50. 


How to Bring Men to Christ. (Nineteenth Thous- 
and.) 12mo, cloth, 75 cents, 

How to Study the Bible for Greatest Profit. 
(Fourth edition.) The methods and fundamental 
conditions of Bible study that yield the largest 
results. 12mo. cloth, 75 cents. 


How to Pray. (Twenty-second Thousand,) The 
need of prayer and the need of revival; their rela- 
tion and effect. 12mo, cloth, 50 cents; paper, 15 
cents, 


How to Obtain Fuliness of Power in Christian 


Life and Service. (Second edition.) 12mo, cloth, 
50 cents. 


The Divine Origin of the Bible. (Second edition.) 
Its authority and power demonstrated and difficul- 
ties solved, 12mo, cloth, 50 cents, 


The Gist of the Lesson (Annually.) A vest-pocket 
exposition of the Sunday-school lessons. Leather, 
net, 25 cents. Interleaved edition, gilt edges, net, 
50 cents. 

The Baptism with the Holy Spirit. (Fourth 
edition.) 12mo, cloth, 50 cents. 


A Vest-Pocket Companion for Christian Workers* 
(T'wenty-fifth Thousand.) Long j8mo, flexible 
piano net, 25 cents; interleaved, gilt edges, net 50 
cents. 


TenReasons Why I Believe the Bible is word of 
God. (Seventh Lhousand.) 16mo, paper, 15 cents, 


Ought Christians to Keep the Sabbath? (Second 
edition.) Paper, net, 10 cents, 


36065700178495 


REE SAGE 
SALVATION 


AND 


WHOLE-HEARTED 
SERVICE 


BY 
Ber Ae LORREY., 


EMM 


rg | 6 
; 


fi 


ep 
(inn fT 


New Yorr Cuicaco Toronto 


Fleming H. Revell Company 


Lonpon anp Eprnpurcu 


Copyright, 1905, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
SECOND EDITION 


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago: 63 Washington Street 
Toronto: 27 Richmond Street, W. 
London: 21 Paternoster Square 
Edinburgh: 100 Princes Street 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER 
I. WHERE ArT THOU? c 4 $ ‘ © 
II, THE APPALLING SIN OF UNBELIEF IN JESUS CHRIST . 
III, Hert: Irs CerTAIntTy, WuHaT SoRT OF A PLACE IT 
Is, AND HowTo EscapeIr . c 5 9 : 
IV. Gop’s BLocKADE OF THE RoaD To HELL. : c 
V. HEAVEN: WuaT SorT OF PLACE IT Is.—How To 
Get THERE C 2 c 
VI. THe New BirtTH 6 5 6 5 . 
VII. ReruceEs oF Lies ; 4 9 - 5 ' 
VIII. Founp Our ; A 5 : c fe . cj 
IX. ‘‘ WHO THEN CAN BE SAVED?’’. - 
X. How To Finp Rest . 5 - 
XI. Joy UnspEAKABLE AND FULL oF GLorY 
XII. THe Fearn oF Man BRINGETH ASNARE . : 
XIII. How Gop LoveD THE WorLD . ' 7 
XIV. To-pay—To-MoRROoW . 2 ; 


. He THAT WINNETH SOULS IS WISE . 


. THe Most EFFEcTIVE METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING . 


SIMPLE METHODS BY WHICH ANY ONE CAN WIN 
OTHERS TO CHRIST 5 . ° e e f 


PAGE 


124 
140 


170 


REAL SALVATION 


I 
Well eR AR i © 


“Where art thou? ”—GEN. iii. 9 


My subject to-night is the first question that God 
ever asked of man. You will find that question 
in Gen. iii. 9, “Where art thou?” God asked the 
question of Adam. Adam had sinned, and on the 
evening of that awful day of the first sin the voice 
of God in its majesty was heard rolling down the 
avenues of the Garden of Eden. Adam had often 
heard God’s voice before, and the voice of God had 
been the sweetest music to Adam up till this day. 
Adam knew no greater joy than that of glad com- 
munion with his Creator and his Heavenly Father. 
But now all was different, and as the voice of God 
was heard rolling through the Garden, Adam was 
filled with fear, and tried to hide himself. That is 
the history of every son of Adam from that day till 
this. When sin enters our hearts and our lives we 
seek to hide from God. Every sinner is trying to 
hide from the presence and the all-seeing eye of 
God. That accounts for a very large share of the 
scepticism and infidelity and the agnosticism and 


10 REAL SALVATION 


atheism of our day. It is sinful man trying to hide 
from a holy God. 

Men will give you many reasons why they are 
sceptics, many reasons why they are infidels and 
agnostics and atheists, but in the great majority of 
cases the real reason is this—men hope by the 
denial of the existence of God to hide themselves 
from the discomfort of God’s acknowledged presence. 
That accounts also for very much of the neglect of 
the Bible. People will tell you that they do not: 
read their Bibles because they have so much else 
to read, that they do not read their Bibles because 
they are not interested in the Bible, and that it is 
a dull and stupid book to them; but the real cause 
of man’s neglect of Bible study is this: the Bible 
brings God near to us as no other book does, and 
men are uneasy in the conscious presence of God, 
so they neglect the book that brings God near. This 
also accounts for much of the absenteeism from the 
house of God and its services. People will give 
you many reasons why they do not attend church; 
they will tell you they cannot dress well enough to 
attend church, will tell you that they are too busy 
and too tired to attend church; they will tell you 
that the services of God’s house are dull and un- 
interesting, but in the great majority of cases the 
reason why men and women, old and young, habitu- 
ally absent themselves from the services of God’s 
house is because the house of God brings God 
near and makes men uncomfortable in sin, and their 
desire to hide from God, more or less distinct, leads 
them to stay away from the house of God. But 
Adam did not succeed in hiding from God. Neither 


WHERE ART “CHOU? II 


will you succeed. No man ever succeeded in hiding 
from God. God said to Adam, “ Where art thou?” 
and Adam had to come from his hiding-place and 
meet God face to face, and make full declaration of 
all his sin. Sooner or later, no matter how carefully 
we have hid ourselves from God, sooner or later 
every man and woman in this building will have to 
come from their hiding-place and meet the all-holy 
God face to face, and make full declaration of just 
where they stand in His presence. 

I believe that God is putting the question of the 
text to every man and woman in this building to-night, 
to every Christian, and to every one who is not a 
Christian. “ Where art thou?” Where do you stand 
as regards spiritual and eternal things? Where do 
you stand as regards God, as regards heaven, as re- 
gards righteousness, as regards Christ, as regards 
eternity? “Where art thou?” 

Every wise man in this hall will be glad to face 
and answer that question. Every truly intelligent 
man desires to know just where he is. In business 
every wise business man desires to know just where 
he stands financially. In our country, at just this 
time of year, every careful business man takes an 
inventory of his stock-in-trade, casts up his accounts, 
finds out precisely what are his credits and pre- 
cisely what are his debits, how much his assets 
exceed or fall below his liabilities. He wants to 
know just where he stands. He may discover as a 
result of his scrutiny that he does not stand as well 
as he thought he did. He may find that he is in 
debt, when he hoped that his capital exceeded his 
liabilities. If that is true, he wants to know it in 


12 REAL SALVATION 


order that he may conduct his business accordingly. 
Many a man has made shipwreck in business through 
unwillingness to face facts and find out just where 
he stood. 

Years ago I knew in America a very brilliant 
business man, a man really gifted along certain 
lines of business enterprise. But his affairs got 
into a tangled condition. His wise business friends 
came to him and advised him to go through his 
books and find out just where he stood. They said 
to him, “If you are in a bad shape we will help 
you out.” But the man was too proud to take their 
advice; he was too proud to admit that his business 
was in a bad way, so he refused to look into it. 
He shut his teeth, set his face like a flint, and tried 
to plunge through. But instead of plunging through 
he plunged into such utter financial ruin that though 
he was, as I have said, an exceptionally brilliant 
man in some directions, he made such complete 
financial shipwreck that he never got on his feet 
again, and when he died he did not have money 
enough to pay his funeral expenses, and I had to pay 
them out of my own pocket, simply because he was 
not willing to humble his pride and face facts. 

It is just so with many of you gentlemen here 
to-night. You are too proud to face the fact that 
you are morally and spiritually bankrupt, so you are 
- going to shut your teeth, to set your face like a flint, 
and plunge through. You will plunge into utter and 
eternal ruin. 

Every man wants to know where he stands physi- 
cally, he wants to know what is the condition of his 
lungs, of his heart, of his stomach, of his nerves. He 


WHERE ART THOU? 13 


may be worse off than he thinks he is; he may think 
his heart is sound when his heart is defective. But 
if that be the case, he wants to know it, because if he 
knows that his heart is defective, he will not subject 
it to the strain that he otherwise would. Many a man 
lies to-day in a premature grave who might be doing 
good work on earth; he was not willing to find out 
what his real condition was, and act accordingly. 

Every man at sea wishes to know just where his 
vessel is, its exact latitude, and its exact longitude. 
I remember once in crossing the Atlantic Ocean 
some years ago, we had been sailing for days 
beneath clouds and through fogs. We had been 
unable to take an observation by the sun, and had 
been sailing by dead reckoning. One night I 
happened to be on deck, and suddenly there was a 
rift in the clouds just where the north star appeared 
through the rift. Word was sent below to the com- 
manding officer . . . The captain of the vessel 
hurried on deck, and I remember how he fairly laid 
across the compass, and how carefully he took an 
observation by the north star, that we might know 
exactly where we were. We are all sailing to-night 
across a perilous sea, toward an eternal port, and 
every truly intelligent man and woman in this vast 
audience will desire to know just where they are, their 
exact spiritual longitude and their exact spiritual 
latitude. 

How shall we consider this great question? 

First of all, we should consider it seriously. It 
is not a question to trifle with. It is a singular fact 
that men and women who are intelligent and sensi- 
ble about everything else, who would not think of 


14 REAL SALVATION 


trifling with the great financial questions of the day, 
or with great social problems, when they come to 
this great question of eternity, will treat it as a joke. 
I remember one night in an American city a little 
bootblack on the street was blacking my boots, and 
I put to this bootblack as he worked over my 
boots the question, “My boy, are you saved?” and 
the boy treated it as a joke. I was not surprised; 
that is all you would expect of a poor, illiterate, 
uneducated bootblack on the street. But, men and 
women, it is not what you would expect of thinking 
men and thinking women, that when you come to 
these great eternal problems of God, eternity, salva- 
tion, heaven and hell, that they should be treated 
as a joke. But alas! they are treated as a joke by 
some men and women. Any man or woman who 
trifles with questions like these plays the part of a 
fool. I don’t care what your culture is, what your 
social position is, what your reputation is for scholar- 
ship—I don’t hesitate to affirm to-night that unless 
you have faced, or will face, to-night, this great ques- 
tion of your spiritual condition, with the profoundest 
earnestness and seriousness, you are playing the part 
of a fool. 

We should consider this question honestly. There 
are many people in our day who are trying to deceive 
themselves, trying to deceive others, and trying to 
deceive God, many men who in their inmost hearts 
know that they are wrong, but are trying to persuade 
themselves that they are right, and trying to persuade 
others that they are right, and trying to persuade God 
that they are right. 

Men and women, you cannot deceive God. It will 


WHERE ART THOU? 15 


do you no good to deceive anybody else, and it is 
consummate folly to deceive yourself. The biggest 
fool on earth is the man who fools himself. Be 
honest. If you are lost, own it up; if you are on the 
road to perdition, acknowledge it; if you are not a 
Christian, say so. If you are an enemy of God, face 
the facts. If you are a child of the devil, admit it. 
Be honest, honest with yourself, honest with your 
fellow-men, honest with God. 

In the third place, we should consider the question 
thoroughly. There are many people who are honest 
enough, and serious enough as far as they go, but 
they don’t go to the bottom of things. They are 
superficial, They give these tremendous questions 
a few moments’ thought, and then their weak minds 
weary, and they say, “I guess I am all right; I will 
take my chance.” You can’t afford to guess on 
questions like these; we must have, not probability, 
but absolute certainty. It will not satisfy me to hope 
I am saved; I must know that I am saved; it will 
not satisfy me to hope I am a child of God; I must 
know that I am a child of God. It will not satisfy 
me to hope that I am bound for heaven; I must know 
that I am bound for heaven. Do not lay these ques- 
tions down until you have gone to the bottom of them, 
and know for an absolute certainty just where you 
stand. 

In the fourth place, you should consider these 
questions prayerfully. God tells us in His Word, and 
we know it from experience, that the heart is deceitful 
above all things and desperately wicked (Jer. xxvii. 
9g). There is nothing that the human heart is so 
deceitful about as about our moral and spiritual con- 


16 REAL) SALVATION 


dition. Every man and woman by nature is very 
sharp-sighted to the faults of others, and very blind 
to their own faults. What we need is to face this 
question in prayer. You will never know where you © 
stand until God shows you. Not till we pray at least 
the substance of David’s prayer, “ Search me, O God, 
and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, 
and see if there be any wicked way in me,” and God 
sheds the light of His Holy Spirit into our hearts, and 
shows us ourselves as He sees us, will we ever know 
ourselves as we really are. 

The great Scotch poet Burns, I think, never said 
a wiser thing than when he wrote: 


“O wad some power the giftie gie us, 
To see oursel’s as ithers see us! 
It wad frae monie a blunder free us, 
And foolish notion.” 


But, friends, there is something better than to 
see ourselves as others see us; that is, to see our- 
selves as God sees us. Oh! let us not leave Bingley 
Hall to-night until we see ourselves in the light of 
God’s presence, as God sees us, and that will only be 
in answer to definite and earnest prayer. 

I met one morning in an American city the pastor 
of a church of which I had formerly been pastor. As 
we met he said to me, “ Brother Torrey, I had an 
awful experience this morning.” I said, “ What was it, 
Brother Norris?” He said, “ You know Mrs. 
mentioning a member of the church of which he 
was now pastor, and of which I was formerly 
pastor. He said, “ You know she is dying. She sent 
for me to come and see her this morning. I hurried 


WHERE ART THOU? 17 


to her home. The moment I opened the door and 
entered the room she cried from her bed, ‘Oh, 
Brother Norris, I have been a professing Christian 
for forty years. I am now dying, and have just found 
out in my dying hour that I was never saved at all.’ ” 
The horror of it! to be a professing Christian for 
forty years, and never find out till your life’s at an 
end that you have never really been a Christian at 
all. Better find it out then than in eternity, but better 
find it out in the dawn of your professed Christian 
experience, better find it out to-night. 

I do not doubt that in this great crowd there is 
many a man and woman who has been a professing 
Christian for years who was never saved. After we 
had left Liverpool I read in a paper, edited by a 
clergyman in that city, a letter complaining about our 
meetings. In this letter, addressed to the public press, 
the writer said, “These men produced the impression 
that some of our Church members are not saved.” 
Well, that is the impression we tried to produce, for 
that is the truth of God. In the Church of England, 
and in the Nonconformist bodies, you will find many 
men and women who are unsaved. 

Once more we should consider this question 
Scripturally, according to the Book. God has given 
to you and me only one safe chart and compass to 
guide us on our voyage through life toward eternity. 
That chart and compass is the Bible—the book I hold 
in my hand. If you steer your course according to 
this book, you steer safely; if you steer your course 
according to your own feelings, according to the 
speculation of the petty philosopher or the theologian, 
according to anything but the clear declaration of the 


18 REAL, SALVATION 


only book of God, you steer your course to shipwreck. 
Any hope that is not founded on the clear, unmis- 
takable teaching of God’s Word is absolutely worth- 
less. Any hope founded on that book is a sure hope; 
any hope that is not built upon that book is not worth 
anything. 

In one of my pastorates a young married couple 
had entrusted to them by the Heavenly Father for 
a brief period a sweet little child. Then God in 
His infinite wisdom, and wisdom in this case which 
was not altogether inscrutable, took from these par- 
ents that little child home to Himself. Their hearts 
were deeply touched, and in the hour of their sorrow I 
went to call upon them, and taking advantage of their 
tenderness of heart pointed them to that Saviour with 
whom their child was safely at home. And they pro- 
fessed to accept that Saviour. After some days and 
weeks had passed, and the first keenness of the sorrow 
had gone, they began to drift back into the world again, 
and I called upon them to speak with them. Only the 
wife was at home. I began by talking about the little 
child, and how safe and happy it was in the arms of 
Jesus, to all of which of course she gladly assented. 
Then I turned it a little bit and said to her, “ Do you 
expect to see your child again?” “Oh,” she said, 
“certainly ; I have not a doubt that I will see my child 
again.” I said, “ Why do you expect to see your child 
again?” She said, “‘ Because the child is with Jesus, and 
I expect when I die I shall go to be with Him too.” I 
said, “ Do you think you are saved?”’ “Oh, yes,” she 
said, “I think I am saved.” I said, “ Why do you 
think you are saved?” “ Because I feel so,” she said. 
I said, “ Do you think you have eternal life?” ‘Oh, 


WHERE ART THOU? 19 


yes,” she said, “I think I have eternal life.” I said, 
“Why do you think you have eternal life?” “ Be- 
cause, she said; “J feel so.” I said, “Is that your 
only ground of hope?” She said, “That is all.” I 
said, “Your hope is not worth anything.’ That 
seemed cruel, didn’t it? but it was kind. I said, “ Your 
hope is not worth anything. Can you put your finger 
upon anything in the sure Word of God that proves you 
have everlasting life?” “No,” she said, “I cannot.” 
“Well, then,” I said, “ your hope is absolutely worth- 
less.” Then she turned on me, which she had a perfect 
right to do. It is quite right to talk back to preachers 
—lI believe in it—and she began to talk back, and she 
said, “ Do you expect to go to heaven when you die?” 
I said, “ Yes, I know I shall.” She said, “ When you 
die, you expect to be with Christ?” .“ Yes,” I said, 
“T know I shall.” She said, “ Do you think you have 
everlasting life?” “Yes,” I said, “I know I have.” 
She said, “ Can you put your finger on anything in the 
Word of God that proves you have eternal life?” I 
said, ‘‘ Yes, thank God, John iii. 36: ‘ He that believeth 
on the Son hath everlasting life.’ Now,” I said, “I 
know I believe on the Son of God, and on the sure 
ground of God’s Word I know I have everlasting life.” 

Can you put your finger upon anything in the Word 
of God that proves you are saved? If you can’t, I ad- 
vise you to stay to the after-meeting and find out if you 
are saved; if not, be saved to-night. And if you are 
saved, find out something in God’s Word that proves it. 

One thing more before I close, and that is a few sug- 
gestions that will help you in considering this question, 
“Where art thou?” First of all, Are you saved, or 
are you lost? You are one or the other, Unless you 


20 REAL SALVATION 


have been definitely saved by a definite acceptance of a 
definite Jesus, Jesus Christ, you are definitely lost. 
Just two classes—lost sinners and saved sinners. To 
which class do you belong? 

Second, Are you on the road to heaven or the road to 
hell? You are on one or the other. There are only 
two roads, as we see by the Scripture Lesson which I 
read to-night. The Lord Jesus tells us that there are 
two, and only two—the broad road that leadeth to 
destruction, and the narrow road that leadeth to life 
everlasting. Which road are youon? Are youon the 
road that leads up to God and heaven and glory, or are 
you on the road that leads down to Satan and sin and 
shame and hell? 

Some years ago one of your English sailors came 
into a Mission in New York city, and as he passed out 
of the Mission not very much affected, a worker at the 
door put a little card into his hand. On this card were 
printed these words, “ If I should die to-night I would 
go to ” The place was left blank, and underneath 
was written, “ Please fill up and sign your name.” 
The sailor, without even reading the card, put it in his 
pocket and went down to the steamer, went to his bunk 
and put that card in the edge of his bunk. In the jour- 
ney over he was thrown from the rigging and broke his 
leg. They took him down to his berth, and as he lay 
there day after day that card stared him in the face. 
He looked at it one day—‘ If I should die to-night I 
would go to——” “ Well,” he said, “if I filled that 
out honestly I would have to write, hell. If I should 
die to-night I would go to hell. But,” he said, “I 
won't fill it up that way,” and lying there in his berth 
he took Jesus Christ and filled the card—‘ If I should 


WHERE ART THOU? 21 


die to-night I would go to heaven.” He came on to 
England, went back to New York, walked into the 
Mission and handed in the card with his name signed 
to it. 

Suppose you had such a card to fill up—‘ If I should 
die to-night I would go to ——” What would 
it be? 

Again, Are you a child of God or a child of the devil? 
We live in a day in which many superficial thinkers are 
telling us that all men are the children of God. That 
is not the teaching of the Bible, and it is not the teach- 
ing of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ says distinctly in 
John viii. 44, talking to certain Jews, “ Ye are of your 
father the devil.” And we are told in 1 John iii. 10, 
“Tn this the children of God are manifest, and the chil- 
dren of the devil.” And we are told distinctly in John 
i. 12, “ As many as received Him, to them gave He 
power to become the sons of God.” Children of God, 
or children of the devil. Every one of us here to-night 
is either one or the other. Which are you? 

When I was speaking more than a year ago in the 
city of Ballarat in Australia there sat a long line of 
educated Chinamen in the meeting listening to the 
sermon. I was preaching on the same text as to-night. 
I came to the point I have come to now, and I said to 
myself, “I guess I will leave that out; that may offend 
somebody without doing any good.” But somehow or 
other God would not let me leave it out, so I put it in, 
and declared the whole counsel of God. The next 
night when I gave out the invitation, among the others 
who came to the front was almost the entire line of 
educated Chinamen, and when they got up to give their 
testimony, one of them said this, “ The reason why I 


22 REAL SALVATION 


came to-night and took Christ was this, I was here last 
night and heard Dr. Torrey say that everyone was a 
child of God or a child of the devil. I knew I was not 
a child of God, and therefore I knew I must be a child 
of the devil. I made up my mind I would be a child of 
the devil no longer, and therefore I have come forward 
to-night to take Jesus Christ.” I hope some of you 
Englishmen will have as much sense as that educated 
Chinaman. 

Again, if you are a professing Christian, what kind 
of a Christian are you? Are you a mere formal Chris- 
tian, or are you a real Christian? You know there are 
two kinds. Are you one of these men or women who 
call themselves Christians, who go to the house of God 
on the Sabbath, go to the Communion on the Sabbath, 
perhaps teach a Bible class or a Sunday School class on 
the Sabbath, but the rest of the week they are running 
around after the theatre, and the card-party and the 
dance, and all the frivolity and foolishness of the world 
—one of these Christians who are trying to hold on to 
Jesus Christ with the one hand and to the world with 
the other? Or are you a real Christian who has 
renounced the world with your whole heart and given 
yourself to Jesus Christ with all your heart, a Chris- 
tian who can sing and mean it, “I surrender all” ? 
“Where art thou?” What kind of a Christian are 
you? 

Once more, Are you for Christ, or are you against 
Him? You know you are either one or the other, 
for He says so. We read in Matt. xii. 30, in the words 
of Jesus Himself, “ He that is not with Me, is against 
Me.” Everyone here to-night is either with Jesus 
whole-heartedly, confessedly, openly, or else you are 


WHERE ART THOU? 23 


against Jesus. Which are you? For Christ or 
against Him? 

In my first pastorate, year after year, for a series 
of years, there came an outpouring of God’s spirit. 
In the second or third of these gracious outpourings 
of His Spirit a great many of the leading business 
men of the place were converted. It was a small 
place, but one of the leading business men would not 
take a stand. He was one of the most exemplary 
men in the community. Most amiable, attractive 
upright, a constant attendant at church, a member 
of my Bible class, and a member of my choir, but he 
was one of those men who wanted to please both 
sides. He was identified with friends in business, in 
the Masonic lodge, and elsewhere, who were not out- 
and-out Christians, and he was afraid that he would 
estrange them if he came out and out honestly for 
Christ. So the weeks passed by. One Sabbath morn- 
ing in the Bible school, after the Sabbath morning 
service, he was passing out of my Bible class on 
the choir platform and passed by the superintendent 
of the Sunday School, who was an intimate friend. 
They had been in the Civil War together. As he 
passed by this intimate friend he turned to him and 
said, “ George?” “ Well, what is it, Porter?” said 
the other, calling him by his first name. He said, 
“ George, when are you going to take a stand?” He 
said, “ Ring the bell.” Promptly the superintendent 
stepped up to the bell and rang it, and the congrega- 
tion going out of the building turned round in surprise, 
wondering what was going to happen. George 
stepped to the front of the platform. It was a com- 
munity where everybody knew everybody else by their 


24 REAL SALVATION 


first name, and everybody was all curiosity, and he 
said, “ Friends, I have heard it said time and time 
again during these meetings that a man must either 
be for Jesus Christ or against Him. I want you all to 
know that from this time on, Em”—his wife—‘“ and 
I are for Christ.” He decided for the whole family, 
and he did, in fact, for when they stood before the 
platform to receive the right hand of fellowship into 
the church, he stood there, and his wife, and his 
father-in-law, and his brother-in-law, and his sister-in- 
law—every member of the family that was not 
already in the fold. 

Men and women, there are many of you here 
to-night whose sympathies for years have been with 
the Church of Jesus Christ, but you have never been 
men enough or women enough to take an open stand. 
Take it to-night. Say, “As for me and my house, we 
are for Christ.” Where art thou? Put the question 
to yourself. Where art thou? 

There is one thing that makes it exceedingly im- 
portant why you should face this question, and that 
is the fact that where you are to-night will in all like- 
lihood determine where you shall spend eternity. 

A story is told of Dr. Forbes Winslow, the elder, of 
London, the eminent pathologist in diseases of the 
mind. A young French nobleman came to London 
bringing letters of introduction from leading French- 
men, including one from Napoleon III., at that time 
Emperor, introducing him to Dr. Forbes Winslow, and 
soliciting Forbes Winslow’s best offices for the young 
man. He presented his letters, and Dr. Winslow said, 
“ What is your trouble?” He said, “ Dr. Winslow, I 
cannot sleep; I have not had a good night’s sleep for 


WHERE ART THOU? 25 


two years, and unless something is done for me I shall 
go insane.” Dr. Winslow said, “ Why can’t you 
sleep?” “ Well,” said the young man, “I can’t tell 
you.” Dr. Winslow said, “Have you lost any 
money?” “No,” he said, “I have lost no money.” 
“ Have you lost friends?” “ No, I have lost no friends 
recently.” “ Have you suffered in honour or reputa- 
tion?” “ Not that I know of.” ‘“ Well then,” said the 
doctor, “ why can’t you sleep?” The young man said, 
“T would rather not tell you.” “ Well,” said Dr. 
Winslow, “if you don’t tell me I can’t help you.” 
“Well,” he said, “if I must tell you, I will. I am an 
infidel. My father was an infidel before me, and yet 
in spite of the fact that I am an infidel and my father 
was an infidel, every night when I lie down to sleep I 
am confronted with the question, ‘ Eternity, and where 
shall I spend it?’ All night that question rings in my 
ears, ‘ Eternity, and where shall I spend it?’ If I suc- 
ceed in getting off to slumber my dreams are worse 
than my waking hours, and I start from my sleep 
again.” Dr. Winslow said, “I can’t do anything for 
you.” “ What!” said the young Frenchman,” “ have I 
come all the way over here from Paris for you to treat 
me, and do you dash my hopes to the ground? Do you 
mean to tell me that my case is hopeless?”” Dr. Wins- 
low repeated, “ I can do nothing for you, but I can tell 
tell you a Physician who can,” and he walked across 
his study, took up his Bible from the centre of the table, 
opened it at Isa. liii. 5 and 6, and began to read: “ He 
was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised 
for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was 
upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed. All 
we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every 


26 REAL SALVATION 


one to his own way; and the Lord hath laid on Him the 
iniquity of us all.” And then, looking at the French- 
man, he said, “‘ That is the only Physician in the world 
that can help you.” ‘There was a curl of scorn upon 
the Frenchman’s lip. He said, “ Dr. Winslow, do you 
mean to tell me that you, an eminent scientist, believe 
in that worn-out superstition of the Bible and Christi- 
anity? 4 > Yes,” -said Dr.) Winslow, 3 L) believer 
the Bible, I believe in Jesus Christ, and believing 
in the Bible and believing in Jesus Christ has saved 
me from what you are to-day.” The young fellow 
stopped and thought, then he said, “ Dr. Winslow, 
if I am an honest man I ought at least to be willing 
to’consider it, ought I not?” “ Yes, sir.” “ Well,” 
he said, “will you explain it to me.” And the 
eminent physician became a physician of souls, sat 
down with his open Bible, and for several consecutive 
days showed the young Frenchman the way of life. 
He saw Christ as his divine, atoning Saviour, put his 
trust in Him, and went back to Paris in rest of mind 
to sleep at night. He had solved the great question of 
eternity and where he should spend it, for he would 
spend it with Christ in Glory. 

Men and women, eternity, and where will thou spend 
it? Where you will spend eternity very likely will 
depend upon where you are to-night. Let us pray. 


II 


PoE APPALLING VSIN.’ Ola UNBE- 
Bibbs IN |e SUS TCR Tork 


“He that believeth not is condemned already, because he 
hath not believed in the name of the only begotten son of 
God.”—JoHN iii. 18. 


Tue failure to put faith in Jesus Christ is not a mere 
misfortune, it is a sin, a grievous sin, an appalling sin, 
a damning sin. “ He that believeth not is condemned 
already, because he hath not believed in the name of the 
only begotten Son of God.” Men will tell you very 
lightly and laughingly, “I do not believe in Jesus 
Christ.” Indeed, men will tell you with an airy toss 
of the head, as if it were something of which they 
were quite proud, “I do not believe in Jesus Christ.” 
Few men are so foolish and so blind, or so utterly 
depraved, as to tell you laughingly or proudly, “I am 
a murderer,” or, “I am an adulterer,” or, “I am an 
habitual liar,” yet none of these is a sadder nor darker 
confession than “I am an unbeliever in Jesus Christ.” 
Believing or not believing in Jesus Christ is largely 
a matter of the will, and not altogether nor largely a 
matter of intellectual conviction. There are those 
who imagine it is wholly a matter of intellectual con- 
viction whether one believes or does not believe in 


27 


28 REAL SALVATION 


Jesus Christ. The one who thinks so is a very super- 
ficial thinker. There are very few people in this 
audience to-night who have not sufficient evidence 
that Jesus is the Son of God and the Saviour of 
those who really believe in Him, if they were only 
willing to yield themselves to the evidence. The will 
plays a very large part in what a man believes politi- 
cally, and the will plays a still larger part in believ- 
ing on Jesus Christ. The men and women who believe 
on Jesus Christ believe on Him because they will to 
yield to the truth, and to believe on Him who is so 
clearly and so abundantly proven to be God’s Son. 
Those who do not believe on Jesus Christ do not 
believe on Him because they, for the love of sin, or 
for some other reason, will not yield to the truth and 
accept Him as Saviour and Lord, who is so abun- 
dantly proven to be the Son of God. Most of you 
who do not believe on Jesus Christ know that this is 
true of yourselves. You know that your refusal to 
accept Jesus Christ is not because you have grave 
reasons for believing that Jesus Christ is not what 
He claims to be. You know it is because you do not 
want to accept Him, and surrender your life to Him 
and confess Him. Now, this is a great sin; a greater 
sin than any you can commit against any fellow- 
man, either by lying to him, or stealing from him, 
or killing him; a greater sin than falsehood, theft, 
or murder. If you will give me your honest attention, 
I will prove to you that this is so. Now don’t try 
to get away from the truth by getting out of the 
house, or whispering to someone else, or refusing to 
listen, or laughing contemptuously. If you do, you 
will do it to your own eternal ruin. If I am right 


THE APPALLING SIN OF UNBELIEF 29 


in this matter, and if the Bible is right, it is of infinite 
importance that you know it: so listen carefully and 
candidly. 

I. Unbelief in Jesus Christ is an appalling sin be- 
cause of whom Jesus Christ is, because of the dignity 
of His person. Jesus Christ is the Son of God. The 
only begotten Son of God. He is the Son of God 
in a sense that no other person is the Son of God. 
He is the effulgence of His Father’s glory, and the 
express image of His person (Heb. i. 3, R.V.). In 
Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead in a 
bodily form (Col. ii. 9). He is the One of whom 
God the Father said, “Let all the angels of God 
worship Him” (Heb. i. 6). Of Him the Father 
says that all men should honour the Son even as 
they honour the Father (John v. 23). A dignity 
attaches to the person of Jesus Christ that attaches 
to no angel or archangel, to none of the principalities 
or powers in the heavenly places. His is the name 
that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus 
every knee should bow and every tongue confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord (Phil. ii. 10). An injury 
done to Jesus Christ is then a sin of vastly greater 
magnitude than a sin done to man. A horse, a cow, 
or a mule has rights, but the rights of a horse, or a 
cow, or a mule are of very inconsiderable moment 
when compared to the rights of a man. The law 
recognises the rights of a mule, but the wilful killing 
of a mule is not regarded as so serious as the wilful 
putting out of a man’s eye. But the rights of a man, 
even of the purest, noblest, greatest of men, pale into 
more utter insignificance before the rights of that 
infinite being whom we call God, and His infinite Son 


30 REAL SALVATION 


Jesus Christ, than do the rights of a horse, or cow, 
or mule, or earthworm before the rights of man. To 
realise the enormity of a sin committed against Jesus 
Christ we must strive to get some adequate con- 
ception of the dignity and majesty of His person. 
When we do, then we see that to rob this infinitely 
glorious Person by our unbelief of that honour which 
is His due is a sin in comparison with which the rank- 
est injustice or enormity committed against man is as 
nothing. What was it that struck conviction to the 
hearts of 3000 men on the Day of Pentecost and made 
them cry out in agony, “Men and brethren, what 
must we do?” (Acts ii. 37). It was this—Peter, filled 
with the Spirit, told them who Jesus was. He said, 
“Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, 
that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have 
crucified, both Lord and Christ” (Acts ii. 36). Their 
eyes were opened at last to see the glory, the dignity, 
the majesty of the Person of Him whom they had so 
outrageously wronged. All the sins of their lifetime 
were instantly seen to be nothing in comparison with 
this sin. And if you to-night will permit God to open 
your eyes to see who Jesus is, to see the infinite dig- 
nity, glory, and majesty of His Divine Person, you 
will see that every conceivable wrong done to any 
mere man is nothing to the wrong done to this august 
Person, You may refuse to-night to let God open 
your eyes to the infinite glory of Jesus, you may 
say I don’t see that He is essentially greater than 
other men or that His rights are more sacred than 
those of Longfellow, or Lincoln, or Washington, or 
my next-door neighbour, but the day will come when 
you will have to see. The day will come when the 


THE APPALLING SIN OF UNBELIEF 31 


full glory of Jesus will be unveiled to the whole uni- 
verse, and in that day, if you will not repent now and 
receive pardon for your awful sin of unbelief in this 
glorious Son of God, you will be overwhelmed with 
eternal shame. You will cry for the rocks and the 
hills to fall upon you and hide you from the wrath 
of Him that sitteth upon the throne of the universe, 
and the wrath of the Lamb. You will wish to rush 
out from the presence of that ineffable glory even into 
eternal darkness if it shall only be away from the 
presence of Him whom you have so grievously 
wronged. On and on and on you would wish to flee, 
away, away, away, eternally away from the outraged 
Son of God. One night God gave me such a vision 
of the glory of Jesus Christ that I saw the appalling 
nature of sin against Him, this infinitely glorious One. 
Men and women, you may not have had such a vision, 
nor do you need to have it, for you know what God’s 
own testimony regarding Jesus is. That testimony is 
in His book. In the light of that testimony you may 
know, if you will, that the most grievous wrong 
against man—theft, adultery, murder—is as nothing. 
It is for this reason that our text says, “ He that be- 
lieveth on Him is not condemned; but he that believeth 
not is condemned already, because he hath not believed 
in the name of the only begotten Son of God.” 

II. In the second place, unbelief in Jesus Christ is 
an appalling sin, not only because of the dignity of 
Christ's person, but also because faith is the supreme 
thing which is His due. Jesus is worthy of many 
things. He is worthy of our admiration, He is 
worthy of our attention, He is worthy of our obe- 
dience, He is worthy of our service, He is worthy 


32 REAL SALVATION 


of our testimony, He is worthy of our love—all these 
things are His due. Not to give Him these things 
is to rob Him of His due, to rob a Being of infinite 
importance of His due. But first of all, underlying 
all else, above all else, Jesus Christ is worthy of faith; 
man’s confidence is due Jesus Christ. He is infinitely 
worthy of the surrender to Himself of the confidence 
of our intellects, our feelings, our wills. It is due to 
Him that you go to Him and say, “ Lord Jesus, thou 
infinite Son of God, I surrender to Thee my mind’s 
utter faith, the utter confidence of my heart and of 
my will.” He is worthy of that, that is His due, His 
first great due. If you refuse to do that—and many 
of you have refused to do it, week after week, and 
month after month, and year after year—you have 
robbed Jesus Christ. You have robbed this glorious 
Divine Person of His first and greatest right, robbed 
a Divine Person of His supreme due. So it is written 
in our text, “He that believeth not is condemned 
already, because he hath not believed in the name 
of the only begotten Son of God.” 

III. In the third place, unbelief in Jesus Christ is an 
appalling sin, because Jesus Christ is the incarnation 
of all the infinite moral perfections of God’s own being. 
“ God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all.” This 
infinite, absolute light which God is, this infinite holi- 
ness and love and truth, is incarnate in Jesus Christ, 
and the refusal to accept Him is the refusal of light, 
and choice of darkness. It is the clearest possible proof 
that the one who rejects Him loves darkness rather than 
light. Nothing more clearly proves what a man is at 
heart than what he chooses and what he rejects. A 
man who chooses foul books, foul pictures, foul 


THE APPALLING SIN OF UNBELIEF 33 


friends, is a foul man whatever his pretensions may 
be. A man who rejects the good, the pure, the true, 
is bad, is impure, is false. To reject Christ is to reject 
the infinite light of God, and reveals a heart that is 
so corrupt that it loves darkness rather than light. 
So it is written in our text, ‘He that believeth not 
is condemned already, because he hath not believed 
in the name of the only begotten Son of God. (And 
this is the condemnation, that light is come into the 
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, be- 
cause their deeds were evil.)” Unbelief in Jesus 
Christ is indeed an appalling sin. 

IV. Unbelief in Jesus Christ is an appalling sin, in 
the fourth place, because it is trampling under foot 
the infinite love and mercy of God. Jesus Christ is 
the supreme expression of God’s love and mercy to 
sinners. (John iii. 16: “ For God so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in Him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life.) We have all broken God’s holy laws 
and thus brought the wrath of the Holy One upon 
ourselves, but God still loves us and, instead of ban- 
ishing us for ever from His presence into the outer 
darkness where there is only agony and despair, He 
has provided a way of salvation for us. He provided 
that way at infinite cost to Himself. His saving love 
had no limit, it stopped at no sacrifice, He gave His 
best, His only begotten Son, to redeem us. All that 
we need to do to be saved is to believe on that Son, 
to put our trust in the pardoning mercy and love of 
God thus revealed. But instead of believing, and thus 
obtaining eternal life, what are many of you here 
to-night doing? You are not believing, you are reject- 


34 REAL SALVATION 


ing this love and its provision. You are despising 
and trampling under foot the salvation which God 
has so dearly purchased and offered to you. You are 
scorning and insulting infinite love and mercy. That 
is what unbelief in Jesus Christ is, it is scorn and 
contempt and insult to infinite, pardoning love. Every 
man or woman here to-night, young and old, who does 
not render the faith of their whole being to Jesus 
Christ, who does not receive Him as the Son of God, 
as their Lord and Saviour, is guilty of scorning and 
insulting the infinite, pardoning love of God. Some 
of you go even beyond that ; you try to make yourselves 
believe that Jesus is not the Son of God; you try 
to make yourselves believe that there is no need of 
an atonement; you laugh at the sacrifice the loving 
Father has made in order that you, His guilty, hell- 
deserving subjects, might be saved. Yes, there are 
men and women in this very audience that do this. 
There are thousands in Birmingham who do it. One 
sometimes almost wonders why the outraged love of 
God does not turn to blazing wrath, and why God 
does not blast the world of Christ-rejecting men with 
the breath of His mouth. Unbelief in Jesus Christ 
is an appalling sin because it is scorn and contempt for 
infinite love. 

There are other reasons why unbelief in Jesus Christ 
is an appalling sin, but here are four tremendous 
reasons and they are enough:—First, Because of the 
infinite dignity of His person. Second, Because that 
faith is His supreme due, and not to give it is to rob 
a Divine person of His supreme due. Third, Because 
Jesus Christ is the incarnation of all the infinite moral 
perfection of God’s own being. Fourth, Because it 


THE APPALLING SIN OF UNBELIEF 35 


is trampling under foot the infinite love and mercy 
of God. 

Men and women, it is as clear as day that unbelief 
in Jesus Christ is an appalling sin. Theft is a gross 
sin, adultery is worse, murder is shocking, but when 
our eyes are opened we see that all these are as 
nothing to the violation of the dignity and majesty 
of the person of Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son 
of God, by our unbelief. How God must abhor the 
sin of unbelief! How the holy angels in heaven must 
abhor the sin of unbelief! How all holy men and 
women must abhor the sin of unbelief! And of this 
awful, appalling sin, many of you whom I address 
to-night are guilty. Not only the gross infidel and 
the refined sceptic are guilty of this sin, but everyone 
who holds back from giving to Jesus the whole-hearted 
surrender of his whole self, mind, affections, and will, 
all who fail to gladly welcome Him as Saviour and 
Lord, all of you are guilty of this appalling sin to- 
night. Do not some of you cry out as did the 3000 
at Pentecost, “ What must we do?” Then it is be- 
cause of the hardness of your heart. Soften those 
hearts of stone; publicly confess your awful sin to- 
night; forsake it to-night. Don’t rest another day 
under such awful guilt. We see why it is that unbelief 
leads to eternal doom. We see why it is that no 
matter how many good things a man may do, if he 
refuses to believe in Jesus Christ he must forever 
perish. Men and women, give up your awful unbelief 
in Jesus Christ, and accept Him to-night. 


ort 


MEL LS 105 CE RAND yy vier ae 
SOR DO) APE CE isa 
LOW @FOsmE Ss Cer ie D 


“And if thy right eye causeth thee to stumble, pluck it out, 
and cast it from thee; for it is profitable for thee that one of 
thy members should perish, and not thy whole body be cast 
into hell.”—Martr. v. 29 (R.V.) 


My subject to-night is Hell: Its Certainty, What Sort 
of a Place it is, and How to Escape it. If I were to 
choose my own subject to preach upon, I certainly 
would never choose this. I always speak upon it with 
reluctance and pain. It is an awful subject, but a 
minister of God has no right to choose his own sub- 
jects. He must go to God for them, and I am con- 
fident that God wishes me to speak upon this awful 
subject to-night. I wish that I could believe that 
there was no hell, that is, I wish that I could believe 
that all men would come to repentance and accept 
Christ, and that therefore hell should be unnecessary. 
Of course, if men will persist in sin, and persist in 
the rejection of Christ, God’s glorious Son, I cannot 
but recognise that it is right that there should be a 
hell, and that that hell should continue as long as 
men persist in their sin and rejection of Christ. If 
men will choose sin, it is for the good of the universe 
and the glory of God that there should be a hell to 
confine them in, but I wish with all my heart that 
36 


HELE Tio GERLALN TY: 37 


all men would repent and thus render hell unneces- 
sary, as far as the human race is concerned. But I 
do not wish to believe it if it is not true. I would 
rather believe and preach unpleasant truth than to 
believe and preach pleasant error. And as awful as 
the thought is, I have been driven to the conclu- 
sion that there is a hell. I once honestly believed 
and taught that all men, and even the devil, would 
ultimately come to repentance, and that thus hell 
would cease to be. But I came to the place where 
I could not honestly reconcile this position with the 
teaching of Christ and the apostles. I was driven 
to this alternative—that I must either give up my 
Bible or give up my “eternal hope.” I could not 
give up the Bible. I had become thoroughly con- 
vinced that the Bible, beyond a doubt, was the very 
Word of God. I could not in honesty twist and dis- 
tort the Scriptures to make them agree with what 
I wanted to believe. As an honest man there was 
only one thing left for me to do—that was to give 
up my opinion that all men would ultimately come 
to repentance and be saved. I know perfectly well 
that if a man stands squarely upon the teaching of 
Christ and the apostles and declares it without fear, 
he will be called “narrow,” “harsh,” and “ cruel.” 
But as to being narrow, I have no desire to be any 
more broad than Jesus Christ was; as to being cruel, 
is it cruel to tell men the truth? Is it not the kindest 
thing that one can do to declare the whole counsel 
of God and to point out to men the full measure of 
their danger? Suppose that I were walking down a 
railway track, knowing that far back of me there 
was a train coming on loaded with happy excursion- 


38 REAL SALVATION 


ists—men, women, and children—full of joy and glee. 
I come to a place where I had supposed that there was 
a bridge across the chasm, but to my horror I find 
that the bridge is down. I say to myself, “I must 
go back at once as far as possible up the track and 
stop that oncoming train.” I hurry back and put forth 
my utmost effort to stop the train. I break in upon 
the people with the awful announcement that the 
bridge is down, and that they are in peril of a fright- 
ful disaster. I spoil the merriment of the evening, 
and I banish the bright thoughts from their mind 
and bring in their place horrid thoughts of imminent 
disaster. Would that be cruel? Would it not be the 
kindest thing that I could do? Suppose, on the other 
hand, when I had found the bridge down, I had said, 
“These people are so happy, I cannot bear to disturb 
their night’s light-heartedness and gaiety; that would 
be too cruel. I will sit down here and wait till the 
train comes,” and I sit down while the train comes 
rushing on and leaps unwarned into that awful 
abyss, and soon there are rising and despairing shrieks 
and groans of the wounded and mangled as they crawl 
out from among the corpses of the dead. Would that 
be kind? Would it not be the cruellest thing that 
I could do? In my country, and I suppose in yours, 
if I acted that way I would be arrested for man- 
slaughter. Friends, I have been down the track. I 
had supposed that there was a bridge across the 
chasm. I have found that the bridge is down. I 
have discovered that many of you who are now full 
of gaiety and joy are rushing on unwarned of the 
awful fate that awaits you. I have come back up the 
track to warn you, I may banish for the time being 


Helis CERTAINTY 39 


your joyfulness and merriment, but by God’s grace 
I will save you from the awful doom. Is that cruel? 
Is it not the kindest thing that I can do? I would 
much rather be called cruel for being kind, than be 
called kind for being cruel. The cruellest man on 
earth is the man who believes the stern things we are 
told in the Word of God about the future penalties 
of sin, but keeps back from declaring them because 
they are unpopular. 

I shall not give you to-night my own speculations 
about the future destiny of the impenitent. My 
speculations would be worth as much as those of 
other men, and no more. That is, they would be 
worth practically nothing at all. Man’s speculations 
on such a subject are absolutely valueless. God 
knows; we don’t; but God has been pleased to tell 
us much of what He knows about it. Let us listen 
to Him. One ounce of God’s revelation about the 
future is worth a hundred tons of man’s speculation. 
One hears on every side in these days, “I think so 
and so about the future life.” What difference does 
it make what you think? The question is, What 
does God say? 

You will find my text to-night in Matt. v. 29 
(Revised Version): “And if thy right eye causeth 
thee to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee, 
for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members 
should perish, and not thy whole body be cast into 
hell.” You will notice I take my text from the 
Sermon on the Mount, and from the Revised Ver- 
sion. I take it from the Sermon on the Mount for 
two reasons—first of all because it exactly suits 
my purpose; second, because a great many men say 


40 REAL SALVATION 


in our day that though they do not believe in the 
whole Bible, they do believe in the Sermon on the 
Mount. Well, I have taken my text from that part 
of the Bible that you all say you believe. And you 
will notice I have taken it from the Revised Version. 
I have done that for two reasons. First of all, 
because the Revised Version ‘3 in this instance a 
more accurate translation than the Authorised Ver- 
sion; and second, because a great many men say 
that the Revised Version has done away with hell. 
Well, there seems to be plenty of it left in the text. 
But, you say, that text is highly figurative. Very 
well, let it go at that. It at least means this much, 
that almost anything is better than going to hell, 
and that is my chief proposition to-night. Almost 
anything is better than going to hell. 

What I have to say will come under three heads. 
First, the certainty of hell; second, the character of 
hell; and third, how to escape hell. 


I. THe CERTAINTY OF HELL 


It is absolutely certain that there is a hell. 
There are people in this city who will tell you 
that all the scholarly ministers and clergymen have 
given up belief in the orthodox hell. That simply 
is not so. That kind of argument is a favourite 
argument with men who know that they have a 
weak case, and try to bolster up a weak case by 
strong assertion. It is true beyond a doubt that 
some scholarly ministers have given up belief in 
the orthodox hell, but they never gave it up for 
reasons of Greek or New Testament scholarship. 


HEC Sis CERTAINTY 41 


They gave it up for purely sentimental and specu- 
lative reasons. No man can go to the New Testa- 
ment to find out what it really teaches, and not to 
see how he can twist it into conformity with the 
speculations which he wishes to believe, and not find 
hell in the New Testament. 

But suppose it were true. Suppose that every 
scholarly minister had given up belief in the ortho- 
dox hell, it would not prove anything; for everybody 
that is familiar with the history of the world and the 
history of the Church knows that time and time again 
the scholars have all given up belief in doctrines that 
after all in the final outcome proved to be true. There 
were no scholars in Noah’s day except Noah that be- 
lieved there would be a flood, but the flood came just 
the same. There were no scholars in Lot’s day except 
Lot that believed that God would destroy Sodom and 
Gomorrah, but He did. Jeremiah and one friend were 
the only leading men in all Jerusalem that believed 
what Jeremiah taught about the coming destruction of 
Jerusalem under Nebuchadnezzar, but history outside 
the Bible, as well as history inside the Bible, tells us 
that it came true to the very letter, though there was 
not a scholar believed it. Every leading school of theo- 
logical thought in the days of Jesus Christ, the Phari- 
sees, the Sadducees, the Herodians, and the Essenes, 
every one of the four scoffed at Jesus Christ’s pre- 
diction about the coming judgment of God upon Jeru- 
salem, but secular history tells us that in spite of the 
dissent of all the scholars it came true just as Jesus 
Christ predicted. There was not a university in the 
world, there was scarcely a leading scholar, in the days 
of Martin Luther and Huss that had not given up 


42 REAL SALVATION 


faith in the doctrine of justification by faith, till Huss 
and Luther and their colleagues came, and they had 
to establish a new university to stand for the truth of 
God. But to-day we know that Martin Luther was 
right, and every university of Germany, France, Eng- 
land, and Scotland was wrong. So, if it were true 
that every scholarly preacher on earth had given up 
belief in the doctrine of the orthodox hell, it would 
not prove anything. 

I say that hell is certain. Why? First of all, be- 
cause Jesus Christ says so, and the apostles say so, 
God says so. If you want the words of Jesus Christ 
turn to Matt. xxv. 41, “ Then shall He say also unto 
them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, 
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his 
angels.” If you want the words of Paul the Apostle, 
turn to 2 Thess. i. 7-9, “ The Lord Jesus shall be re- 
vealed from heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming 
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, 
and that obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: 
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of 
His power.” If you want the words of the Apostle 
John, turn to Rev. xx. 15, “ Whosoever was not found 
written in the book of life was cast into the lake of 
fire.’ If you want the words of the Apostle Peter, 
turn to 2 Pet. ii. 4-9, “ God spared not the angels that 
sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; 
. . . the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of 
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of 
judgment to be punished.” If you want the words of 
the Apostle Jude, turn to Jude 14 and 15, “ The Lord 


HELE ITS CERTAIN TY: 43 


shall come with ten thousand of His holy ones, render- 
ing vengeance unto all, and convincing all the ungodly 
of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly 
done, and of all their hard sayings which ungodly sin- 
ners have spoken against Him.” If you want the 
words of Jesus Himself again, Jesus after He had 
died, after He had gone down into the abode of the 
dead, after He had come up again, after He had as- 
cended unto the right hand of His Father (He cer- 
tainly knows what He is talking about now—He has 
been there), you will find it in Rev. xxi. 8, “The 
fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and 
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and 
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake 
which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the 
second death.” 

I say that hell is certain, because Jesus Christ and 
the Apostles say so, because God says so through 
them. The only thing against it is the speculation 
of the theologians and dreams of poets. The words 
of Christ have stood the test of eighteen centuries, and 
always proved true in the final outcome every time. 
No school of theological speculation has ever stood 
the test of eighteen years, and when I have Christ on 
one side and speculative theologians on the other, it 
doesn’t take me long to decide which to believe. 

In the second place, I say that hell is certain, because 
experience, observation, and common sense prove that 
there is a hell. One of the most certain facts of every 
man’s experience is this—that where there is sin there 
must be suffering. We all know that. The second 
certain fact of observation is the longer a man con- 
tinues in sin the deeper he sinks down into sin and 


44 REAL SALVATION 


the ruin, shame, agony, and despair which are the 
outcome of all sin. Gentlemen, there are hundreds and 
thousands of men and women in Birmingham to-night 
in a very practical hell, and the hell is getting worse 
every day. You may not know how to reconcile what 
these men and women suffer with the doctrine that 
God is love, but no intelligent man gives up patent 
facts because he cannot explain the philosophy of them, 
and this is a patent fact. Now, if this process keeps 
going on, sinking ever deeper and deeper into ruin, 
shame and despair, when the time of possible repent- 
ance has passed, and it must be passed some time, what 
is left but an everlasting hell? The only thing against 
it, the dreams of poets and the speculations of would- 
be philosophers. But the speculations of philosophers 
have proved an ignis fatuus from the very dawn of 
history; and when on the one hand I have the teach- 
ing of observation, experience, and common sense, and 
on the other hand only the speculations of philoso- 
phers and the dreams of poets, it doesn’t take me very 
long to decide which to believe. But when in addition 
to the teaching of observation, experience, and com- 
mon sense in its conflict with the speculations of 
cloistered theologians we have the sure teaching of 
the Word of God, the case is settled. There is a hell. 
It is more certain that there is a hell than that when 
you lie down to sleep to-night you will wake again to- 
morrow morning. You probably will, you may not; 
but it is absolutely certain that there is a hell, and the 
next time you buy a book—I care not how skilfully it 
is written—or go to hear a lecturer—I care not how 
eloquent—and pay a shilling, or two shillings, or four 
shillings to have some man prove to you by book or 


HELESSLIS CGHARACIER 45 


lecture that there is no hell, you pay a shilling, or two 
shillings, or four shillings to be made a fool of. There 
is a hell. 


II. Tue CHARACTER OF HELL 


First of all, hell is a place of extreme bodily suffer- 
ing. That is plain from the teaching of the New Tes- 
tament. The commonest words to express the doom 
of the impenitent are “ death” and “ destruction,” con- 
stantly recurring. What do death and destruction 
mean? God has taken pains to define His terms. You 
will find His definition of destruction in Rev. xvii. 8, 
compared with Rev. xix. 20, and Rev. xx. 10. In Rev. 
xvii. 8, we are told that the beast goeth into “ perdi- 
tion.” The word there translated perdition is the 
same word which is translated elsewhere “ destruc- 
tion,” and ought to be so translated here, or else it 
ought to be translated differently in the other pas- 
sages. Now, if you can find where the beast goes you 
have God’s own definition of perdition or destruction. 
Turn to Rev. xix. 20. You will read that the beast 
and the false prophet were cast into “the lake that 
burneth with fire and brimstone.” Turn to Rev. xx. 
10, and you are told that a thousand years after the 
beast and the false prophet have been thrown in there, 
the devil also is cast in there where the beast and the 
false prophet are at the end of the thousand years, and 
they shall be “tormented day and night for ever and 
ever.” By God’s own definition, “ perdition” or ‘“ de- 
struction ” is a place in a lake of torment for ever and 
ever. Now let us look at God’s definition of death. 
You will find it in Rev. xxi. 8: “ The fearful, and un- 
believing, and the abominable, and murderous, and 


46 REAL SALVATION 


whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all 
liars, shall have their part in the lake which burneth 
with fire and brimstone: which is the second death.” 
God’s definition of “ death” is a portion in “the lake 
which burneth with fire and brimstone,” just the same 
as His definition of “ perdition.” “Oh,” but some-' 
body says, “ that is all highly figurative.” Very well, 
I don’t care to contend against that to-night, but re- 
member God’s figures stand for facts. Some people 
when they come to something unwelcome in the Bible 
will say it is figurative, and fancy that they have done 
away with it altogether. You have not done away with 
it by calling it figurative. What does the figure mean? 
God is no liar, and God’s figures never overstate the 
facts, and it means at least this much—bodily suffer- 
ing of the intensest kind. Remember furthermore, 
that in the next life we do not exist as disembodied 
spirits. All this theory so common to-day of the im- 
mortality of the soul independent of the body, where 
we float around as disembodied spirits, is Platonic 
philosophy and not New Testament teaching. Accord- 
ing to the Bible, in the world to come the redeemed 
spirit has a body, not this same body, a radically dif- 
ferent body, but still a body, the perfect counterpart of 
the redeemed spirit that inhabits it, and partaker with 
it in all its blessedness. On the other hand, the lost 
spirit has a body, not this same body, but a body the 
perfect counterpart of the lost spirit that inhabits it, 
and partaker with it in all its misery. Why, even in 
the life that now is, inward spiritual sin causes out- 
ward bodily pain. How many men to-night are suffer- 
ing the most exquisite bodily suffering because of in- 
ward sin. I once went to a hospital where there were 


HELI TiS CHARACTER 47 


upwards of 1200 people suffering the most awful 
bodily suffering, and the physician in charge told me 
that every one of the upwards of 1200 were brought 
there by one specific sin. Friends, hell is the hospital 
of the incurables of the universe, where men exist in 
awful and perpetual pain. 

2. But while there is physical pain, this is the least 
significant feature of hell. Hell is a place of memory 
and remorse. You remember, in the picture which 
Christ has given us of the rich man in hell, that Abra- 
ham said to the rich man, “‘ Remember.” The rich 
man had not taken much that he had on earth with him, 
but he had taken one thing—he had taken his memory. 
You men and women that go on in sin, and spend 
eternity in hell, you won’t take much with you that 
you own to-night, but you will take one thing—you 
will take your memory. You men will remember the 
women whose lives you have blasted and ruined, and 
you women will remember the lives squandered in 
frivolity and fashion and foolishness, when you might 
have been living for God. You will remember the 
Christ that you rejected, and the opportunities for sal- 
vation that you despised. There is no torment known 
to men like the torment of an accusing memory. I 
have seen in my office in Chicago strong men weeping 
like children. What was the matter? Memory. I 
have seen one of the strongest, brainiest men I ever 
knew throw himself upon the floor of my office and roll 
and sob and groan and wail. What was the matter? 
Memory. I have had men and women hurry up to me 
at the close of a service with pale cheeks, with drawn 
lips, with haunted eyes, and beg a private conversa- 
tion. What was the matter? Memory. You will take 


48 REAL SALVATION 


your memory with you; and the memory and the con- 
science that are not set at peace in the life that now 
is by the atoning blood of Christ and the pardoning 
grace of God never will be. Hell is the place where 
men remember and suffer. 

One day Mr. Moody asked me to go out riding; and 
after we had ridden a little way he drove into a corn- 
field, went out to the middle of the lot, and then he 
said, ‘This is where it happened.” I said, “ This is 
where what happened?” He said, “ Don’t you re- 
member the last time I was in Chicago that I told you 
a certain story, and you said the next time you came to 
Northfield you wanted me to show you just where it 
happened?” He said, “ This is where it happened.” 
iWhat was the story? When Mr. Moody was a mere 
lad, one day he was hoeing corn—maize, as you call 
it—across a field with an elderly man. Suddenly the 
man who was hoeing stopped hoeing, and commenced 
hitting a stone with the hoe. Mr. Moody looked at 
him. The tears were rolling down his cheeks, and he 
said, “ Dwight, when I was a lad like you I left home to 
make a living for myself.” His house was up on the 
hill; Mr. Moody pointed to the house as he spoke. “ As 
I came out of the front gate yonder my mother handed 
me a Testament and said, ‘My boy, “ Seek first the 
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these 
things shall be added unto you.”’” He said, “I went 
to the next town. I went to church on the Sabbath. 
The minister got up to preach. He announced his text, 
Matt. vi. 33, looked right down at me, and pointed his 
finger at me and said, ‘ Young man, “ Seek first the 
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these 
things shall be added unto you.”’” He said, “I went 


HELE Tis ICHARACTER 49 


out of the church; I had an awful struggle! it seemed 
as if the minister were talking at me. I said, ‘No; I 
will get fixed in life first, and then I will become a 
Christian.’” He said, “I found no work there. I 
went to another town; I found employment. I went 
to church, as was my custom, Sunday after Sunday. 
After I had been going some Sundays the minister 
stood up in the pulpit, announced his text, Matt. vi. 
33, ‘Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His right- 
eousness, and all these things shall be added unto 
you.” And he said, “‘ Dwight, he seemed to look right 
at me and point his finger right at me, and said, ‘ Young 
man, “ Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His 
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto 
yor. 9 We vsaid, “I sot up ands went outiof 
church. I went to the cemetery back of the church. 
I sat down upon a tombstone. I had an awful fight, 
but at last I said, ‘ No, I will not become a Christian 
till I get settled in life.” And he said, “ Dwight, 
from that day to this the Spirit of God has left me, and 
I have never had the slightest inclination to be a 
Christian.’ ” Mr. Moody said, “I did not understand 
it then. I was not a Christian myself. I went to Bos- 
ton and was converted. Then I understood it. I wrote 
to my mother and asked her what had become of him, 
and she wrote me: ‘ Dwight, he has gone insane, and 
they have taken him to the Brattleboro Insane Asy- 
lum.’ I went home to Brattleboro, and called on him 
there. He was in his cell, and as I went into his cell 
he glared at me, pointed his finger at me, and said, 
‘Young man, “ Seek ye first the kingdom of God and 
His righteousness,” ’ and I could do nothing with him. 
I went back to Boston. After some time I came home 


50 REAL SALVATION 


again. I said to my mother, ‘ Where is Mr. now?’ 
‘Oh!’ she said, ‘ he is home, but he is a helpless imbe- 
cile.’ I went up to his house. There he sat rocking 
back and forth in a rocking-chair, a white-haired man; 
and as I went into the room he pointed his finger at 
me and said, ‘ Young man, “Seek first the kingdom 
of God and His righteousness.”’ Gone crazy with 
memory. 

Men, hell is the madhouse of the universe, where 
men and women remember. 

3. Again, hell is a place of insatiable and torment- 
ing desire. You remember what Jesus tells us of 
Dives, the rich man in hell. The rich man said, 
“Send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water 
to quench my thirst for I am in torment, in agony, 
anguish in this flame.” What is it a picture of? 
This, men; there is another thing you will carry 
into the next world with you: you will carry into the 
next world the desires that you build up here. Hell 
is the place where desire and passion exist in their 
highest potency, and where there is nothing to gratify 
them. You men and women that are living in sin, 
living in worldliness, what are you doing? You are 
developing in your soul passions, desires, until they 
become regnant, for which there is no gratification in 
that world to which you are going. Happy is that 
man or woman who sets his affection on the things 
above in the life which now is, rather than cultivating 
desires and aspirations for which there is no satisfac- 
tion in the world to which we are going. Wretched 
indeed is that man or woman who cultivates into rul- 
ing powers, passions and desires for which there is no 
gratification in the world to which we are going. 


HEE iis GHARAGTER 51 


4. In the fourth place, hell is a place of shame. 
Oh, the awful heart-breaking agony of shame. In 
America, in New York State, we had a bank cashier 
in a bank, who was in a hurry to get rich, so he 
appropriated the funds of the bank and invested them, 
intending to pay them back. But his investment was 
a failure. For a long time he kept the books so as to 
blind the bank examiner, but one day when the bank 
examiner was going over the books he detected the 
embezzlement. He called in the cashier—he had to 
acknowledge his defalcation. He was arrested, tried, 
and sent to the State’s prison. He had a beautiful 
wife and lovely child, a sweet angel-like little girl. 
Some time after his arrest and imprisonment the little 
child came home sobbing with a breaking heart. 
“Oh,” she said, “ mother, I can never go back to that 
school again. Send for my books.” ‘ Oh,” she said, 
“my darling,” thinking it was some childish whim, 
“of course you will go back.” “No,” she said, 
“mother, I can never go back. Send for my books.” 
She said, “ Darling, what is the matter?”’ She said, 
“ Another little girl said to me to-day, ‘ Your father 
is a thief.’” Oh, the cruel stab! The mother saw 
that she could not go back to school. The wound was 
fatal. That fair blossom began to fade. A physician 
was called in, but it surpassed all the capacities of his 
art. The child faded and faded, until they laid her 
upon her bed, and the physician said, “ Madam, I 
must tell you this is a case in which I am powerless ; 
the child’s heart has given way with the agony of the 
wound. Your child must die.” The mother went in 
and said to her dying child, “ Darling, is there any- 
thing you would like to have me do for you?” “ Oh,” 


52 REAL SALVATION 


she said, “ yes, mother, send for father. Let him come 
home, and lay his head down on the pillow beside 
mine as he used to do.” Ah! but that was just what 
could not be done. The father was behind iron bars. 
They sent to the governor of the State, and he said, “I 
have no power in the matter.” They sent to the war- 
den of the prison. He said, “I have no power in the 
matter.” 

But hearts were so touched that they got the judge 
and every member of the jury and the governor, 
and they got up a petition, and they made arrange- 
ments whereby the father was suffered to come home 
under a deputy-warden. He reached his home late 
at night, entered his house. The physician was wait- 
ing. He said, “I think you had better go in to- 
night, for I am afraid your child will not live till 
morning.” The father went to the door and opened 
it. The child looked quickly up. “Oh,” she said, 
“T knew it was you, father. I knew you would come. 
Father, come and lay your head beside mine upon the 
pillow just as you used to do.” And the strong man 
went and laid his head upon the pillow, and the child 
lovingly patted his cheek, and died. Killed by shame. 
Men and women, hell is the place of shame, where 
everybody is dishonoured. 

5. Hell is a place of vile companionships. Do you 
want to know the society of hell? Read Rev. xxi. 8: 
“The fearful, and unbelieving and the abominable, 
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and 
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake 
which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is the 
second death.” That is the society of hell. “Oh,” 
but somebody says, “many who are brilliant and 


HELL: ITs CHARACTER 53 


gifted are going there.” It may be, men, but listen. 
How long will it take the most gifted man or woman to 
sink in such a world as that? Come to Chicago. I 
can go to the lowest dives and pick you out men who 
were once physicians, lawyers, congressmen, college 
professors, leading business men, and even ministers 
of the gospel, but now living with thugs, whore- 
mongers, and everything that is vile and bad. How 
did they get there? They began to sink. 

In 1864 when George B. McClellan was nominated 
on the Democratic ticket for President of the United 
States, my father was one of the delegates to the 
Presidential Convention in Chicago. We then lived 
in New York. He took us children with him nearly 
to the Convention, left us in a quiet country town in 
Michigan, went on to the Convention, and then came 
back for us, and we started east. The train was filled 
with leading politicians. When we got to Albany we 
left the train, and got on a Hudson River steamboat. 
This steamboat was filled with the leading Democratic 
politicians, and we had a political meeting for hours 
that evening. Man after man of our most gifted 
orators stood up and spoke to the crowd, but there 
was one man who stood there who eclipsed everyone 
else. As that man stood there everybody was spell- 
bound by the power of his eloquence, everybody was 
electrified, and I—a boy of eight years of age—was 
carried away with the marvellous eloquence of this 
man. Years passed. One day I went out on our 
front lawn. I saw something lying on our lawn there, 
all covered with vomit, sleeping heavily, snoring like 
an overfed hog. When I went up to it I found it was 
a man, and alas! it was the very man who that night 


54 REAL SALVATION 


had carried by storm all on that steamer. He had gone 
down. He died in a madhouse through drink and 
tobacco. 

During our World’s Fair there was a Women’s 
Board appointed to receive the dignitaries of the Old 
World, to receive the members of the nobility, and the 
members of the royalty of Spain and other countries. 
A woman stood right near Mrs. Potter Palmer, who 
was the ruling one of the Women’s Commission, daz- 
zling people by her beauty and by her wit. Just before 
I left Chicago to go round the world some friends of 
mine were down in the slums of Chicago hunting for 
poor forlorn ones that they might help, and they found 
a poor creature with nails grown like a bird’s claws, 
long tangled hair, twisted full of filth, face that had 
not been washed for weeks, clad in a single filthy gar- 
ment—a wreck! And when they began to talk with 
her they found it was that woman who had stood so 
near Mrs. Potter Palmer during all the honours of 
the World’s Fair. She had gone down through 
cocaine. 

6. One thing more. Hell is a world without hope. 
There are men who tell you that the word aionios, 
translated “ everlasting,’ never means everlasting; but 
when they tell you so they either have not looked into 
the matter—which is the most likely—or else they tell 
you a deliberate falsehood. It is true it does not neces- 
sarily mean everlasting. Whether it does or not has 
to be determined by the context. In Matt. xxv. 46, 
we read, “ These shall go away into everlasting life, 
and these into everlasting punishment,” and if it means 
everlasting in one part of the verse, by every known 
law of exegesis it must mean the same in the other 


PEL eG Ve pais Wir oCAPE IT y ss 


part of the verse, and nobody questions that it does 
mean everlasting in the one case. 

Furthermore, there is another expression, “ Eis tous 
aidnas ton aidndn” (‘ Unto the ages of the ages’’), 
used twelve times in one book, eight times of the 
existence of God and the duration of His reign, once 
of the duration of the blessedness of the righteous, 
and in every rémaining instance of the punishment of 
the beast, the false prophet, and the impenitent—the 
strongest known expression for absolute endlessness. 
Men, I have hunted my Bible through for one ray of 
hope for men that die impenitent, just a ray of hope 
that can be called such when the passage is properly 
interpreted by the right laws of exegesis, and I have 
failed after years of search to find one. I am familiar 
with the passages men quote, but they will not bear the 
burden placed upon them when carefully interpreted 
in their context with an honest attempt to discover 
what they really mean, and not to make them fit a 
theory. The New Testament does not hold out one 
ray of hope for men and women that die without 
Christ. Anyone who does, dares to do what God has 
not done. “For ever and ever” is the never-ceasing 
wail of that restless sea of fire. Such is hell, a place 
of bodily anguish, a place of agony of conscience, a 
place of insatiable torment and desire, a place of evil 
companionship, a place of shame, a place without 
hope. 


III. How SuHatt WE Escape Ir? 


That may be answered in a word. There is but 
one way to escape hell, that is, by the acceptance of 
Jesus Christ as your personal Saviour, surrender to 


56 REAL SALVATION 


Him as your Lord and Master, open confession of 
Him before the world, and a life of obedience demon- 
strating your faith. The Bible is perfectly plain about 
that. Turn to Acts iv. 12: “ There is none other name 
under heaven given among men, whereby we must be 
saved.” John iii. 36: “ He that believeth on the Son 
hath everlasting life, he that believeth not on the Son 
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth upon 
him.” Matt. x. 32, 33: “ Whosoever therefore shall 
confess Me before men, him will I confess also before 
My Father which is in heaven. But whosoever shall 
deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My 
Father which is in heaven.” 2 Thess. i. 7-9: “The 
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His 
mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on 
them that know not God and that obey not the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 
and from the glory of His power.” 

So the whole question is this, Will you accept Christ 
to-night? Men and women, hell is too awful to risk 
it for a year, it is too awful to risk it a month, it is too 
awful to risk it a week, it is too awful to risk it a day. 
Your eternal destiny and mine may be settled inside of 
twenty-four hours. It is too awful to risk it an hour, 
it is too awful to risk it till I have finished my sermon. 
Take Christ now. I know what some of you are say- 
ing, or what the devil is whispering to you. He is 
saying, “Don’t be a coward, don’t be frightened 
into repentance.” Men, listen. Is it cowardice to 
be moved by rational fear? Is it heroism to rush 
into unnecessary danger? Suppose when I go out 
of this building to-night I looked up and there 


HELL: HOW, SHALL WE ESCAPE IT? 57 


was a building on fire. A man is sitting at an 
upper window reading a book carelessly. I see his 
peril, and I lift my hand to my mouth and say, 
“Flee for your life, the house is on fire.’ Then 
suppose that man should lean out of the window and 
shout back, “I am no coward. You can’t frighten 
me.’ Would he be playing the hero, or would he be 
playing the fool? 

One night I went to see my parents at the old home. 
They are both in heaven now. As I stepped off the 
one train I stepped on to another track. Unknown to 
me an express train was coming down that other 
track. A cabman of the town saw my peril, put his 
hand to his mouth, and cried, “ Mr. Torrey, there is 
a train coming, get off the track!” I did not shout 
back, “I am no coward, you can’t scare me.” I was 
not such a fool. I got off the track, or I would not be 
here to-night to tell the story. Men and women, you 
are on the track; up the track I hear the not far distant 
thunder and rumble of the wrath of God as it comes 
hurrying on, and I cry to-night, “ Get off the track!” 
Take Christ to-night! Take Him now! If you are 
reasonable, you will. If you don’t you will not be 
playing the hero, but playing the fool. | 


IV 


GOD sS BLOCKADE OL 1 I hahaa 
‘LOR eT 


“The Lord is not willing that any should perish, but that 
all should come to repentance.’—2 PET, iii. 9. 


IF any man or woman in this audience is lost, it won’t 
be God’s fault. God does not wish you to be lost. 
God longs to have you saved. If God had His way, 
every man and woman in this audience would not 
only be saved some time, but saved to-night. God is 
doing everything in His power to bring you men and 
women to repentance. Of course, He cannot save 
you if you will not repent. You can have salvation if 
you want to be saved from sin, but sin and salvation 
can never go together. There are people who talk 
about a scheme of salvation whereby man can continue 
in sin and yet be saved. It is impossible. Sin is 
damnation, and if a man will go on everlastingly in 
sin, he will be everlastingly lost. But God is doing 
everything in His power to turn you out of the path of 
sin and destruction into the path of righteousness and 
everlasting life. God has filled the path of sin—the 
path that leads to hell—with obstacles. He has made 
it hard and bitter. A great many people are saying 
to-day “the Christian life is so hard.” It is not. 
“ Christ’s yoke is easy, and His burden is light ” (Matt. 
ii. 30). God tells us in His Word, “ The way of trans- 
58 


BLOCKADE OF THE ROAD TO HELL 59 


gressors is hard” (Prov. ii. 15). God has filled it 
full of obstacles, and you cannot go on in it without 
surmounting one obstacle after another. I am to talk 
to you to-night about some of the obstacles that God 
has put in the path of sin and ruin. 

The first one is the BisteE. You cannot get very 
far in the path of sin without finding the Bible in your 
way. The Bible is one of the greatest hindrances to 
sin in the world. With its warnings, with its invi- 
tations, with its descriptions of the character and con- 
sequences of sin, with its representations of righteous- 
ness, its beauty and its reward, with its pictures of 
God and God’s love, the Bible always stands as a great 
hindrance to sin. It makes men uneasy in sin. That 
is the reason many men hate the Bible; they are deter- 
mined to sin, and the Bible makes them uneasy in sin, 
so they hate the book. 

Men will give you a great many reasons why they 
object to the Bible, but in ninety-nine cases out of a 
hundred, if you should trace men’s objections to the 
Bible home, you would find the reason they hate the 
Bible is because it makes them uneasy in their sin. 
Men sometimes say to me, “I object to the Bible 
because of its filthy stories,” but when I look into their 
lives I find that their lives are filthy, and that their 
real objection is not to filthy stories, of which there 
are none. Stories of sin there are; stories that paint 
sin in its true colours; stories that make sin hideous 
—and their objection is not to filthy stories, but because 
the Bible makes them uneasy in their filthy lives. This 
is why you hate it. The Bible makes it hard for you 
to go on in sin. How often a man has been turned 
back from the path of sin by a single verse in the 


60 REAL SALVATION 


Bible. Hundreds of men have been turned out of the 
path of sin by Rom. vi. 23, “ The wages of sin is death, 
but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ 
our Lord.” Thousands of men have been turned out 
of the path of sin by Amos iv. 12, “ Prepare to meet 
thy God.” Tens of thousands of men have been 
turned out of the path of sin by John iii. 16, “ For God 
so loved the world, that he gave His only begotten 
Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life.’ And John vi. 37, 
“ Him that cometh to Me, I will in no wise cast out.” 

Several years ago a man came into our church in 
Chicago, who had not been in a house of worship for 
fifteen or sixteen years. He was a rampant infidel. 
I don’t know why he came in that night. I suppose 
because he saw the crowd coming, and was curious to 
know what was going on. He sat down, and I began 
to preach. In my sermon, I quoted John vi. 37, “ Him 
that cometh to Me, I will in no wise cast out.” It 
went like an arrow into that man’s heart. When the 
meeting was over he got up and went out, and tried 
to forget that verse, but could not. He went to bed, 
but could not sleep. “ Him that cometh to Me, I will 
in no wise cast out” kept ringing in his mind. The 
next day it haunted him at work, and the next and the 
next, and for days and weeks that verse haunted him, 
but he was bound not to come to Christ. He came 
back to the street where our church stands, walked up 
and down the sidewalk, stamped his foot, and cursed 
the text, but he could not get rid of it. Six weeks 
passed and he came into our prayer meeting, and stood 
up and said, “ Men and women, I was here six weeks 
ago and heard your minister preach. I heard the text, 


ve 


BLOCKADE OF THE ROAD TO HELL 61 


John vi. 37, and I have tried to forget it, but it has 
haunted me night and day. I have walked up and 
down the sidewalk in front of your church. I have 
stamped on the sidewalk and cursed the text, but I can’t 
get rid of it. Pray for me.” And we did, and he was 
saved. One text from God’s Word turning him out of 
the path of sin and ruin. 

The second obstacle that God has put in the path 
of sin is a mother’s holy influence and a mother’s 
teaching. 

How many hundreds of men and women there are 
here to-night who are not yet Christians, who have 
tried to be infidels, tried to plunge down into sin, but 
your mother’s holy influence and your mother’s Chris- 
tian teaching won't let you go the way you wish to. 
Sometimes it is years afterward that a mother’s teach- 
ing does its work. We had in America a young fel- 
low who went west to Colorado in the mining times. 
He worked in the mines during the day and gambled 
at night, as so many miners do, but he spent more 
money gambling than he made in the mines. One 
night he was at the gaming-table. He lost his last 
cent. Then he used some of his employer’s money 
and lost that. He felt he was ruined. He arose from 
the gaming-table, went up into the mountains, drew his 
revolver and held it to his temple, and was about to 
pull the trigger, when a word that his mother had 
spoken to him years before came to his mind, “ My 
son, if you are ever in trouble, think of God.” And 
there, standing in the moonlight, with a revolver 
pressed against his temple, and his finger upon the 
trigger of the revolver, and the revolver cocked, he 
remembered what his mother had said, and dropped 


62 REAL SALVATION 


on his knees, and cried to God and was saved. Turned 
out of the path of perdition by a mother’s teaching. 

Another obstacle that God has put in the path of sin 
and ruin is a mother’s prayers. Oh, men, in the des- 
perate hardness of our hearts we often trample our 
mother’s teaching under foot, but we find it very hard 
to get over her prayers. How often at the last moment 
a man is saved by his mother’s prayers. I have in my 
church in Chicago a man who stood outside the taber- 
nacle in the old days with a pitcher of beer, and as 
the people came out of the meeting he offered them 
drink out of that pitcher of beer. He was hard and 
desperate and wicked. He had a praying mother in 
Scotland. One night when he went home from the 
meeting where he had caused trouble, in the middle of 
of the night, in answer to the prayers of a godly mother 
in Scotland, he was awakened and saved without get- 
ting out of bed. He came back to Scotland to see 
his mother. He had a brother who was a sailor in the 
China seas, and the mother and the saved son knelt 
down and prayed for the wandering boy, and that very 
night while they prayed the Spirit of God came down 
upon that sailor and he was saved, and afterwards 
became Dr. Morrison, a missionary to India—saved 
by a mother’s prayers. 

I stand here to-night a saved man, because when 
I was rushing headlong in the path of sin and ruin, 
my mother’s prayers arose and I could not get over 
them. I used to think that nobody had anything to 
do with my salvation, no living being, for I was 
awakened in the middle of the night. I had gone to 
bed with no more thought of becoming a Christian than 
I had of jumping over the moon. In the middle of 


BLOCKADE OF THE ROAD TO HELL 63 


the night I jumped out of bed and started to end my 
miserable life, but something came upon me, and I 
dropped on my knees, and in five minutes from the 
time I got out of bed to take my life I had surrendered 
to God. I thought no man or woman had anything to 
do with it, but I found out a woman had—my mother 
—427 miles away praying, and while I had gotten over 
sermons and arguments and churches, and everything 
else, I could not get over my mother’s prayers. Do you 
know why some of you men are not in hell to-night? 
Your mother’s prayers have kept you out of hell. 

Another obstacle is the sermons we hear. How 
many thousands and tens of thousands of men are 
turned back from sin to God by sermons that they 
hear or read. Sometimes the sermon does its work 
years afterwards. 

I remember once, in my first pastorate, I prepared 
a sermon on the parable of the Ten Virgins. There 
was one member of my congregation who was very 
much on my heart—I prayed that that woman might 
be saved by that sermon. I went and preached that 
sermon. I fully expected to see her saved by that ser- 
mon, but when I gave out the invitation she never made 
a sign. I went home and did not know what to make 
of it. I said, “I prayed for her conversion by that 
sermon and fully expected her conversion, and she is 
not converted. I don’t know what to make of it.” 
Years afterwards, when J had gone to another pas- 
torate, I heard that this woman was converted. I 
revisited the place and called upon her, and said, “I 
am very glad to hear you have been converted.” She 
said, ‘ Would you like to know how I was converted? ” 
I said I would. “Do you remember preaching a ser- 


64 REALM SAL VALION 


mon years ago on the Ten Virgins? When you 
preached that sermon I could not get it out of my 
mind. I felt I must take Christ that night, but I would 
not, and that sermon followed me, and I was converted 
years after by that sermon.’ The sermon I was sure 
she was going to be converted by. But I did not see it 
for years. 

Another obstacle is a Sunday School teacher's 
influence and teaching. How many it brings to Christ! 
How many in this audience to-night were brought to 
Christ by the teaching of a faithful Christian man or 
woman in the Sunday School? I want to say to you 
Sunday School teachers that a faithful Sunday School 
teacher is one of God’s best instruments on earth for 
the salvation of the perishing. 

In Mr. Moody’s first Sunday School in Chicago he 
had a class of very unruly girls—nobody could manage 
them—but finally he found a young man who did 
manage them. One day this young man came into Mr. 
Moody’s shop (it was before Mr. Moody went out of 
business) and said, “ Mr. Moody ” (and he burst into 
tears). Mr. Moody said, “ What is the matter? ” “ The 
doctor says I have consumption, and that I must go 
to California at once or die,” and he sobbed as if his 
heart would break. Mr. Moody tried to comfort him, 
and said, “ Suppose that is so, you have no occasion 
to feel so bad. You are a Christian.” ‘It is not that, 
Mr. Moody; I am perfectly willing to die, I am not 
afraid to die, but here I have had this Sunday School 
class all these years and not one of them saved, and I 
am going off to leave them, every one unsaved,” and 
he sobbed like a child. Mr. Moody said, “ Wait, I will 
get a carriage and we will drive around and visit them, 


BLOCKADE OF THE ROAD TO HELL 65 


and one by one you can lead them to Christ.” He 
took the pale teacher in the carriage and they drove 
around to the homes of the girls, and he talked to them 
about Christ until he was so tired that he had to be 
taken home, and the next day they went out again, and 
they went out every day until every one of these women 
but one was saved. Then they met for a prayer meet- 
ing before he went away. One after another led in 
prayer, and at last the one unsaved girl in the whole 
company led in prayer too and accepted Christ. He 
left by the early train the next morning, and Mr. 
Moody went down to the train to see him off. As 
they were waiting, one by one the girls dropped in, 
without any pre-arrangement, until every one of the 
young women was on the platform. He spoke a few 
words of farewell to them, and as the train pulled out 
of the station he stood upon the back platform of the 
car with his finger pointing heavenward, telling his 
Sunday School class to meet him in heaven. 

A kind word or an act God often throws as an 
obstacle in the path of sin. A lady friend of mine 
was standing in a window looking out on Bleecker 
Street, New York. A drunkard came down the street. 
He had been a man in high circumstances; he had 
been the mayor of a Southern city, but had gone down 
through drink, and was now a penniless drunkard on 
the streets of New York. He had made up his mind 
to commit suicide. He started for the river, but as he 
was going down Bleecker Street he thought, “I will 
go into a public-house and have one more drink. I 
have spent a lot of money in that public-house, and I 
can certainly stand the man off for one drink.” He 
went in and asked for a drink, and told the man he 


66 REAL SALVATION 


had no money to pay for it, and the man came around 
from behind the bar and kicked him into the gutter— 
you are welcome, men, just as long as you have money 
—kicked him into the gutter. My friend, looking out 
of the window, saw the poor wretch picking himself up 
out of the gutter, and she crossed over and wiped the 
mud off with her handkerchief, and said, “ Come over 
in there. It is bright and warm and you will be wel- 
come,’ and the poor wretch went over and sat down 
’ behind the stove. The meeting began, and one after 
another gave their testimony, and when the meeting 
was over that lady came and spoke to him about his 
soul, and his heart was touched and he was saved. 
He got one position and then a better one, and finally 
was made manager of one of the largest publishing 
houses in the city of New York. One day he came to 
my friend, and said, “I have some friends down at a 
hotel; I want you to meet them.” She went to the 
hotel, and he introduced her to a fine-looking, middle- 
aged woman and a fine-looking young lady, and said, 
“This is my wife and daughter ”—hbeautiful, refined, 
cultured ladies whom he had left and gone down to the 
very verge of hell; but a kind act and a word of invi- 
tation to Christ had turned him out of the path to per- 
dition, when he was within one step of hell, into the 
path that leads to glory. Oh, let us go as the mission- 
aries of God’s grace and block the path of sinful men 
and women with kindly deeds, and thus turn them to 
righteousness and to God. 

Another obstacle that God puts in the path of sin 
and ruin is the Holy Spirit of His work. How strange 
itis. You and I have experienced it. When we were 
right in the midst of a carousal a strange feeling came 


BEOUCKADE OF “THE ROAD TO HELL 67 


into our heart, an unrest, a dissatisfaction with the 
life we were living, a longing for something better, 
memories of home, church, mother, Bible, and God. 

A man one night was playing cards at the table. He 
was a man wholly given up to the world, belonged to 
one of your noble families, not a nobleman himself, but 
connected with members of the nobility—a wild, reck- 
less, English spendthrift, and there he sat playing 
cards, and suddenly the voice of God’s Spirit spoke in 
his heart. He thought he was about to die. He 
sprang up from the table, threw down his cards, rushed 
to his room. There was someone in the room. He 
thought at first, “It won’t do to pray while the maid 
is in the room.” But he was so much in earnest that 
he did not mind anybody. He dropped down by his 
bed and called upon God for Christ’s sake to forgive 
his sins. 

That man was Brownlow North, who did such a 
great work for God in Ireland and Scotland in ’59 
and ’60. Oh, friends, listen. Last night as you were 
in some den of infamy, there came into your heart 
a wretchedness, a sense of self-disgust, a longing for 
something better, a calling to a purer life—what 
was it? God’s Spirit. As you sit in this place here 
to-night (all over this building) there is a stirring in 
your heart, and you are saying to yourself, “ I wonder 
if I had better not become a Christian to-night?” 
Almost a determination to stand up as soon as the invi- 
tation is given out. What is it? God sending His 
Spirit to blockade the road to hell. Listen, men, listen 
to God’s Spirit to-night. Yield; accept Christ. 

One other obstacle that God has put in the road as a 
blockade in the path to hell—that is the cross of Christ. 


68 REAL SALVATION 


No man can get very far down the path of sin and 
ruin until he sees looming before him the cross. On 
that cross there hangs a Man, the Son of Man, the 
Son of God. There you see Him hanging with nails 
in His hands and feet, and a voice says, “ It was for 
you. I bore this for you. I died for you.” Oh, men, 
in the pathway of every man and woman here to-night 
stands the cross with Christ upon it, and if you go 
out of Bingley Hall to continue in sin you will have 
to go over the cross and over the crucified form of the 
Son of God. 

I heard of a godly old man, who had a worthless 
son. That son was more anxious to make money than 
he was for honour or anything else, and he determined 
to go into that infamous business in which there is lots 
of money, but which no self-respecting man will un- 
dertake, the liquor business. Any man who is willing 
to coin money out of rum selling will coin money out 
of the tears of broken-hearted wives, out of the groans 
and sighs of the drunkards’ sons and daughters, out 
of the hearts’ blood of their fellow-men, for this infer- 
nal rum traffic is sending thousands of men every year 
to premature graves. This infernal rum traffic is 
causing more sorrow, more ruined homes, more wretch- 
edness than perhaps anything else on earth, and every 
publican, every barman, every barmaid, and every 
professed Christian that holds stocks in breweries or 
distilleries, every one of you is a party to the crime. 
You have plenty to say about the rum-seller and the 
bartender. I would like to know how he is any worse 
than you professed Christians who own brewery stocks. 
He gets the abuse and you get the money, and you will 
get the eternal damnation unless you get out of the 


BLOCKADE, OF “THE ROAD? TO HELL 66 


infernal business. Well, this man so far lost his self- 
respect that he was going to open a public-house, and 
his father was ashamed. He pled with him. He said, 
“ My boy, you bear an honoured name which has never 
been disgraced before. Don’t disgrace it by putting 
it up over a public-house.”’ But the son was so bent 
on money-making that he would not listen to his 
father’s voice. The day came to open the public- 
house. The father was about the first on hand. He 
stood outside the door of that public-house, and every 
man that approached the door he stepped up to him 
and told him of the miseries that came from strong 
drink, warned him of the consequences of entering 
such a place as that, and, one after another, they turned 
away. The son looked out of the window to see why 
he was getting no customers. He saw his father out- 
side, turning his customers away. He came outside 
and said, “Father, go home. You are ruining my 
business.” He said, “I cannot help it, my boy. I 
won't have my name dishonoured by this business, and 
if you are bent on going on with it, I will stand here 
and warn every man that comes to enter your door.” 
Finally the son lost his temper. He struck his old 
father. I tell you, friends, this rum business takes the 
humanity out of people—he struck his old father in 
the face. The father turned to him without the least 
anger. He said, “ My son, you can strike me if you 
will; you can kill me if you will, but no man shall enter 
your public-house unless he goes over my dead body.” 
Men, listen! No man or woman here to-night will 
ever enter hell unless by going over the dead body of 
Jesus Christ. No man or woman here to-night can 
go out of this place refusing Christ, persisting in sin, 


70 REAL SALVATION 


without trampling under foot the form of Him who 
was crucified on the cross of Calvary for you. 

Oh, men, God has piled the obstacles so high in His 
patient love! Don’t try to surmount them to-night. 
Turn back. Turn out of the path of sin, turn into the 
path of faith in Jesus Christ. Turn now! 


V 


HEAVEN WHAT SORT OFSPIEACE 
itis. HOW 10 GELeEHERE 


“He looked for a city which hath foundations, whose 
builder and maker is God.”—HEs. xi. Io. 

“Here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to 
come.” —HEnp. xiii. 14. 

“T go to prepare a place for you.”—JoHN xiv. 2. 

“And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and 
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things 
are passed away.”—REv. xxi. 4. 


My subject to-night is “ Heaven: What Sort of a 
Place it is, and How to Get There.” This was the 
city Abraham sought, the “city which hath founda- 
tions,” this is “the continuing city’ which we are 
seeking instead of these fleeting and perishable cities 
and homes of earth. What sort of a place is this city? 
what sort of a place is heaven? In answer to the 
question I am not going to tell what sort of a place I 
imagine heaven to be. I care very little for my spec- 
ulations or any other man’s speculations and fancies 
on this point. I am going to tell you something that 
is sure about it. I am going to tell you what God 
plainly teaches about it in His Word. There are many 
who think we know nothing about heaven, and that it 
is all guesswork. That is not so. God has revealed 
to us very much about it, and what He has revealed 


7p 


72 REAL SALVATION 


about it is very cheering, and eminently calculated to 
awaken in every wise and true heart a desire to go 
there. I think if we reflected more about heaven it 
would help us to bear our burdens here more bravely, 
that it would incite us to holier living, that it would do 
much to deliver us from the power of the greed and 
the lust that is blighting so many lives, that it would 
make us cheerier and more sunshiny. Those are very 
shallow philosophers who tell us that our present busi- 
ness is to live this present life and let the future take 
care of itself. You might as well tell the schoolboy 
that his present business is to live to-day and take no 
outlook into the future life of manhood, that he might 
wisely prepare for it on the one hand, and feel its stim- 
ulus on the other. True thoughts of the life that is to 
come clothe the life that now is with new beauty and 
strength. Let us then think awhile to-night about 
heaven. What do we know about it? 


I. HEAVEN, A PLACE 


First of all, heaven is a place. “I go to prepare 
a place for you,” says Jesus (John xiv. 2). Some will 
tell you that heaven is merely a state or condition. 
Doubtless it is more important to be in a heavenly state 
or condition than in a heavenly place. It would un- 
questionably be preferable to be in hell in a heavenly 
state of thought and heart, than to be in heaven in a 
hellish state of thought and heart. But heaven is a 
place. We are not to be merely in a heavenly state of 
mind, but in a heavenly city as well, “a city that hath 
foundations,” “a continuing city.” Christ has already 
entered into heaven now to appear in the presence of 
God for us (Heb. ix. 24). He has gone to prepare a 


HEAVEN: WHAT SORT OF A PLACE 73 


place for us, and is coming back for us to take us to 
it. We are not to be disembodied spirits in the world 
to come, but redeemed spirits, in redeemed bodies, in 
a redeemed society, in a redeemed universe. 


II. Bur Wuat Sort or A PLACE 18 HEAVEN? 


1. It is a place of incomparable external, as well 
as internal beauty. This appears from such descrip- 
tions as we have in the 21st and 22nd chapters of the 
last book in the Bible. The God of the Bible is a God 
of beauty. The God of nature is also a God of beauty. 
He made this world beautiful. Its beauty has been 
marred by sin, the weed and the thorn and the brier 
spring up, the insect devours the roses, the lilies fade, 
decay and death bring loathsome sights and foul smells. 
“The whole creation,” fallen in sympathy with fallen 
man (and it may be in sympathy with fallen pre- 
adamite races), groans and travails together in pain 
until now (Rev. viii. 20-22). But enough is left of 
the primal beauty to show us how intensely God loves 
beauty, and He has told us in His Word that the crea- 
tion itself shall be delivered from the bondage of cor- 
ruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God 
(Rom. viii. 21). There will be in heaven the perfec- 
tion of beauty. Perfection of form, colour, sound, and 
odour. The beauty that is to be is necessarily inde- 
scribable. All earthly comparisons necessarily fail. 
Every sense and faculty of perception in our present 
state is blunted by sin and the disease that results from 
sin. But in our redemption bodies every sense and 
faculty will receive enlargement and exist in perfec- 
tion. What new senses there may be we cannot, of 
course, imagine. Every faculty will have unlimited 


v4 +~«#REAL ~SALVATION 


opportunity for exercise. A material beauty, the 
counterpart and double of the moral beauty of that 
world, a material beauty the highest and most fault- 
less will surround us on every hand, filling eye and 
ear and nostrils. Some of us have seen beautiful vis- 
ions on earth. We have seen the mountains rearing 
their snow-crowned heads through the clouds; we 
have seen the vista of rolling hills and verdant valleys 
and winding rivers and forests with their changing 
colours; we have seen the lake and ocean dancing and 
tossing and rolling in the moonlight; we have seen the 
heavens in the clear wintry night bejewelled with their 
countless stars; we have caught the odours that float 
through the summer night in park and garden and 
tropical island; we have listened to the indescribable 
harmonies of piano and violin and organ as they re- 
sponded to the touch of the master’s hand, and the 
more matchless music of the human voice; but all these 
are nothing to the beauty of sight and sound and fra- 
grance that will greet us in that fair city that hath 
foundations. This shall be the lot of the poorest of 
God’s children. That poor widow who to-night toils 
by the dim candle-light to gain the pitifully small wage 
with which pitiless sweaters reward her painful toil, 
will soon be at rest, and entering upon these scenes of 
indescribable beauty to go no more out for ever. 

2. But the beauty of heaven, as good and attrac- 
tive as it is, will be its least important characteristic. 
Heaven will be a place of high, holy, and ennobling 
companionships. The best and wisest and noblest men 
of all ages will be there. Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob will be there (Matt. viii. 11, “ And I say unto 
you, That many shall come from the east and west, 


HEAVEN: WHAT SORT OF A PLACE 75 


and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and 
Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven”). Moses, Elijah, 
and Daniel, Paul and John, Rutherford and Brainerd 
and Payson. All the purest, noblest, most unselfish 
the world has known. All those who have trusted 
in the atoning blood of Christ (2 Cor. v. 1, “ For we 
know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle 
were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house 
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens’’). All 
the dear ones who believed in and loved the Lord 
Jesus will be there. There are many who desire to 
get into the best society of earth. That is all right 
if really it is the best society, and not merely the 
society of wealth and fashion and foolishness that is 
sometimes so strangely and irrationally called “the 
best society.” But the very best society of this 
world will be nothing to the society of heaven. 
The joys we find in the companionship of noble, 
unselfish, thoughtful people here, in the dearest com- 
panionships we know, give but the faintest conception 
of the joys of heaven’s companionships. The angels 
are there (Luke i. 19, “ And the angel answering, said 
unto him, ‘I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of 
God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew 
thee these glad tidings.’”” Luke xv. 7, 10, “I say unto 
you, That likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sin- 
ner that repenteth, more than over ninety and nine 
just persons, which need no repentance.” “ Likewise, 
I say unto you, There is joy in the presence of the 
angels of God over one sinner that repenteth”). We 
shall enjoy the companionship of these lofty intelli- 
gences, every one, Gabriel, Raphael, with the whole 
angelic host. God Himself is there too. In a sense 


"6 REAL SALVATION 


He is everywhere, but heaven is the place of His 
peculiar presence and manifestation of Himself. (2 
Chron. vi. 30, “ Then hear thou from heaven thy dwell- 
ing-place;” Matt. vi. 10, “ Thy kingdom come. Thy 
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.”) We shall 
hold communion with Him. Jesus Christ is there. 
(Acts vii. 56, “ And said, Behold, I see the heavens 
opened, and the Son of Man standing on the right 
hand of God.” Heb. iv. 14, “Seeing then that we 
have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, 
Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession ; ” 
viii. 1, “ Now of the things which we have spoken this 
is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set 
on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the 
heavens.”) To Paul this was one of the most at- 
tractive thoughts about heaven (Phil. i. 23, R.V.). 
The holy Rutherford also cried, “I would rather be 
in hell with Thee than in heaven without Thee; for, 
if I were in hell with Thee that would be heaven to me, 
and if I were in heaven without Thee that would be 
hell to me.” On the other hand, there will be no un- 
pleasant or degrading companionships there. The 
devil will not be there. The lewd, the vulgar, and 
the obscene will not be there. The avaricious and the 
scheming and selfish will not be there. The liar and 
the slanderer and the backbiter and the meddler and 
the gossip will not be there. The mean and the con- 
temptible and the hypocrite will not be there. The 
profane and the blasphemer and the infidel and the 
scoffer will not be there. No money, nor influence, 
nor cunning will get them in. “ And there shall in 
no wise enter into it anything that defileth, neither 
whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a lie” 


HEAVEN: WHAT SORT OF A PLACE 77 


(Rev. xxi. 27). It will be a good place to be. Bir- 
mingham would not be such a bad place to live in if 
we could get rid of some of its inhabitants. All such 
will be gotten rid of there. There are limitations to 
the joys of the dearest earthly companionships. Here 


“Thought is deeper than all speech, 
Feeling than all thought, 
Soul to soul can never teach 
What to itself was taught.” 


It will not be so there. We can perfectly open our 
hearts to one another there, as we so often and so 
vainly long to here. (1 Cor. xiii. 12, “ For now we 
see through a glass, darkly; but then face to face: 
now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also 
I am known.”) 

Heaven will be a place of glad reunions. “ Then 
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up in 
the clouds, together with” those who have left us, to 
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with 
the Lord (1 Thess. iv. 17). The bereaved wife shall 
meet again the husband she has missed so long, the 
son shall meet again the mother whose departure left 
his life so desolate. There we shall meet again chil- 
dren who were removed from us in all the beauty of 
their early life, and whom we have never forgotten 
through all the months and years that have passed 
since. Ah! what glad days those coming days will be 
when we meet again never more to part. 

3. Heaven will be a place that is free from every- 
thing that curses or mars our life here. The world we 
live in would be a happy place indeed if it were not for 
a few things. If there were no sin, no sickness, no 


78 REAL SALVATION 


pain, no poverty, no servile labour, no want, no death, 
this world would be good. But these things mar and 
well-nigh ruin this present world. There will be none 
of these things in heaven. There will be no sin. Every- 
one will perfectly obey the will of God. There will be 
no poverty. Everyone will have all the inexhaustible 
wealth of God at his disposal. (Rom. viii. 17, “ And 
if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs 
with Christ: if so be that we suffer with Him, that we 
may be also glorified together.”) There will be no 
servile, grinding toil. I tell you, when I see the weary 
women who toil from early morn until late at night 
over the tub or ironing-board or sewing machine, 
when I see the men who rise at break of day and go 
forth to the forge or bench or ditch, I rejoice that 
there is a place where the weary are at rest. There 
will be none of these things in heaven. “ There re- 
maineth therefore a rest to the people of God” (Heb. 
iv. 9). There will be no sickness nor pain. “ And 
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and 
there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor cry- 
ing, neither shall there be any more pain: for the 
former things are passed away” (Rev. xxi. 4). 
No more aching limbs, no more throbbing temples, 
no more darting pains, no more grinding tortures, no 
more swelling tongues, no more weakness, no more 
sighs, no more groans, no more nights of tossing in 
sweltering rooms, no more tears. There will be no 
death in heaven. No breaking hearts as we look for 
the last time into the faces of loved ones as cheeks 
grow ashen, as eyes glaze. No watching the under- 
taker as he screws down the coffin lid on the one we 
loved, no black dresses and veils, no funerals passing 


HEAVEN: WHAT SORT OF A PLACE 79 


through the streets, no standing by a yawning grave 
and watching a coffin lowered into it, no listening to 
the cold clods as they fall remorselessly on the box that 
contains the form of the one we love so much and 
whose departure leaves life so cheerless. Thank God 
there is no death in heaven. 

4. Heaven will be a place of universal and perfect 
knowledge. Here the wisest of us sees through a glass 
darkly, but there face to face. Here we know in part, 
but there even as we are known (1 Cor. xiii. 12). The 
wisest scientist or philosopher on earth knows but very 
little. The little they know is exceedingly pre- 
cious, but it is very little. Sir Isaac Newton when an 
old man said to one who praised his wisdom, “ I am as 
a child on the seashore picking up a pebble here and a 
shell there, but the great ocean of truth still lies be- 
fore me.” But in heaven the most uneducated of us 
will have fathomed that great ocean of truth. Perfect 
knowledge of all things. The great perplexing prob- 
lems of God and man, of time and eternity, solved. 
God’s wondrous purposes and their accomplishment 
lying open before us. No doubts, no questionings, no 
uncertainties, no errors. Faith swallowed up in sight. 

5. Heaven will be a place of universal and perfect 
love. “ Beloved now are we the sons of God, and it 
doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know 
that, when He shall appear, we shall be like Him; 
for we shall see Him as He is” (1 John iii. 2). We 
shall be like Him, and He is love. (1 John iv. 8, 
“He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is 
love.”) What a place to live, where everyone is a 
lover and where all love is perfect. How happy is the 
home where love is triumphant. It may be a lowly 


80 REAL SALVATION 


home, a plain, a very plain place, but it is a happy 
place. “ Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, 
than a stalled ox and hatred therewith ” (Prov. xv. 17). 
All is love there. And the love there will not be like 
that of earth, hesitating, suspicious, changeful, sel- 
fish, now so cold and again so warm, but pure un- 
bounded, unfaltering, unchanging, constant, Christ- 
like. What a world that will be! The universal broth- 
erhood of which we read and talk so much and see so 
little will find its perfect realisation there. 

6. Heaven will be a place of praise. “ After this 
I beheld, and, lo, a great multitude, which no man 
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, 
and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the 
Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their 
hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, ‘ Salvation 
to our God which sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
Lamb.’ And all the angels stood round about the 
throne, and about the elders and the four beasts, and 
fell before the throne on their faces, and worshipped 
God, saying, ‘ Amen: Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, 
and thanksgiving, and honour, and power, and might, 
be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen’ ” (Rev. vii. 
9-12). Men will have open eyes to see God as He is. 
To see Jesus Christ as He is. Souls will throb and 
burst forth with praise. Suppose we should here in 
this hall to-night get one glimpse of God as He is, one 
view of Jesus Christ as He is! There would be a 
burst of song rising from this audience such as never 
rang through this building before. There will be mel- 
ody all day long in heaven. Some people ask me in 
a critical way, Why do you have so much music in 
your meetings? Because we wish them to be as much 


HEAVENS Wat SORT TOR A PLACE? 81 


like heaven as possible. Heaven will be a very musi- 
cal place. There will be far more singing than preach- 
ing there. 

7. Heaven will be “a city which hath foundations,” 
a “continuing city” (Heb. xi. 10; xiii. 14). Earth’s 
greatest cities and earth’s fairest homes do not abide, 
they crumble into dust. The so-called “eternal city ” 
of the past is trodden underneath the unheeding feet 
of the beggars of modern Rome. The world itself 
does not abide. “The world passeth away” (1 John 
ii. 17). Heaven does abide. We enter it to go no 
more out for ever. The zxons of eternity roll on, but 
heaven abides in its beauty, in its glory, in its joyous- 
ness, in its love; and we abide with it. 


Ill. How to GAIN AN ENTRANCE INTO HEAVEN 


Is no heart to-night stirred with a longing for that 
“better country”? (Heb. xi. 16). Who would not 
rather have an entrance there than to have the poor 
fleeting possessions of any of earth’s millionaires? If 
I had my choice between having the most splendid 
mansion on earth, and largest fortune, and all that 
money could buy, and then missing heaven at last, 
and living in the wretchedest tenement in want and 
hunger and suffering all my days and then gaining 
heaven at last, it would not take long to choose. Ah, 
when we reach that fair home, the privations of earth 
through which we may have passed to gain it will seem 
small and trifling indeed. “I reckon that the suffer- 
ings of this present time are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory which shall be revealed in us” (Rom. 
viii. 18). But we may all gain an entrance there. 


82 REAL SALVATION 


There is but one way, but that is very simple and open 
to all. In John xiv. 6, “Jesus saith unto them, ‘1 
am the way, the truth, and the life; no man cometh 
unto the Father but by Me.’” In John x. 9, He says, 
“JT am the door: by Me if any man enter in, he shall 
be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.” 
Christ is the door to heaven: Christ is the way to God. 
Accept Christ, accept Him fully as your Saviour, your 
Master, your Lord. Do it to-night. Do it now. If 
you stood outside the door of some fair mansion to- 
night where all inside was beauty, and sociability, and 
joyousness and love, and the owner with cordial invi- 
tation said, “ Come in,” would you wait a second invi- 
tation and risk its not being given? But even now 
Jesus swings heaven’s door open wide, and says, 
“Come in.” Accept Him at once and gain a right to 
enter and live for ever in heaven. 

Over in our country there was a godless father who 
had a sweet little child who was an earnest Christian. 
This young daughter fell ill and died. The father was 
very angry at God. After the funeral he raged about 
his room cursing God who had taken from him his be- 
loved child. At last, utterly worn out, he threw him- 
self upon the bed and fell asleep. In his slumber he 
dreamed that he stood beside a dark river, across which 
he saw a beautiful land on the farther side. As he 
gazed across the river he saw children’s forms com- 
ing toward him. From among the children one fair 
child came forth, whom he soon recognised as his own 
little daughter. She was beckoning to him and call- 
ing, “Come over here, father; come over here.” He 
awoke, and bursting into tears gave up his rebellion 
against God, accepted Christ, and prepared to meet 


HEAVEN: WHAT SORT OF A PLACE 83 


his child in the fair land beyond the river. To many 
of us to-night there are voices of loved ones who have 
gone before calling, “Come over here, father;” 
“ Come over here, my son;” Come over here, mother ; ” 
“ Come over here, husband; ” “ Come over here, wife.” 
Let us accept Christ at once, and thus gain the right 
to enter heaven and live there for ever. 


VI 
AMIENS, INGA A Me yi al 


“Ve must be born again.’—JoHN ili. 7. 


No one can be saved unless he is born again by 
the power of God’s Holy Spirit. “Ye must be born 
again,” says Jesus. The necessity is absolute; not 
merely, “ Ye may be born again,” but “Ye must be 
born again.” 

Nothing else will take the place of the new birth. 
Neither baptism nor confirmation will take the place 
of the new birth. Simon, in the eighth of the Acts 
of the Apostles, was baptized, and whatever the right 
form of water baptism may be, he was baptized the 
right way, for he was baptized by a man sent by the 
Apostles, and taken into the early Church; but when 
Peter and John came down and saw his heart, Peter 
said unto him, “ Thou hast neither lot nor part in this 
matter, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God. 
Thou art still in the gall of bitterness and in the bond 
of iniquity.” A baptized lost sinner! I go to people 
in these meetings and ask them to come to Christ, but 
they say, “I have been baptized; I have been con- 
firmed.” Have you been born again? ‘“ Ye must be 
born again.” 

No performance of religious duties will take the 
place of the new birth. A great many people are 
depending upon the fact that they say their prayers, 
read their Bibles, go to church, partake of the Sacra- 

84 


THE NEW BIRTH 85 


ment, and perform other duties; but all that will not 
take the place of the new birth. “Ye must be born 
again.” 

Orthodoxy of faith will not take the place of the 
new birth. A great many people are saying, “I 
believe the Apostles’ Creed,” “I believe the Nicene 
Creed,” “I believe in the Longer and Shorter Cate- 
chism,” “I am orthodox; I hold the right views about 
Christ, the right views about the Bible, the right views 
about the Atonement.” ‘You can be orthodox upon 
every doctrine, and be lost for ever. I suppose the 
devil is as orthodox a person as there is. The devil 
knows the truth about the Bible. He hates it, and 
loves to get others to believe something else, but he 
believes it himself. The devil knows the truth about 
Christ. He believes in the Divinity of Christ. He 
tries to keep others from believing in it, but he 
believes in it himself, he knows Jesus Christ is Divine. 
The devil believes the truth about hell. There is no 
one knows better than the devil that there is an ever- 
lasting hell. The devil is perfectly orthodox, but he 
is lost. “ Ye must be born again.” 

Culture, and refinement, and outward correctness 
of life will not take the place of the new birth. The 
trouble with us is not merely in our outward life. 
The trouble is in the heart. The corruption is in the 
heart, in the very deepest depths of our inner life; 
and merely to reform your outward life is not enough; 
that will not save you. It does not go deep enough. 
Suppose I had a rotten apple. I could take that apple 
to an artist and have him put a coating of wax around 
the rotten apple, and then paint it until it was just as 
beautiful in appearance as any apple you ever saw, 


86 REAL SALVATION 


but it would be just as rotten as ever. Take one bite 
into it and you bite into the decay. The trouble with 
you is that out of Christ you are rotten at the heart, 
and mere culture, mere refinement, mere respectability, 
mere reform, mere morality, is simply putting a coat- 
ing of wax on the outside and painting it up. You 
must be changed down to the deepest depths of your 
being. What we need is the power of God going 
down to the deepest depths of our souls, banishing 
death, and bringing in life; banishing corruption, and 
bringing in the holiness of God. “ Without holiness, 
no man shall see God,” and it is only by the regener- 
ating power of the Spirit of God that any man or 
woman can become holy. “Ye must be born again.” 

The necessity of the new birth is universal. There 
is not a man or woman on the face of the earth that 
shall ever see the kingdom of God, or enter the king- 
dom of God, except they be born again. There is no 
exception. There is not a woman in Birmingham, I 
care not how refined, how highly educated, how 
amiable, how beautiful in her daily life, that will ever 
see the kingdom of God unless she is born again. If 
anybody could have entered the kingdom of God with- 
out the new birth it was Nicodemus. Nicodemus was 
an upright man, honoured by everyone; he moved in 
the best society, a man of wealth and culture; he 
belonged to the orthodox party, a man of deep relig- 
ious earnestness, sincerely desiring to know the right 
way, a man who prayed and studied his Bible, and 
went regularly to the synagogue several times a week; 
and the Lord Jesus looked him right in the face, and 
He said, “ Nicodemus, you must be born again.” No 
exceptions. Except a man be born again, he shall 


TOE eNEWOBIRGH. 87 


not see the kingdom of God. So I come to you with 
the question, “Have you been born again?” I do 
not ask if you are a church member. I do not ask 
you if you believe the truth. I do not ask if you say 
your prayers or read your Bible. I do not ask if you 
goto church. I do not ask if you have a liberal heart 
towards the poor. I do not ask if you give to foreign 
missions. Have you been born again? 

Well, somebody says, “ What does it mean to be 
born again?”’ As good a definition as I know of 
the new birth is given in 2 Cor. v. 17, “If any man 
be in Christ, he is a new creature [creation]: old 
things are passed away; behold, all things are become 
new.” The new birth is a new creation. A radical 
transformation by the power of the Spirit of God in 
the deepest depths of our being; a new will, new 
affections, new thoughts. We are born with a per- 
verted will. We are born with corrupted affections. 
We are born with a blinded mind. 

In regeneration by the power of the Holy Spirit 
God transforms our will, transforms our affections 
and our tastes, transforms our way of looking at 
things. Let me go into it a little more specifically. 
Every man and woman by nature has a perverted 
will, a will that is set on pleasing self. By nature 
we love to please self. We do what pleases our- 
selves. What pleases us may not be vicious at all; 
we may not be pleased to get drunk, or swear, or 
lie, or do anything vicious or vulgar; but our minds 
are bent on pleasing ourselves. But when God, by 
His Spirit, imparts to us His nature and life, our 
will is changed, and the whole purpose of our life. 
Instead of pleasing self, it is pleasing God; the whole 


88 REAL SALVATION 


will is surrendered to God, and we live to please Him. 
We may do a great many of the things we did before, 
but now we do them because they please God. Be- 
fore, we did them because they pleased ourselves. 
Our affections are corrupt by nature. We love the 
things we ought not to love, and hate the things we 
ought to love. For example, a great many women 
in this room this afternoon love novels, which God 
hates, more than they love the Bible, which God loves. 
If a great many of you women were to tell the truth 
this afternoon, and would stand up and speak the 
truth, you would say, “I would rather read a story- 
book any day of the week than read the Bible.” You 
love the theatre, which God hates. I don’t say God 
hates theatrical people, mind you—He loves them; 
but He hates the theatre. God hates the card-table: 
I am sure He does. You all would, probably, if you 
knew as much about it as I do; but you love the card- 
table. God hates the dance. I should think that any 
intelligent, modest person would, if they would only 
stop to think a little; but you love the dance. You 
would rather go to the theatre than to the gathering 
of God’s children. If you had your choice Thursday 
night or Wednesday night between going to a first- 
class opera or to a place where God’s Spirit was 
present in power, you would choose the opera. You 
would go to a card-party rather than to a quiet 
gathering of God’s people, where they knelt down and 
prayed for the outpouring of the Spirit, and very 
likely you are a church member. When God, through 
the power of the Spirit, imparts to you a new nature, 
you will love the Bible more than any other book in 
the world. You will love the place where God mani- 


THE NEW BIRTH 89 


fests Himself better than any place of worldly enter- 
tainment. You will love the company of God’s people 
better than you will love the pleasures of this world; 
and the beautiful thing is that in a moment of time, 
by the power of God’s Holy Spirit, the change comes. 

New tastes, new affections, take the place of the 
old tastes and old affections. There is not anyone 
here to-day that loves the theatre more than I once 
did, and the dance—I used to go to from four to 
six dances a week—or that loves the card-party more 
than I once did, for I played cards every day of my 
life except the Sabbath. (I thank God that my 
mother’s training kept me from doing it on the 
Sabbath day.) You could not hire me to do these 
things to-day. I think there is not money enough 
in Birmingham to hire me to go to the theatre, unless 
I went there to get some poor soul out. There is not 
money enough in Birmingham to get me to play whist, 
or casino, or bridge, or anything else. I hate it. I 
love the things I once hated, and I hate the things 
I once loved. Why, in those days I would rather 
have read any novel than read this book. To-day I 
have more joy in reading this book than in any other 
book on earth. I love it. My greatest intellectual 
joy is just to pore over the wonderful pages of this 
book of God. Then you will get new thoughts. A 
great many of you to-day are blind to the Divine 
authority of this book. You believe all the nonsense 
that people tell you in the name of what they call 
“ scholarship ”’—about the mistakes in it. When you 
are born again, you will get a mind so in tune with 
the mind of God that you will believe everything in it 
in spite of everybody. Some of you cannot believe 


go REAL SALVATION 


the doctrine of the Atonement, that Jesus took our 
sins in His own body on the cross. The preaching 
of this doctrine is “ foolishness to them that perish” ; 
but when you are born again, the doctrine that the 
Son of God died on the Cross of Calvary will be one 
of the sweetest doctrines in all the universe. A new 
will set upon pleasing God instead of pleasing self, 
new affections to love the things that God loves and 
to hate the things that God hates, a new mind about 
the truth of God. Have you been born again? If 
not, you are not saved. “Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, except a man be born again, he cannot see the 
kingdom of God.” 

How can we tell whether we have been born again 
or not? 1 John ii. 29: “ Every one that doeth right- 
eousness is born of Him.” If you have been born 
of God, you will do as God does. God does righteous- 
ness. If you are born of God righteousness will be 
the practice of your life. What is righteousness? 
To do righteousness is to do that which is right in 
God’s sight. A man that is born of God will study 
the Word of God to find out what God’s will is as 
revealed in His Word, and when he finds out, he will 
do it. Are you doing that? Studying the Word of 
God daily to find out what God wants you to do? 
When you find out what God wants you to do, are you 
doing it? 

1 John iii. 9: “ Whosoever is born of God doth 
not commit sin.” That is, does not make a practice 
of sin. What John means by sin he tells us a few 
verses before this. To commit sin is to do that 
which you know to be contrary to God’s will. The 
man of God will not, when he knows God’s will, 


THE NEW BIRTH oI 


disobey it. He may be mistaken. He may do some- 
thing that he did not think at the time was not God’s 
will, but he will find out it was not, and when he 
does he will own it up and confess it as sin. Or he 
may be suddenly surprised, overtaken by a sudden 
temptation, and fall; but as soon as he sees it he will 
confess it. He will not go on day after day doing 
that which he knows to be contrary to the will of God. 
Anybody that is making a practice day after day of 
something that they know when they do it to be con- 
trary to the will of God has reason to doubt whether 
they are born again. A young man asked me on the 
street on Thursday, “If a man is born again and lies 
down in sin and dies in sin, will he be saved?” 
“Why,” I said, “a man who is born again will not 
lie down in sin. He may fall into it, but he will not 
stay there.” 

Do you know the difference between a hog and a 
sheep? A hog will fall into the mud, and when he 
gets there he will stay there. A sheep may fall into 
the mud, but he gets up as quick as he can. A good 
many people that we think are Christ’s sheep are only 
washed sows. A sow that is washed will return to 
the mire, but a sheep will not stay in the mud. Some 
of you say, “I wish Dr. Torrey would not use such 
inelegant language.” It is not my language, it is 
God’s. If you are only outwardly reformed, if you 
are simply externally converted, in a few weeks you 
will go back to your sin and your worldliness. You 
are only a washed sow. I am quoting Scripture. It 
is God’s language (2 Pet. ii. 22). It is the person 
who is outwardly converted, but not inwardly trans- 
formed, who will give up after a little while; but if 


92 REAL SALVA LION 


you have been born again you are transformed from 
a sow into a sheep, and you will never lie down in sin 
again. 
In 1 John iii. 14, you find the third proof of re- 
generation—love of the brethren. “We know that 
we have passed from death unto life, because we love 
the brethren.” Love to everybody that belongs to 
Christ, irrespective of their social position, irrespective 
of their race or colour. ‘“ We love the brethren,” 
every child of God. The nature of God is love, and 
if God has imparted His nature to you, you have a 
heart full of love, and especially love for God’s chil- 
dren. I once went to a communion service in the 
city of Brooklyn, and they were receiving new mem- 
bers. A lady sat near me, and when the people stood 
up to receive the new members, I saw she did not 
stand up. When the meeting was over I said to her 
—I knew her very well— Why didn’t you stand up 
to receive the new members?” She replied, “I was 
not going to stand up for them. They are our 
mission people. I am not going to love and watch 
over and care for them.” They were poor and she 
was rich. She loved rich Christians. She was not 
a child of God. The poorest old washerwoman that 
is born of God you will love just as much as if she 
were the wife of a millionaire. A woman that cannot 
read or write you will love just as much as if she were 
the most highly educated woman in the kingdom. It 
is a practical love, a love that shows itself by going 
into the pocket. People will get up in a prayer meet- 
ing sometimes and say, “I know I have passed from 
death unto life because I love the brethren.” After 
the meeting a lady goes round and says, “ There is 


THE NEW BIRTH 93 


Mrs. Smith; she is in trouble. She needs a little 
help, and we are making up a little purse for her. 
Won’t you give something?” And she says, “I 
cannot do it. Christmas is coming, and I have got 
to get presents for my sisters, and children, and 
cousins, and I cannot give to everybody.’ You can, 
if you are a child of God, and have it to give. 

The Bible is such a practical book, coming down 
to everyday life. The proof of the new birth is love, 
and the proof of love is, that if you have a penny left 
in your pocket you will go and share it with your 
poor brethren, your poor sisters, if you are born 
again. 

Another test. I John v. 1: “ Whosoever believeth 
that Jesus is the Christ is born of God.” Now, you 
say, “I come in on that. I believe that Jesus is the 
Christ.” Do you? “Of course I do. I am per- 
fectly orthodox.” It is not orthodoxy, it is real 
belief. “Christ” means King, and if you really 
believe in Christ as King, it leads you to set Him up 
as King in your heart. Everybody that really believes 
in Christ as King makes Christ King. Does Christ 
sit upon the throne of your heart? Does Christ rule 
your life? If He does, you are born of God. If He 
doesn’t, you are not. 

1 John y. 4: “ Whatsoever is born of God over- 
cometh the world.” There are two classes of people 
in the world—those who are overcoming the world, 
and those who are being overcome by the world. 
Which class do you belong to? Are you getting 
the victory over the world, or is the world getting 
the victory over you? A great many people come 
to me and say, “I know this is not just right, but it 


94 REAL SALVATION 


is what everybody in Birmingham does, and so I 
do it.” The world is getting the victory over you. 
“T don’t believe in this, but all the people in our 
suburb, even including the church members, do it, 
therefore I do it.’ The world is getting the victory 
over you. If you are born of God you will get the 
victory over the world. You won’t ask what the 
world does; you will ask what Christ says, and you 
will obey Christ, your King, and get the victory over 
the world, though you have to stand alone. Are 
you born of God? “ Ye must be born again.” Have 
you been born again? 

Now, I think, a great many of you will say, “ No, 
I haven’t. Can you tell me just now what I must 
do to be born again?” Yes, I can. God Himself 
tells us. 

John i. 12: “As many as RECEIVED Him, to them 
gave He power to become the sons of God.” We 
are born again by God’s Holy Spirit, through His 
Word, the moment we receive Christ. When you 
take Christ into your heart, you take the life of God 
into your heart. When you take Christ into your 
heart, Christ comes and reigns and _ transforms 
you through and through in a moment. Any- 
body in this building this afternoon, I care not how 
worldly you are, how sinful you are, how hard you 
are; I care not how unbelieving you are, anyone 
to-day that will throw his heart open and let Jesus 
come in to rule and reign, who will take Christ as 
his sin-bearing Saviour, as his Saviour and Deliverer 
from the power of sin, the moment you surrender to 
Him the control of your life, God, by the power of 
His Holy Spirit, will make you a new creature. 


THE NEW BIRTH 95 


Some people will bring to you two persons—one 
who has been very carefully reared, who has been 
taught to observe the outward forms of Christianity, 
and another woman who has gone down into the 
deepest depths of sin, and say, “ Here is this person 
very near the kingdom; she will surely be easily led 
to accept Christ. But here is this person who has 
gone down into the depths of sin; of course we don’t 
expect to see that one saved right now.” Why not? 
If that moral, refined, amiable, beautiful girl takes 
Christ, God by His Holy Spirit will impart His nature 
to her and make her a child of God the moment she 
does it; but, also, if the vilest woman in Birmingham 
takes Christ, God by His Holy Spirit will impart His 
nature to her, and make her a child of God the 
moment she does it. How often I have seen it, at 
the same meeting. 

“Ye must be born again.” Ye can be born again. 
There is not a person within the hearing of my voice 
but who will become a child of God right now if he 
will take the Lord Jesus Christ. The moment he 
does it, God, by a creative act, by the power of His 
Holy Spirit, will make him a new creature. “Old 
things are passed away; behold, all things are become 
new.” 

Two thoughts I wish to leave with you. First, 
that the most highly-educated, most upright, most 
amiable, most attractive man or woman who is out 
of Christ will never be saved but by the creative act 
of God, until the Holy Spirit in the inmost depths of 
your soul makes you a new creation in Christ. Second, 
the most hopeless abandoned man or woman in Bir- 
mingham can be saved in an instant, born again, 


06 REAL SALVATION 


made a new creature, the moment they accept Christ. 
We are all saved the same way. By the acceptance 
of Christ, by the power of the Holy Ghost the instant 
you accept Christ. Have you been born again? If 
not, will you take Jesus right now and be born again? 


VII 


RERUGES OF LUTES 


“The hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies.’—Isa. 
XXVlii. 17. 


Every man needs a refuge. Every one of us needs 
a refuge from four things—the accusations of our 
own conscience, the power of sin, the displeasure of 
God, and the wrath to come. Almost every man 
has something that he is trusting in as a refuge. The 
trouble is not that men have no refuge, but that they 
have a false one, what our text characterises as a 
refuge of lies. God announced to Israel through His 
servant Isaiah, and announces to us to-night, that 
there is a day coming for testing the refuges of men, 
and in that day of testing the hail will sweep away the 
refuge of lies. Is your refuge a true one or a false 
one? Is ita refuge that will stand the test of the hour 
that is coming, or is it a refuge that will go down ina 
day of storm? Can we tell? We can with absolute 
certainty. 

There are four common-sense tests that you can 
apply to every hope, that will show clearly whether 
it is a true hope or a refuge of lies. Those four tests 
are: First, a true refuge must be one that meets the 
highest demand of our own conscience. If it does 
not meet the highest demand of our own conscience, 
it is not a refuge from the accusations of our own 
conscience, neither is it a refuge from the displeasure 


97 


98 REAL SALVATION 


of God, for if our own heart condemn us, God is 
greater than our heart and knoweth all things. In 
the second place, it must be one, trust in which is 
making you a better man. If that refuge in which 
you are trusting is not making you a better man from 
day to day, it is not a refuge from the power of sin, 
neither is it a refuge from the wrath to come; for 
you may rest assured that any hope that does not 
save you from the power of sin in the life that now 
is can never save you from the consequences of sin 
in the life which is to come. In the third place, it 
must stand the test of the dying hour. A refuge 
that only comforts you when you are well and strong, 
but will fail in that dread hour when you are face to 
face with death, God, and eternity, is absolutely 
valueless. Fourth, it must be a refuge that will stand 
the test of the judgment day. Unless it stands that 
great test it is absolutely worthless. Suppose you had a 
friend who was under indictment for murder, and 
you went down to see him in the jail before his trial. 
You find him in a very cheerful frame of mind, and 
you say to him, “I thought you were under indict- 
ment for murder.” And he replies, “I am.” “I 
thought the trial was near.” “It is.” “Well, you 
seem to be very cheerful for a man who is under 
indictment for murder, and whose trial is very near.” 
“ Oh, I am, and the reason is this, I have an answer 
to make when the trial comes on.” “ What is your 
answer? Will it satisfy the judge and jury?” “No, 
I don’t think it will, but it satisfies me.” “ Why, 
man,” you say, “ you don’t try the case. Your an- 
swer is no good unless it will satisfy the judge and 
jury.’ You say you have a refuge that satisfies you. 


REFUGES OF LIES 99 


Will it satisfy God? that’s the question. Will it in 
the judgment day satisfy God? 

Now I am going to apply these four common-sense 
tests to some of the refuges of lies in which men are 
trusting to-day. The first refuge of lies is trust in 
our own morality, our own goodness, our own char- 
acter. How many men and women there are who 
when you approach them on the subject of becoming 
Christians reply, “ No, I don’t feel any need of Christ. 
I am trusting in my own character, in my own daily 
life, I don't claim to be perfect. Of course, | am 
not faultless, but I believe that the good in my life 
will more than counterbalance the evil, and I am 
trusting in my own good deeds.” Let us apply the 
tests. Does your goodness meet the highest demand 
of your conscience? Be honest now. In all my talk- 
ing with moralists, and I have talked with a great 
many, I have never met in all my life but two men 
who, when I drove the question home, maintained 
that their own goodness came up to the highest 
demand of their own conscience. I have met two. 
You say that they must have been remarkably good 
men. No, they had remarkably poor consciences. 
One of them was a Jew I once met in crossing the 
Atlantic Ocean. I started to talk to him one day 
about becoming a Christian, and he said to me, “I 
feel no need of 4 Saviour.” [I said, “ Do you mean 
to tell me that you have never sinned?” “ Never,” 
he said. ‘ Never fallen below the highest demand of 
your own conscience?” “ Never.” ‘Never done 
anything that you regretted afterwards?” “ Never.” 
“Well,” you say, “he must have been a good man 
indeed.” No; far from it. He was so mean that 


100 REAL SALVATION 


before we reached New York city he was the most 
unpopular man on the steamer. Apply the second 
test: Is trust in your own goodness making you a 
better man? As you go on day after day talking 
about your own morality and trusting in it, do you 
find, as you grow older, that you are growing more 
unselfish, more kind, more considerate of others, more 
helpful, more humble? I have known a great many 
men who trusted in their own morality; I have never 
known a single one of them who, as he grew older, 
grew gentler, sweeter, kinder, more considerate of 
others, more helpful to his fellow-men. Every one 
I have known as he grew older has grown more cross, 
censorious, self-centred, proud. Apply the third test: 
Will it stand the test of the dying hour? How often 
it does not. How many a man, who in days of health 
and strength has boasted of his own goodness, when 
he comes to lie on his dying bed has wished that he 
had a living faith in Christ. In one of my pastorates 
was perhaps the most self-righteous man I ever knew 
intimately. He had no use for the church, no use 
for the Bible, no use for Jesus Christ, no use for 
ministers, and perhaps least of all for me, against 
whom he had a particular grudge, because of some- 
thing I had once done that he misunderstood, but 
he was perfectly confident that he was the best man 
in all the community. In process of time a cancer 
appeared on that man’s scalp; it spread and ate its way 
through the scalp until it reached the skull. Then 
little by little it ate its way through the skull until 
there was only a thin film of skull between the cancer 
and the brain. You could see the throbbing beneath 
the thin film of skull. He knew he must die, and in 


REFUGES OF LIES IoI 


that hour he said, “Send for Mr. Torrey. I must 
speak to him.” I hurried to his home at once, sat 
down beside his bed, and he said, “Oh, Mr. Torrey, 
tell me how to be saved. Tell me how to become a 
Christian.” I took my Bible and I explained to him 
just as simply as I knew how what to do to be saved, 
and I think I can explain it pretty simply. But some- 
how or other he could not grasp it. Hour after hour 
I sat with him. When night came I said to his wife 
and family, “ You have sat up with him night after 
night. You are tired. You go to bed, and I will sit 
up with him all night to-night and minister to him.” 
They gave me instructions what to do and retired for 
the night. All night long I sat by him, except when now 
and then I had to go out into the other room to get 
something for him to eat or drink. Every time when 
I came back into the room where he was lying over in 
the corner there came one constant groan from that 
corner, and it was this, “ Oh, I wish I was a Christian ! 
Oh, I wish I was a Christian! Oh, I wish I was a 
Christian!” And so the man died. Will it stand 
the test of the judgment day? When you stand face 
to face with God and that awful, piercing, all-seeing, 
holy eye looks you through and through, the eye of 
the One who knows all your past, not only your overt 
acts but your covert thoughts, every hidden imagina- 
tion, will you look up into His face and say, “O God, 
Thou holy One, Thou all-seeing One, Thou knowest 
me through and through, and I stand here to-day con- 
fident that my own righteousness will pass with Thee ” ? 
Never! If you fancy that you will, go alone with 
God to-night and kneel down even now and look up 
into God’s face and try to tell Him that. You can 


102 REAL SALVATION 


tell me that, but I don’t believe that even you have 
the brazen effrontery to look up into the face of God 
even now and try and tell Him that. Apply one more 
test; will it stand the test of the Word of God? We 
know that it will not. We are told in Gal. iii. Io, 
“As many as are of the works of the law—who are 
trying to be saved by their own doings—are under 
the curse; for it is written, Cursed is every one that 
continueth not in all things that are written in the 
book of the law to do them.” And we are told in 
Rom. iii. 20, “ By the deeds of the law shall no flesh 
living be justified in His sight.” 

The second refuge of lies is trust in other people’s 
badness. Some people make their boast in their own 
goodness; others make their boast in the badness of 
others. How often when you go to a man and urge 
him to come to Christ, he says, “ No, I don’t pretend 
to be very good, but I am just as good as a lot of other 
folks, just as good as a great many of your church 
members.” Let us try that. Does that meet the high- 
est demand of your own conscience? When conscience 
comes with its imperious demands, does it satisfy your 
conscience to say,“Well, I am not very good, but I am as 
good as somebody else?” If it does, you must have a 
mighty mean conscience. Is trust in other people’s bad- 
ness making you a better man? I have known a great 
many people who talked much of other people’s badness, 
but I have yet to find the first man or woman who was 
made better by the process. Show me a man who is 
always talking about the faults of others and I will 
show you a man who is rotten at the heart every time. 
Show me a man that calls every other man a thief, and 
I will show you a man you can’t trust with your pocket- 


REFUGES OF LIES 103 


book. Show me a man who thinks every other man is 
impure, and I will show you an adulterer. Show me 
a man or woman who is always talking about others’ 
faults, and I will show you a man or woman, without 
exception, that you can’t trust. It never fails. In one 
of my pastorates in my Bible class I had a woman— 
I came near saying a lady—who was in business— 
notoriously dishonest in business. One day she said 
to me in my Bible class, “ Brother Torrey”—oh, she 
did love the “ brother ”—“ Brother Torrey, don’t you 
think that everybody in business is dishonest?” I 
looked at her and replied: ‘Mrs. Mac,’—she was 
Scotch; never mind the rest of it—‘‘ when anybody 
in business accuses everybody in business of being dis- 
honest, they convict at least one person.”’ And she was 
mad! But why should she be mad? I only told her the 
truth. I made a statement like this in my own church 
once in an American city—not where I am now: 
“Show me a person who is always talking about the 
faults of others and I will show you a person rotten 
at the heart.” At the close a lady in my church came 
to me and said, “I didn’t like something you said this 
morning.” I said, “ What was that?” “ You said, 
‘Show you a man or woman that was always talking 
of the faults of others and you would show them a 
man or woman rotten to the heart every time.’” I said, 
“Yes, I said that, and I meant it too.” ‘“ Well,’ she 
said, “there is Miss So-and-So, you must admit she 
is always talking about the faults of others.” I had 
to admit it. ‘‘ Now,” she said, “ you would not say she 
was bad.” Well, I didn’t say it, but, if I had told that 
lady, the fact was that on that very day I had told that 
woman that she could never sing in our choir again, 


104 REAL SALVATION 


because of awful rottenness in her life that had been 
brought to my view, with which I had charged her, and 
which she had confessed. Men and women, if you 
know a man or woman who is always talking about 
the faults of others, don’t you trust them. Third, Will 
it stand the test of the dying hour? Oh, never. This 
very woman to whom I have already referred who 
asked the question in the Bible class, the time came for 
her to die. The physician had done his best. He went 
into the room and said to her, “ Mrs. Mac, it is my 
duty to tell you I can do no more, neither can any other 
physician. You must die.” And she shrieked, “ Doc- 
tor, I can’t die! I won’t die! I am not ready to die. 
Doctor, I can’t die!” But she did die, and so will you, 
and in that hour you will not think about the faults of 
others; the faults of one person will fill the whole 
horizon, and those are your own faults. Will it stand 
the test of the judgment day? Face to face with God 
who knows you, will you look up into His face and 
say, “ I have never been good, but I am just as good as 
others?” Never! In that day, God tells us distinctly 
in Rom. xiv. 12, “ Every one of us shall give account 
of himself to God.” 

The third refuge of lies—universalism, the belief 
that God is too good to condemn anyone, that there 
is no hell, no future punishment for sin. How com- 
mon a refuge that is to-day, and perhaps no more 
common anywhere than in Birmingham. People meet 
you everywhere when you urge them to come to Christ 
with the answer, “I believe in the mercy of God, I 
believe in the goodness of God, I believe God is love 
and too good to condemn anyone, I believe there is 
no hell, no future punishment.” Let us apply the tests. 


REFUGES OF LIES 105 


Does that satisfy the demands of your own conscience? 
When your conscience points out your sin and demands 
a change in your life, does it satisfy your conscience 
to say, “ Yes, I know my life is not just right, but God 
is love, therefore I am going right on trampling His 
laws under foot, because He is so good and so loving.” 
Is that the kind of conscience you have? If I had that 
kind of conscience I would trade it off just as quick as 
I could. Look here. Here is a boy who has been very 
ill. He has a loving mother, who loves him enough 
to die for him if necessary. Through long days of 
illness she will not even have a hired nurse, but watches 
by his bedside till she takes his complaint and breaks 
down, and now he is up and around, but she is at the 
very verge of death. She calls him and his sister into 
the room and says, “ Children, I am very low. I may 
not live the day out, but I want you to go out into the 
garden into the bright sunshine and enjoy this beauti- 
ful day for awhile; but, Johnnie, when you get out 
there you will find some roses in bloom that are very 
choice. I am saving them for a special purpose. Please 
don’t pluck them, Johnnie.” They go out, and no 
sooner do they reach the garden than Johnnie begins 
at once to pluck every one of those roses. Mary says 
to him, “ Johnnie, what are you doing? Did you not 
hear what mother said, that we were not to pull the 
roses?” “Qh, yes, Mary, I heard her; but Mary, 
you know how mother loves us. You know how good 
she is. You know how she watched over me through 
my illness, how she would not even have a trained 
nurse, but watched over me herself, and now she is ill 
to-day because she loved me so and watched over me 
so tenderly. Mary, that is the reason I am disobey- 


106 REAL SALVATION 


ing her, because she loved me so.” What would you 
say of a boy like that? But you contemptible and 
ungrateful men and women are making God’s infinite 
love that gave His Son to die on the cross of Calvary 
for you an excuse for trampling His laws under foot. 
Shame on you! Don’t you ever do it again! 

Will your universalism stand the test of the dying 
hour? A great deal of the universalism of the day 
does not. Dr. Ichabod Spencer, one of the most cele- 
brated pastors America ever had, has written a book 
called “ Pastoral Sketches,” telling incidents from his 
pastoral work—one of the most valuable books that a 
minister can possess. One of the sketches is as fol- 
lows: There were in his Brooklyn congregation two 
ladies, both married ladies, one the mother-in-law of 
the other. The husband of neither of them was a 
Christian. One day the husband of the younger, the 
son of the older, was taken suddenly and seriously ill. 
They saw that the illness might result in death, and 
they sent for Dr. Ichabod Spencer. When Dr. Spencer 
came into the room this young fellow was tossing upon 
a bed of sickness. Dr. Spencer hurried to his side and 
tried to present to him the consolation of the Gospel. 
He said, “ Dr. Spencer, I can’t listen to you. I have 
heard it over and over again. I would not listen to it 
in times of health and strength. I am now very ill. I 
am dying, will die soon. I can’t repent in this my last 
hour. I can’t do it.” And he tossed and groaned in 
agony upon the bed. His father was walking up and 
down the room in great excitement. Finally, he turned 
to the bed and said, “ My son, there is nothing for you 
to be so anxious about. You have not been a bad boy, 
and there is no hell. You have nothing to fear.” That 


REFUGES OF LIES 107 


dying son turned to his father and said, “ Father, you 
have deceived me all through my life. If I had listened 
to mother instead of to you I would not have been here 
now. She tried to get me to go to church and Sunday 
School, but you took me off fishing and pleasure-seek- 
ing on the Sabbath. You told me that there was no 
hell, and I believed you. You have deceived me up to 
this time, but, father, you can’t deceive me any longer. 
I am dying and going to hell, and my blood is upon 
your soul.” Then he turned his face to the wall and 
died. Fathers, you who are upsetting the teaching of 
godly wives, the day is coming when your sons will 
curse you. Will your universalism stand the test of 
the dying hour? 

Is it making you a better man? Much of the uni- 
versalism of the day don’t. Oh, with how many univer- 
salism is simply an excuse for sin! In how many of 
our churches to-day the world is sweeping in like a 
flood! All separation is gone, and professed Christians 
are running after the world, the flesh, and the devil, 
because they have accepted the eternal hope nonsense 
which is robbing the Church of its devotion and its 
beauty, and making the Church so like the world that 
you can’t tell the two apart. This universalistic non- 
sense is simply an excuse for sin—to make men easy in 
a life of sin, and in giving up their separation unto 
God. Face it squarely—is your universalism making 
you better men? 

Again, will it stand the test of the judgment day? 
When you go up to meet God face to face, will you 
look into the face of God and say, ‘“O God, I know 
my life has not been right, but I thought that Thou 
wast a God of love. I thought Thou wast too good to 


108 REAL SALVATION 


punish sin. I did not think there was any hell, so I 
trampled Thy laws under foot?” Will you do it? 
You know you won’t. 

The next refuge of lies—infidelity. How many a 
man is trying to find comfort to-night in infidelity. Let 
us apply the tests. Does your infidelity meet the 
highest demand of your own conscience? When con- 
science points out your sin and demands a new life 
does it satisfy your conscience to say, “ Well, I don’t 
believe in the Bible, I don’t believe in God. I don’t 
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Does that 
satisfy your conscience? If it does, you are not fit to 
be called a human being. Is your infidelity making 
you a better man? I have known a great many 
infidels. My ministry has been largely a ministry to 
sceptics, agnostics, and infidels. I have had their con- 
fidence, and I have yet to meet the first infidel that was 
made better by infidelity. I have known men whose 
characters have been undermined by infidelity—count- 
less men. Oh, I have had young men come to me with 
breaking hearts, with saddest confessions of immorality 
and of ruin, and I have had them say to me time and 
again, “ The first step was listening to Colonel Inger- 
soll,’ or some other infidel lecturer, or reading an 
infidel book. I tell you, men, you young men espec- 
ially, who are trifling with infidelity, you are under- 
mining the foundations of sound character. Infidelity 
is sowing the world with wickedness. In my own 
church one night in Chicago, to which a good many 
infidels come, one of them said to me, “ We come over 
here to hear you. You don’t spare us, but we like men 
to stand up to the rack. That is the reason we come.” 
There are always a lot of them every Sunday. Thank 


REFUGES OF LIES 109 


God, a great many of them get converted, so we like 
to see them coming. They are very friendly and very 
kind. When we left Chicago, I think the person that 
came nearest to breaking into tears was the wife of 
one of the most notorious infidels in Chicago. She was 
an infidel herself, or trying to be. But now for my 
story. 

One night in my church in Chicago I said, “I 
would like to put this thing to the test. I would like 
to ask every man in this congregation to-night who 
has been saved from drunkenness by Jesus Christ and 
the Bible to stand up,” and all over that building about 
two hundred men stood up as having been saved from 
drunkenness by the Bible and Christ. I said, “ That 
will do. Now I am going to be fair. I would like to 
ask every man in this audience who has been saved 
from drunkenness or any other definite sin by infidelity 
in any form to stand up.” I thought that no one had 
risen, but finally as I looked over that great crowd, 
away off underneath the gallery I saw one man stand- 
ing—a poor, seedy-looking negro, the only man in the 
audience who had been saved from drunkenness or 
other positive sin by infidelity, and he was drunk at the 
time. But he had sense enough to come to Christ at 
the close of the meeting. Men, face facts. Infidelity 
makes nobody a better man. Will it stand the test of 
the dying hour? How often it fails. A friend of 
mine who was in the Northern army in the Civil War 
said that in the same company with him was a man 
who was a very loud-spoken infidel, who loved to talk 
much in the camp. On the second day of the battle of 
Pittsburg Landing he said to the boys in the morning, 
“Boys, it seems just as if I was going to be shot 


110 REAL SALVATION 


, 


to-day.” “Oh,” they said, “nonsense. It is nothing 
but superstition. You are not going to be shot.” 
“ Well,” he said, “I feel very strange. I feel as if I 
was going to be shot.” At last they were lined up 
waiting for the word of command. “ Forward, 
march! Up they went up the hill, and just as they 
reached the crest of the hill a volley came from the 
enemy’s guns. At the very first volley a bullet pierced 
this man near the heart, and as he fell back into the 
arms of the comrade back of him he threw his hands 
in the air and cried as they carried him to the rear, “ O 
God, just give me time to repent.” It only took one 
bullet to take the infidelity out of that man. It would 
take less than that to take the nonsense out of most 
of you. 

Will it stand the test of the judgment day? Will 
you go up into God’s presence and be ready to say, “O 
God, my answer is this: I was an infidel, I was an 
agnostic, I was a sceptic, I was an atheist, I was a 
materialist, I was a positivist,” or this, that, or the 
other? Do you think you will? I will tell you how to 
put it to the test. Go alone to-night, get down on your 
knees and try to tell Him. Oh, you can talk nonsense 
to your fellow-men. But when you go to talk to God 
it will take the nonsense out of you. One night I went 
down into the audience to speak to individuals after a 
meeting like this. I went down to a man who sat in 
the last opera chair. I said to him, “ Are you a Chris- 
tian?” “No,” he said, “I should say not. I am an 
infidel.” I said, “ What do you mean?” “ Well,” he 
said, “ I don’t believe in the Divinity of Christ.” I said, 
“You don’t believe in the Divinity of Christ?” ‘ No,” 
he said, “I don’t.” “ Well,” I said, “let us kneel right 


REFUGES OF LIES III 


down now and tell God so.”’ And he turned pale. You 
go and tell God what you would like to tell me. 

One more refuge of lies—religion. You say, “‘ What! 
religion! You don’t mean what you say.” I mean 
every word. I say religion is just as much a refuge of 
lies as morality, or other people’s badness, or univer- 
salism, or infidelity. Religion never saved anybody. It 
is one thing to trust in religion; it is something entirely 
different to trust in a living Christ. How many men 
are making their boast in their religion. You go to 
people and they say, “ Oh, I am very religious. I go 
to church. I say my prayers every morning and night. 
I read my Bible. I go to communion. I have been 
baptized. I have been confirmed. I give a tenth of my 
income to the poor. I am very religious.” Well, you 
can do every bit of that and go straight to hell. Others 
say, “I make my confession on Saturday and attend 
mass on Sunday; I say ever so many Paternosters and 
Ave Marias; I count my beads and sprinkle myself 
with holy water.” You can do it all and go straight 
to hell. Religion never saved anybody. Apply the 
tests; is your religion making you a better man or 
woman? A great deal of religion don’t make men or 
women one bit better. There are some people who say 
prayers, read the Bible, go to church, talk in meetings, 
are very prominent in the Church, and they will lie as 
fast as anybody. Many people who do all these things 
will go around slandering their neighbours. Many 
men who are very religious and very prominent in the 
Church—I don’t know whether it is so in your town 
or not, for I don’t know your town—men who are 
very prominent oftentimes in the Church will cut you 
as wide open in a business deal as any man in town. 


112 REAL ALVA LION 


Many a man who is religious treats his servants like 
brutes and oppresses his employees. Many a man who 
is religious turns a deaf ear to the cry of the widow 
and the orphan, unless it is going to get into the papers 
that he gave them something. Many a man is very 
religious and a perfect scoundrel. I met a man in this 
country—never mind what city—he seemed to be a 
most religious man. I met him one Sabbath morn- 
ing. He said, “I am going to conduct a meeting,” and 
he had dressed himself to make himself look as much 
like a preacher as he could. He made his employees 
gather together at a certain hour every day for prayer, 
and he held religious service with them every Sunday 
so that they would not have to go to church. I was 
told the wages that this pious humbug was paying the 
girls that worked for him. They were starvation 
wages. I saw the girls, and they were the palest, most 
pinched crowd of girls I have seen in all England, and 
man after man told me of how he tried to get the better 
of them in deals. That kind of religion will send a 
man to the deepest hell there is. In the second place, 
will your religion stand the test of the dying hour? A 
great deal of religion don’t. A great many very active 
religious people are as badly scared as anybody when 
they come to die. Oh, how I have heard them groan 
and sigh and weep in the dying hour. Their hollow 
religion doesn’t stand the test of that great crisis. 
Will it stand the test of the judgment day? Mere 
religion will not, for what says the Lord Jesus Christ 
Himself in Matt. vii. 22, 23: “ Many will say to Me in 
that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Thy 
name, and in Thy name have cast out devils, and in 
Thy name done many wonderful works? And then 


REFUGES OF LIES 113 


will I profess unto them, I never knew you. Depart 
from Me ye that work iniquity.” Religion is a refuge 
of lies, and if that is what you are trusting in you are 
lost for ever unless you get something better. 

Well, someone will say, Is there no true refuge? 
There is. It is found in the verse before my text. 
God says, “ Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a 
stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure 
foundation; he that believeth shall not make haste.” 
That sure foundation stone ts Jesus Christ. “ Other 
foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, 
Which iss jesisy Christ, “(1 Corti) 11), “Lesaidva 
few moments ago that it is one thing to trust in relig- 
ion and something entirely different to trust in a 
crucified and risen Christ with a living faith. Will that 
refuge stand the test of our own conscience? It will, 
thank God. When my conscience points to my sin, I 
have an answer that satisfies it, and that answer is 
“ Jesus,’ who bore my sins in His own body on the 
cross. Will it make men better men? Yes. A living 
faith in a crucified and living Christ will make every 
man who has it more and more like Christ every day 
of his life, and if you have a faith that is not making 
you like Christ you have not a real faith. Whosoever 
believeth that Jesus is the Son of God overcometh the 
world (1 John v. 4, 5). If the world is overcoming 
you, you have not a living, saving faith in the Son of 
God. Will it stand the test of the dying hour? Thank 
God, yes. How often have I gone to a dying bed and 
looked men and women, and children too, in the face 
and said to them, “ My brother, my sister, your time 
is short. Before morning breaks you will have passed 
into the great beyond.” And with a calm, triumphant, 


114 REAL SALVATION 


and ecstatic voice they said, “I know it; I am ready 
to go.” The gladdest scenes I have ever seen on earth 
have been deathbed scenes of true Christians—scenes 
of triumph and glory. One day at the close of my 
Bible class in Chicago the president of the class came 
up to me and said, “ Pomeroy ”—one of the members 
of my class—“ is dying round the corner of consump- 
tion. I don’t think he will live until morning. I know 
you are busy, but can’t you go and see him?” I said, 
“Certainly, Fred.” I went around and found him 
propped up with pillows. I said to him, “ Mr. Pome- 
roy, they tell me you can’t live through the night.” 
“Oh,” he said, “I know it.” I said, “ Are you afraid 
to die?” “ Afraid?” he said, “afraid to die? No, 1 
shall be glad to depart and be with Christ.” How often 
I have seen it. 

Will it stand the test of the judgment day? Yes. 
If it be God’s will—I say it reverently and thought- 
fully—if it be the will of God, I am willing to face 
God to-night in judgment. You say, “ What, have 
you never sinned?” Alas! I have. Thank God, you 
will never know how deeply I have sinned. But when 
God asks for an answer I will say one word—“ Jesus,” 
—and that will satisfy God. It already satisfies me. 
Men and women, the hail shall sweep away every 
refuge of lies. Throw them all away to-night and come 
to Christ, and be ready for life, ready for death, ready 


for eternity. 


Vill 
He) UND ©) ich 


“Be sure your sin will find you out.”—Num. xxxii. 23. 


No man can escape his own sins. Every sin we com- 
mit will find us, and call us to account and make us 
pay. No man ever committed a single sin that he did 
not pay for in some way. No man ever committed a 
single sin by which he was not a loser. There never 
has been a sin committed on this earth that paid. The 
most stupendous folly of which a man can be guilty 
is for him to imagine that he can ever gain anything 
by doing wrong. Whether you hurt any one else by 
your own wrong-doing or not, you are bound to hurt 
yourself. There are doubtless many men and women 
in this audience to-night who contemplate doing some 
wrong act. Very likely you contemplate doing it to- 
night. Very likely your being in this place is simply 
a step toward the sin you have in mind. I want to 
say to you to-night, as Moses said to the children of 
Reuben and Gad, “ Be sure your sin will find you out.” 
You can’t escape it. You are bound to suffer by that 
sin. It is pretty sure that if a man puts his hand in 
the fire he will be burned. It is absolutely sure that 
if a man sins he will suffer for it, and suffer for each 
individual sin he commits. You may escape the law, 
you cannot escape the consequences of your own sins. 
You may escape the laws of men, you cannot escape 
the law of God. No man can hide where his sin will 
115 


116 REAL SALVATION 


not find him. Let me point out some ways in which a 
man’s sins find him out. 

1. Men’s sins find them out by the execution of 
human laws. The execution of law in human society 
is necessarily imperfect, and yet it is astonishing how 
surely men who break the laws are sooner or later 
brought to book. A man may successfully elude the 
meshes of the law for days, or weeks, or months, or 
years, but he is all the time weaving a net that will 
almost certainly entrap him at last. Take an illustra- 
tion. Some years ago a crime was committed in the 
city of Chicago. The detectives set to work to ferret 
out the criminal. Every clue failed. One day a de- 
tective was speaking to me about it. We were just 
about to separate. He was utterly discouraged. Just 
at the last moment a thought flashed through my mind 
about a party who had not once been suspected. A 
man who had, as he thought, covered all his tracks, not 
a soul on earth but himself knew that he was the crim- 
inal. Inside of two hours that party was under arrest 
and had made full confession of his crime. It is a 
marvellous thing how crime comes to light; how a 
man’s sin finds him out and exposes him at last to the 
contempt of the whole world. 

2. Men’s sins find them out in their own bodies. 
When a man does not pay the penalty of his sin before 
human courts, he pays it in a court where there is no 
possibility of bribery, the court of physical retribu- 
tion for moral offences. Not only do certain diseases 
follow in the train of certain sins, but in a general way 
there is the most intimate connection between morality 
and health. All sins have physical consequences. The 
suffering consequent upon some sins is not so imme- 


FOUND OUT 117 


diate or so marked as the physical suffering conse- 
quent upon a few well-known vices, but it is none the 
less true that every sin has physical consequences. The 
man who sins will suffer for it in his body. His sin 
is bound to find him out. Scarcely a week passes that 
same one does not come to me suffering some great 
physical evil that is simply the consequence of his own 
sin. Young men see others suffering the terrible 
consequences of transgressing God’s law, yet go right 
on as an ox to the slaughter. They fancy that they 
will be an exception. There are no exceptions to phys- 
ical law. Any action that is unnatural or immoral is 
bound to be visited with penalty. Why so many men 
with broken bodies and shattered intellects? Viola- 
tion of God’s law—their sin has found them out. Why 
so many broken-down women? Violation of God’s 
law—your sins are finding you out. Of course, dis- 
ease may be hereditary, or the result of accident or 
misfortune, but if we should eliminate all the sickness 
that is the result directly or indirectly of our own sin, 
we would be surprised at the little sickness there was 
left. Many very excellent young men have been 
guilty of sins in certain directions, and the body is 
shattered and the mind enfeebled in consequence. 
The same is true of many young women, who, in many 
other respects, are most estimable young women. Take 
even such a sin as anger. Does that find a man out in 
his body? Surely. It disorders his blood, stomach, 
brain, nerves. It is demonstrably unhealthy in every 
case, and in many cases leads to paralysis and death. 

In one church of which I was pastor, one of the 
deacons had a stroke of paralysis that finally resulted in 
death. It was said that the stroke of paralysis was 


118 REAL SALVATION 


due to this excellent man losing his temper in a politi- 
cal discussion. It is simply marvellous, if you will 
only study it, the many ways, some simple, some intri- 
cate, some direct and some indirect, in which our sins 
hunt us down and find us out in our own bodies. Man, 
if you are contemplating sin, just.stop and think of this 
a moment, “ Be sure your sin will find you out!” If 
nowhere else, in that body of yours. For every sin you 
commit, you will in some measure pay a_ physical 
penalty. 

3. There is another place in which our sin finds us 
out, and this is more important by far than its finding 
us out in the execution of human laws, or its finding 
us out in our bodies. Sin finds us out in our charac- 
ters. For every sin you commit you will suffer in 
character. Every sin breeds a moral ulcer. A fester- 
ing body is not so bad as a festering character. You 
can’t tell a lie but your moral blood is poisoned by it, 
and your moral constitution undermined. Do you 
think you can cheat a man in business and not suffer 
in your character more than he suffers in his pocket? 
Do you think that you can wrong an employee in his 
wages, and you not suffer immeasurably more in what 
you become, than he suffers in what he gets? Do you 
think you can wrong a man regarding his wife, and 
not have a death-dealing cancer in your own charac- 
ter? Do you think you can read an impure book, or 
tell or listen to an obscene story, and not breed a stink- 
ing distemper in your own moral nature? Do you 
think you can violate those laws of purity that God 
has written in His Word, and on your heart, and in 
your body, and not reap in disgusting tumours in your 
own character? Wherever else the law may seem to 


FOUND OUT 119 


fail, here it absolutely never fails. A man’s sin, a 
woman’s sin, always finds them out in their characters, 
in what they themselves become. 

4. Again, your sin will find you out in your own con- 
science. From whomever else you can hide your sin, 
you cannot hide it from yourself. And you are so 
constructed in the mercy of God that to know you 
are a sinner means self-condemnation and agony. Oh, 
how many of you are suffering to-night untold agonies 
from the bitter consciousness of sins no one knows 
anything about but yourself. No physical torments 
match the torments of an accusing conscience. An 
accusing conscience means hell on earth. No earthly 
prosperity, no human love, no mirth nor music, nor 
revelry, nor fun, nor intoxication, can dispel its clouds, 
nor assuage the agony of its ever-gnawing tooth. Well 
did the old Latin poet Juvenal write: 


“Trust me, nor tortures that the poets feign 
Can match the fierce, unutterable pain 
He feels, who night and day, devoid of rest, 
Carries his own accuser in his breast.” 


Ah! there is a place where all our sins will soon find us 
out—every one of us. Have no doubt of that, my 
friend. “Be sure your sin will find you out.” It 
may be hidden from the officer of the law, it may be 
hidden from the eye of every man and every woman. 
But it will speak to your conscience some day. 
It will find you just there, then beware! That sin 
you are contemplating to-night looks fair and sweet. 
It won’t look so fair, nor taste so sweet, after it is com- 
mitted. It will find you out and you will suffer. Oh, 
how you will suffer. 


120 REAL SALVATION 


Before I pass on to another place where your sin 
will find you out, let me say that the fact that your 
sin is sure to find you out in so many ways, in your re- 
lations to your fellow-men, in your body, in your 
character, in your conscience—all this points unmis- 
takably to the existence of a moral governor of this 
universe. Everything in this universe is tuned to vir- 
tue. The stars in their courses fight against Sisera. 
Everything conspires to punish sin and reward good- 
ness. To see this and to question the existence of 
such a God as the Bible pictures is to be supremely 
irrational. 

5. But there is another place where your sin will 
find you out, i.e., in your children. That is one of 
the most awful things about sin, its curse falls not 
only upon us, but upon our children also. God does 
visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children. 
You may complain about that as much as you like, 
but it is an unquestionable fact, and a wise man 
doesn’t think so much of what he would like to have 
true, as of what really is true. There is no question 
that our sins find us out in our children. Let a man 
be a drinking man, for example. He may not be a 
very hard drinker, but there is almost sure to be a 
curse upon his children. It is more than likely that 
some one of his sons will be a drunkard. I remember 
a man who was a constant, but moderate, drinker. 
He had three sons. I don’t think that man was ever 
drunk in his life. Indeed, he despised a drunkard. 
But he laughed at total abstainers. Each one of his 
three sons became a drunkard. In a New England 
town I knew of a young woman belonging to one of 
the best families. I don’t think that her father was a 


FOUND OUT 121 


drunkard, only a moderate drinker, but the daughter 
inherited an appetite that completely overmastered 
her. She became a periodical drunkard. At times 
she would disappear from home, go to Boston, and 
when pursued be found in the lowest slums beastly 
drunk. Her father’s sin had found him out. Take 
the liquor dealer. His sin is almost sure to find him 
out in his children. A friend of mine of very wide 
experience says he never has known a man in the 
liquor business where the curse sooner or later did not 
strike in his own home. A man was pointed out to 
me in an American town as the one who had made a 
determined effort to upset the temperance principles 
of the majority of the town by introducing a saloon. 
Two members of his own family came to violent 
deaths through drink. His sin found him out. 

Take the Sabbath breaker. Nowadays a great many 
Christians are careless about the Lord’s Day. They 
go out riding, or go out to the park, or go bicycling, 
or playing golf. Let them look out. Their sin will 
find them out in their children. Their children will go 
farther than they do. They will disregard the day 
altogether, they will very likely turn out infidels and 
drunkards and rakes, and all that is bad. If there is 
anything I thank God for in my home training, it is 
the strictness with which we children were trained to 
observe the Lord’s Day. Some of us wandered into 
sin in later life, but when that one day in seven came 
round we couldn’t find heart to do what we did on 
other days. We would go to church, and so we were 
brought back to Christ. The sin of the adulterer will 
find him out in his own children. Let him take heed 
regarding his daughter. A very prominent man in 


122 REAL SALVATION 


America, an excellent man in many respects, was led 
on into sin. Very few knew of it. His wife knew of 
it, and freely forgave him. But his sin found him 
out in his own family. His own daughter fell a prey 
to an infamous scoundrel. Oh, men and women, who 
are contemplating some sinful act to-night, beware, 
lest you bring a curse upon your own household. It 
looks attractive to-night. It seems as if it would pay, 
but it won’t. “ Be sure your sin will find you out.” 
6. There is one more place where your sin will find 
you out—your sin will find you out in eternity. This 
present life is not all. There is a future life, and our 
acts and their consequences will follow us into it. If 
your sin does not find you out here, it will there. You 
may be absolutely sure of that. We shall in eternity 
reap the consequences of every sin we sowed in time. 
It sometimes seems to go on here to the end unwhipped 
of justice. Men defraud their employees, they rob 
the widow and the orphan, they condemn other men 
and their families to beggary, that they may increase 
their already too enormous wealth, and no one seems 
to call them to account. It will not always be so. God 
will call them to account, to strict account, and a few 
thousands, or hundreds of thousands, or millions of 
their ill-gotten wealth given to charity will not blind 
the eyes of a Holy God. They shall suffer. Men 
sometimes lay traps for foolish girls, and they go 
down to ruin and contempt and an outcast’s grave, 
and no one seems to call the man to account. He 
goes on and on, admitted to the “ best society,” and 
loaded with honours. It will not always be so. His 
sin will find him out, if not in this world, in the next; 
and he will stand before the universe exposed to shame, 


FOUND OUT 123 


loaded with dishonour, cast out to everlasting con- 
tempt. Men despise God, laugh at His Word, and 
trample under foot His Son, and God still lets them 
live. He does not seem to call them to account. But 
it will not be always so. “Be sure your sin will find 
you out.” “The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking 
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey 
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be 
punished with everlasting destruction from the pres- 
ence of the Lord, and from the glory of His power.” 

ber sire syour sin) will) find) youl-out. = Lhe 
principle of our text is sure. All history is a con- 
firmation of and commentary on this point of the Word 
of God. Every man’s experience is a confirmation 
of it. You cannot sin without suffering for it. Your 
sin will find you out in the workings of human society, 
or in your own body, or in your characters, or in your 
conscience, or in your children, or in eternity, or in all 
together. Is there a man here to-night contemplating 
sin? Don’t do it. I beg of you, don’t do it. You 
will regret it. You will suffer, you will pay an awful 
price. Your sin will find you out. 

But many of us have sinned already, and our sins 
are finding us out already. What shall we do? Fly 
to Christ. I have preached law to you to-night. Now, 
a word of Gospel. There is but one way of escape 
from the penalties of the law, that is, in the grace of 
the Gospel. “ Christ has redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, being made a curse for us” (Gal. iii. 13). 
Fly to Him at once. He calls, “Come unto Me, all 
ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest” (Matt. xi. 28). Come—come at once. 


IX 
WHO DHE NTCANS DS Has Ay EDs 


“Who then can be saved? ”—MarkK x. 26. 


THE disciples asked that question of Jesus. Jesus 
had just told them how hard it was for a rich man to 
enter into the kingdom of heaven, and the disciples 
seem to have held the same opinion as most men hold 
to-day, that a rich man can get anywhere. But Jesus 
said “ No”; that it was easier for a camel to pass 
through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to 
enter the kingdom of God. Then they asked the 
question: If that is so—if it is so hard for a rich 
man to be saved—what chance does anybody else 
stand? 

Who then can be saved? Jestis went on to tell them 
that though it was impossible with men for a rich 
man to be saved—and I think all experience carries 
this out, the rich man stands the poorest chance of 
salvation of anybody on earth; there are fewer rich 
people saved than people of any other class—Jesus 
told them that God, with whom all things are possible, 
could save even a rich man; but nobody but God 
could. 

We come, then, to the question itself: “Who then 
can be saved?” ‘The Bible answers the question 
very fully and very plainly. The Bible tells us that 

124 


WHO THEN CAN BE SAVED? 125 


there are some people who cannot be saved, and that 
there are some people who can be saved. 


I. WHo CANNOT BE SAVED? 


We will take up first those who cannot be saved. 

1. In the first place, no man can be saved who will 
not give up his sin. We read in Isa. iv. 7, “ Let the 
wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his 
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and He 
will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for He 
will abundantly pardon.” But if he will not forsake 
his ways and turn to God he cannot be saved. Every 
man and every woman has to choose between sin and 
salvation. You cannot have both. If you won’t give 
up sin you must give up salvation. There are schemes 
of salvation in our day that propose to save a man 
while he continues in sin. These schemes of salva- 
tion are absurdities upon the very face. We read in 
Matt. i. 21, concerning our Saviour, “They shall call 
His name Jesus, for He shall save His people from 
their sins.” Not in them. You cannot save a man 
while he continues in sin. Sin is damnation; holiness 
is salvation. And you might just as well propose to 
cure a man who is ill while he continues in his disease 
as to save a sinner while he continues in his sin. 
A man is not cured till he is well, and a man is not 
saved till he quits sin. 

The whole reason why some of you men here 
to-night are not saved is because you won’t give up 
sin. Some of you won’t give up your drunkenness; 
some of you won’t give up your adultery; some of 
you won't give up your profanity; some of you won’t 


126 REAL SALVATION 


give up your lying; some of you won’t give up your 
bad temper; some won’t give up one thing, and some 
won't give up another. Well, then, you must go into 
perdition. You cannot be saved if you won’t give up 
sin, and if you persist in sinning you will be lost for 
ever. 

A man in Chicago came to a friend of mine and 
said to him, “I want to be saved.” My friend re- 
plied, “ You do not want to be saved.” “ But,” he 
said, “I do.” My friend said, “You are not willing 
to give up your drinking.” “No,” he said, “I am 
not.” He answered, “ Well, then, you do not want 
to be saved. To be saved means to give up sin.” 
Jesus Christ can save any man; but Jesus Christ won't, 
and Jesus Christ can’t, save a man who won't give up 
his sin. 

2. In the second place, no man can be saved who 
trusts in his own righteousness, and is not willing to 
admit that he is a lost sinner. That is the trouble 
with hundreds here to-night. You are proud of your 
own morality; you are not willing to get down to 
the dust, and say, “I am a poor, vile, worthless, miser- 
able sinner,’ and you will never be saved, and never 
can be saved, while you trust in your own righteous- 
ness. Jesus tells us that two men went up to the 
temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, one of the most 
respectable, religious men in the community, a man 
that everybody looked up to; the other, a publican, 
a man whom everybody looked down upon. The 
Pharisee prayed this way. He talked about his own 
goodness. He looked up, and said, “I thank Thee, 
O God, that I am not as other men are, unjust, ex- 
tortioners, adulterers,” and then he looked contemp- 


WHO THEN CAN BE SAVED? 127 


tuously over to the poor publican, “or even as this 
publican. I fast twice every week ”—pretty religious, 
wasn't he?—“I give a tenth of all I get.” And Jesus 
said that this man went out of the temple down to his 
house an unforgiven, hopelessly lost sinner; but the 
publican, the outcast, the man that everybody looked 
down upon, would not so much as lift up his eyes to 
heaven, but felt he was a miserable, worthless sinner. 
He smote upon his breast, and said, ‘“ God be merciful 
to me a sinner!” And Jesus said that this man went 
down to his house justified. Anybody can be saved 
that will take the sinner’s place and cry for mercy; 
nobody else can. 

I have a very quaint friend over in America who is 
a Scotchman, and one day he was walking out through 
the country when a man came along in a carriage. He 
saw the old man walking, and invited him to get into 
the carriage, which he very promptly did, for he saw 
an opportunity for doing good. The man who had 
invited him into the carriage was very curious to 
know who the old Scotchman was, so he asked him 
questions, and finally the old Scotchman said, “I will 
tell you who I am, and I will tell you what my business 
is. I have a very strange business. I am hunting for 
heirs.” The other man said, “ What?” “I am hunt- 
ing for heirs—heirs to a great estate. I represent a 
very great estate, and I am hunting for heirs for it, 
and there are a good many round this neighbourhood.” 
The other said, “Do you mind telling me their 
names?” “ No,” he said; “it is a very large family ; 
their name begins with ‘S.’” “Oh,” said the man; 
“ Smith, I suppose?” “ No,” the old man replied, “a 
much larger family than the Smith family.” He says, 


128 REAL SAbW ATION 


“Larger than the Smith family! Who are they?” 
The old Scotchman said, “ They are the sinner family. 
The estate I represent is the kingdom of God, the inher- 
itance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away, and the heirs to it are the sinners who are willing 
to take the family name and own up that they are sin- 
ners, and look to God for pardon.”” Do you belong to 
that family? Do you belong to the sinner family? If 
you do you can be saved. If you are not willing to 
own that you do you cannot be saved. You are lost 
for ever. 

3. In the third place, no man, no woman, can be 
saved who is not willing to accept salvation as a free 
gift. We are told in Eph. ii. 8, “ For by grace are ye 
saved through faith, and that not of yourselves, it is 
the gift of God”; and in Rom. vi. 23, “ The gift of 
God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.” 
Salvation is a free gift. Anybody can have it for noth- 
ing ; nobody can have it any other way, and if you are 
not willing to take it as a free gift you cannot have it 
at all. 

My wife was talking one day in America to a young 
man, a son of the richest man in all that neighbour- 
hood. There seemed to be some difficulty about his 
accepting Christ. Finally my wife said to him, calling 
him by his name, “ The trouble with you is you are 
not willing to accept salvation as a free gift.” He said, 
“Mrs. Torrey, that is just it; I am not willing to 
accept salvation as a free gift. If I could earn it, if I 
could work for it, if I could deserve it! I am will- 
ing to earn it, but I am not willing to take it as a 
free gift.” 

Well, nobody can earn it, nobody can merit it, 


WHO (THEN; CAN BE SAVED? 129 


nobody can deserve it; nobody can get it, except for 
nothing, and unless you are willing to take it as a free 
gift you will never get it at all. The richest million- 
aire has to get it the same way as the pauper—as a 
free gift; and the richest man on earth that gets saved 
will have nothing more to boast of when he gets to 
heaven than the poorest pauper who is saved. 

4. In the fourth place, nobody can be saved who will 
not accept Jesus Christ as his Saviour. We are told 
in Acts iv. 12, “ There is none other name under heaven 
given among men whereby we must be saved.” Any- 
body can be saved in Christ; nobody can be saved in 
any other way. An infidel once said to a friend of 
mine, Mr. Henry Varley, “If I cannot be saved with- 
out accepting Christ I won’t be saved.” Well, then, 
he won’t be saved. That is all there is to it, he won’t 
be saved. 

If you should ever go to Sydney, you will soon find 
that every citizen in the city is very proud of their 
harbour. You won't be in Sydney half-an-hour before 
somebody will ask you, “ What do you think of our 
harbour?” They may well be proud of it. It is one 
of the finest, if not the finest harbour in the world, 
beautiful and capacious. But it has only one entrance. 
There is one high promontory of rock called the North 
Head, and another high promontory called the South 
Head, and the only channel, wide and deep, is between 
these two heads. A little way south of the South Head 
is another headland, called “Jacob’s Ladder.” One 
night, many years ago, a vessel called the Duncan Dun- 
bar, with hundreds of people on board, came outside of 
Sydney harbour after dark. The captain saw the South 
Head, and thought it was the North Head; he saw 


130 REAL SALVATION 


“ Jacob’s Ladder,” and thought it was the South Head. 
He steered and put on full speed, and steamed in be- 
tween the two lights, and ran on to the rocks, and every 
one of the hundreds on board perished, except one man, 
who was thrown up into a cave on the face of the rock. 
Now, that captain was perfectly sincere—there never 
was a more sincere man on earth—but he was mis- 
taken, and he was lost. People say it does not make 
any difference what you believe if you are only sincere ; 
but the more sincerely you believe error the worse you 
are off. There is just one channel into salvation, and 
that is Christ. Try to go any other way, no matter how 
sincere you are, and you ‘will be wrecked and lost 
eternally. 


II. WHo CAN BE SAVED? 


So much for who cannot be saved. Now, who can 
be saved ? 

First of all, sinners can be saved, even the vilest. 
We read in 1 Tim. i. 15, “ This is a faithful saying, 
and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came 
into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.” 
He has already saved the chief of sinners, and He is 
able to do it again. In the city where I used to live, 
the city of Minneapolis, a young girl of thirteen was 
betrayed. Her father and mother cast her off, so 
much the more shame for them. Her brothers cast 
her off, and I doubt if they were any better than she 
was; but, you know, it is one thing for a girl to sin, 
and another thing for a man to sin. It is in the eyes 
of man, but it is not in the eyes of God. They cast 
this poor girl of only thirteen years of age off, and I 
think they were worse than she was—more devilish. 


WHO THEN CAN BE SAVED? 131 


Of course, she went down; she became the companion 
of thieves, robbers, forgers, murderers, of everything 
that was disreputable, a member of two of the worst 
gangs, at different times, in New York and Chicago. 
One night when she was away down in sin a friend 
of mine met her, and said to her, “ If you are ever sick 
of this life, come to me, and I will help you out of it.” 
A night came when she was thoroughly sick of it, and 
she went to this gentleman’s house—a very wealthy 
man, who used all his money for God—there was one 
rich man saved, but he has given his money, pretty 
much all of it, away. She came to his house. His 
wife, who was in, tried to show her the way of life. 
After a while the gentleman came in, and he showed 
her the way of life, and she was saved. To-day that 
young woman occupies a high position of great re- 
sponsibility and honour in America, and there is 
scarcely one in the society in which she is a very high 
officer—I doubt if there is one—who even knows her 
past life. God has covered it up, though she bears the 
same name as she did in that life. A few years ago 
I was in Northfield, and she came to me and said, “I 
hope, Mr. Torrey, that you won’t think it necessary 
to tell the people here, you or Mrs. Torrey ”—(we 
were about the only ones, if not the only ones, there 
that knew her past record; she had been in our house 
in the days of her trouble)—“ I hope you won’t think 
it necessary to tell the people here my story.” I said, 
“Most assuredly we shall not,’ for why should you 
tell a saved woman’s story, when it is underneath the 
Blood, any more than a saved man’s story? It is no 
longer her story; it is blotted out. And that woman 
is to-day a highly honoured woman. Out of the deep- 


132 REAL SALVATION 


est depth of sin Jesus Christ has not only saved her, 
but covered up her past. 

2. In the second place, any man or woman who is 
too weak to resist sin in their own strength can be 
saved. It is not a question of your strength, but of 
Christ’s strength. We read in Jude, verse 24, ‘““ Now 
unto Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to 
present you faultless before the presence of His glory 
with exceeding joy.” We read in 1 Pet. i. 5, ‘““ Who 
are kept by the power of God through faith unto sal- 
vation.” Jesus Christ can keep the weakest man or 
woman just as well as the strongest. I have seen men 
start out in the Christian life who talk this way in tes- 
timony meetings: “Friends, you know me; I am a 
man of great decision of character. When I make up 
my mind to do anything, I always go through. I have 
started out in this Christian life, and I want you to 
understand that I am not going to backslide as so many 
do; I am going through.” Whenever I hear a man 
talking that way, I know he is going to backslide in- 
side of six weeks every time. Another man will stand 
up trembling, hesitant, and he will say, “ You all know 
me; you know I have no will power left; I have tried 
to quit my sin, time and time again, and, as you know, 
I have failed every time. I have absolutely no confi- 
dence in myself; but God says in Isa. xli. 10, ‘ Fear 
thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I 
am thy. God; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help 
thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of 
My righteousness,’ and I am trusting in Him.” When 
I hear a man talking that way, I know he is going to 
stand every time. 

One day somebody came to me in Chicago, and said, 


WHO THEN CAN BE SAVED? 133 


“We have got to find a place for Mrs. S Vale said! 
“Why?” “Well,” they said, “Nels got drunk last 
night, and tried to kill his wife with a shoe-knife, and 
it is not safe for her nor her child, so she has left her 
husband. We must do something to provide for her.” 
I said, “ You are quite right to provide for her; that is 
just what we ought to do.” 

Not long after Nels came round to me, and said, 
“Mr. Torrey, do you know where my wife is?” I 
said, “Ido.” He said, “ Will you please tell me where 
she is?” I replied, “I will not. You tried to kill 
her; you are a brute; you do not deserve to have a 
wife, and I am not going to tell you where she is, to 
let you go and kill her.” He said, “ If you do not tell 
me I will commit suicide.” “ Very well,” I said; 
“you will go to hell if you do.” That kind of fellow 
never commits suicide. Well, he kept getting drunk. 
He could not help it, poor fellow. Every little while 
he would come round to me for five cents, or for ten 
cents, saying that he was going to get a job in a shoe 
factory. I always knew that the money was going for 
whisky. He got a good many five cent pieces from 
me, and a good many from my students, and the money 
always went for whisky. Years and years went on, 
and Nels was always saying that he was going to quit 
drinking. I knew he was not. He meant to. He 
would come round saying that he was hunting for 
work; but I knew he was looking for another drink. 
That went on for years. One day I said to God, 
“ Heavenly Father, if you will give me Nels S mal 
will never despair of another man as long as I live.” 
I do not know if it was the same week, but I am sure 
it was very soon afterwards, that Nels S got his 


134 REAL SALVATION 


feet upon the Rock, Christ Jesus, and never fell again. 
Years have passed; he is an honoured member of my 
church. When I was home this summer, among those 
who came to welcome me was Nels S , his wife, 
and child, a happy family in Jesus Christ. 

Friends, the Christ who saved Nels S , the lying, 
habitual, hopeless drunkard, can save any man or 
woman in Bingley Hall to-night that will trust Him. 

3. Once more, amy man can be saved who thinks he 
has committed the unpardonable sin, but who is willing 
to come to Jesus Christ to-night. Jesus says in John 
vi. 37, “ Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
out.” I think I have never gone to any place in my 
life where somebody has not written to me, or come 
to me, and said, “I had committed the unpardonable 
sin,” and almost every one, if not every one, up to 
date, has gone away rejoicing in Jesus Christ. I get 
letters every week, from all over England, from people 
who tell me that they have committed the unpardonable 
sin, 

One time I received a letter, a very broken-hearted 
letter, from a father who was a Presbyterian minister. 
He wrote that he had a son who was in awful spir- 
itual darkness. The son thought that he had com- 
mitted the unpardonable sin, and he was plunged into 
absolute despair. Would I take him at the Bible In- 
stitute? I replied that though I had every sympathy 
with him in his sorrow, the Bible Institute was not for 
the purpose of helping cases like these, but to train 
men and women for Christian service. 

The father continued to write, beseeching me to 
take his son, and got other friends to plead for him. 
Finally I consented to take the young man. He was 


WHO THEN CAN BE SAVED? 135 


sent to me under guard, lest he might do some rash 
thing by the way. 

When he was brought to my office I showed him 
to a seat. As soon as the others had left the room he 
began the conversation by saying, “I am possessed of 
the devil.” “I think quite likely you are,” I replied, 
“but Christ is able to cast out devils.” “ You do not 
understand me,” he said, “I mean that the devil has 
entered into me as he did into Judas Iscariot.” “ That 
may be,” I answered, “ but Christ came to destroy the 
works of the devil. Now He says in John vi. 37, 
“Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’ 
If you will just come to Him, He will receive you 
and set you free from Satan’s power.” The conversa- 
tion went on in this way for some time: he constantly 
asserting the absolute hopelessness of his case, and I 
on my part constantly asserting the power of Jesus 
Christ, and His promise, “ Him that cometh to Me I 
will in no wise cast out.” After a while I sent the 
young man to his room. Days and weeks passed, and 
we had many conversations, always on the same line, 
and I always holding him to John vi. 37. One day I 
met him in the hall of the Institute, and made up my 
mind that the time had come to have the battle out. 
I told him to sit down, and I sat down beside him. 
“Do you believe the Bible?” I asked. “ Yes,” he re- 
plied, “I believe everything in it.” ‘Do you believe 
John vi. 37?” I asked. “ Yes, I believe everything 
in the Bible.” “ Do you believe that Jesus Christ told 
the truth when He said, ‘Him that cometh to Me I 
will in no wise cast out?” ‘“ Yes, I do; I believe 
everything in the Bible.” 

“ Well, then, will you come?” 


136 REAL’ SALVATION 


“T have committed the unpardonable sin.” 

I replied, “ Jesus does not say, ‘ Him that hath not 
committed the unpardonable sin that cometh to Me 
I will in no wise cast out.’ He says, ‘Him that 
cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’” 

“But I have sinned wilfully after I have received 
the knowledge of the truth.” 

“Jesus does not say, ‘Him that has not sinned wil- 
fully after he received the knowledge of the truth that 
cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out.’ He says, 
‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’ ” 

“But I have been once enlightened, and have tasted 
the heavenly gift, and have fallen away, and it is im- 
possible to renew me again unto repentance.” 

“Jesus does not say, “Him that has not tasted of 
the heavenly gift, and has not fallen away, if he 
cometh to Me I will in no wise cast him out.’ He 
says, “Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
Outs 

“ But I am possessed of the devil,” he answered. 

“Jesus does not say, ‘ Him that is not possessed of 
the devil that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’ 
He says, ‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise 
cast out.’ ” 

“T mean that the devil is entered into me as he did 
into Judas Iscariot.” 

“Jesus does not say, ‘Him that the devil has not 
entered into, as he did into Judas Iscariot, that cometh 
to Me I will in no wise cast out.’ He says, ‘ Him that 
cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’ ” 

“ But my heart is hard as a millstone.” 

“Jesus does not say, ‘If a man’s heart is soft and 
tender, and he comes unto Me, I will in no wise cast 


WHO THEN: CAN BE SAVED? 137 


him out.’ He says, ‘ Him that cometh to Me I will in 
no wise cast him out.’” 

“ But I do not know that I have any desire to come.” 

“Jesus does not say, ‘Him that hath a desire to 
come, and comes unto Me, I will in no wise cast out.’ 
He says, ‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise 
cast out.’ ” 

“But I do not know that I can come in the right 
way.” 

“Jesus does not say, ‘Him that cometh to Me in 
the right way I will in no wise cast him out.’ He says, 
‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.’ ” 

“ Well, I don’t know that I care to come.” 

“Jesus does not say, “Him that careth to come to 
Me, and comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out.’ He 
says, ‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
Gute? 

The man’s excuses and subterfuges were exhausted. 
I looked him square in the face and said, “ Now, will 
you come? Get down on your knees, and quit your 
nonsense.” He knelt, and I knelt by his side. ‘“ Now,” 
I said, “ follow me in prayer.” 

“Lord Jesus,” I said, and he repeated “ Lord 
Jesus,” “my heart is as hard as a millstone.” 

“My heart is as hard as a millstone,” he repeated. 

“T have no desire to come unto Thee.” 

“JT have no desire to come unto Thee.” 

“ But Thou hast said in Thy Word”: 

“But Thou hast said in Thy Word”: 

“Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
out.” 

“Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
out.” 


138 REAL SALVATION 


“ Now the best I know how I come.” 

“Now the best I know how I come.” 

“ Thou hast said, ‘ Him that cometh to Me I will in 
no wise cast out.’ ”’ 

“Thou hast said, ‘ Him that cometh to Me I will in 
no wise cast out.’ ”’ 

“T believe this statement of Thine.” 

“T believe this statement of Thine.” 

“Therefore, though I don’t feel it, I believe Thou 
hast received me.” 

“Therefore, though I don’t feel it, I believe Thou 
hast received me.” 

When he had finished, I said, “Did you really 
comers -serreplied, = lecdia.. 

“Has He received you?” 

“T do not feel it,” he replied. 

“But what does He say?” 

“Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast 
out.” 

“Ts this true? Does Jesus tell the truth, or does He 
lie?” 

“ He tells the truth.” 

“ What, then, must He have done?” 

“He must have received me.” 

“Now,” I said, “go to your room: stand firmly 
upon this promise of Jesus Christ. The devil will give 
you an awful conflict, but just answer him every 
time with John vi. 37, and stand right there, believing 
what Jesus says in spite of your feelings, in spite of 
what the devil may say, in spite of everything.” 

He went to his room. The devil did give him an 
awful conflict, but he stood firmly on John vi. 37, 
and came out of his room triumphant and radiant. 


WHO] THEN CAN BE SAVED? 139 


Years have passed since then. Though the devil 
has tried again and again to plunge him into despair, 
he has stood firmly on John vi. 37, and he is to-day 
being used of God to do larger work for Christ than 
almost any man I know. He is the author of that 
hymn, 


“Years I spent in vanity and pride, 
Caring not my Lord was crucified, 
Knowing not it was for me He died 

On Calvary. 


“Mercy there was great, and grace was free, 
Pardon there was multiplied to me, 
There my burdened soul found liberty, 
At Calvary.” 


Lastly, any one can be saved that will come to Jesus. 
“The Spirit and the bride say ‘Come.’ And let him 
that heareth say “Come.’ And let him that is athirst 
‘Come.’ And whosoever will, let him take the Water 
of Life freely.” Come now, come. 


x 
HOWTOS INd eh Fock 


“Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and 
and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you and learn 
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find 
rest unto your souls.”—Marrv. xi. 28, 20. 


Ir is a pretty dark night, but I have a very bright 
text—a good text for a smoky night. My subject 
to-night is just the offer this world needs. You will 
find it in Matt. xi. 28, “Come unto Me, all ye that 
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 
That is just the offer this old world needs. What this 
world needs is rest. What every man and woman in 
this building to-night, who has not already found it 
ir. Christ, needs is rest. When I see the millions of 
men and women on the earth, the toilers who are 
working hard for small pay, and who go home night 
after night to their wretched homes, all worn out, 
without any fit place to sleep—when I see them my 
heart is heavy; but when I see the many more millions 
who have not merely no rest for the body, but no rest 
for their heart, no rest for their souls, rich as well as 
poor, my heart is heavier yet. But I am glad that 
there is One who can give rest to every tired heart, 
and that one is Jesus Christ. He stands to-night with 
extended hands, and says, “ Come unto Me, all ye that 
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 
Now, those are either the words of a Divine Being 
140 


HOW TO FIND REST 141 


or the words of a lunatic. If the Lord Jesus Christ 
offers rest and gives it, He is a Divine Being; if He 
offers rest and cannot give it, He is a lunatic. Sup- 
pose any man, even the greatest and the best that the 
world ever saw, should stand and hold out his hands 
to this sorrowing, grief-stricken, burdened world of 
ours and say what Jesus said, “Come unto Me, and 
I will give you rest,” you would know at once that 
the man had gone crazy, for no man could do it. But 
Jesus offers to do it, and He does it. Thousands, 
tens of thousands, millions throughout the centuries 
have accepted Christ’s offer, and nobody ever accepted 
it yet that did not find rest. 

There was a great throng when the Lord Jesus 
spoke that day, perhaps as big as the crowd that 
throngs Bingley Hall to-night, but a much more motley 
crowd. It represented far more misery than this 
crowd represents. This crowd represents misery 
enough if we only knew all, but that was a more miser- 
able crowd. There were multitudes of the poor there; 
the penniless and the sick were there; all kinds of 
diseases were represented—leprosy, blindness, every 
manner of disease. The demoniac was there, the out- 
cast man and woman, the man and woman who were 
down, the man and woman that everybody was tramp- 
ing upon—a vast mass of misery—and the Lord Jesus 
Christ cast His loving eye over that great multitude 
that represented so much misery, and His great heart 
went out toward them, and He said, ‘‘ Come, come to 
Me, every one of you who has a burden, every one who 
has a sorrow, every one who has a broken heart; come 
unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and 
I will give you rest.” 


‘142 REAL SALVATION 


And do you know, men and women, He not only 
extended His hands to that great throng that repre- 
sented so much misery, but He also extends His 
hands to all men and all women in all ages that are 
burdened, down-trodden, oppressed, wretched, broken- 
hearted, despairing. He says to them all, “Come unto 
Me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest.” He says it to you to-night. 

Will you please notice, in the first place, who it is 
He has invited—all that labour and are heavy laden. 
The commentators have tried to tone down the words 
of our Lord. Some commentators tell us that He 
meant all who were burdened with the many require- 
ments of the Mosaic law; other commentators tell us 
He meant all who were burdened by a consciousness 
of sin, a sense of guilt. But, friends, He means just 
what it says. “Come unto Me, all ye that labour ”— 
every man that has a burden, a sorrow, a heart-ache, 
a trouble, a woe of any kind—Jesus invites you to 
come. 

First of all, He invites all who are burdened with a 
sense of sin and a sense of shame. I suppose there 
are men and women here to-night, many of them, who 
have been brought in one way or another to recognise 
the fact that your life is disgraceful. You are ashamed 
of yourself. You hardly lift up your heads, dare not 
lift them up and look your fellow-men or fellow- 
women in the face. You are saying to yourself, “ My 
life is simply shameful,” and you are crushed by the 
sense of your disgrace and your sin. To every one of 
you Jesus says, “ Come unto Me, and I will give you 
rest. 

That day when our Lord Jesus uttered these words 


HOW PO RIND] REST 143 


in Capernaum, away out on the outskirts of the crowd 
Was a woman who was a sinner, a professional sin- 
ner, an outcast despised by every one. As she stood 
there on the outskirts of that great crowd, I have no 
doubt many a woman who prided herself on her moral- 
ity turned round and looked at her with scorn, but soon 
Jesus looks at her too—not with scorn, with pity, with 
compassion, with tenderness, with yearning, with love, 
—and as His eye falls upon her she looks right at 
Him and she sees He is speaking directly to her. He 
seems to lose sight of everybody else, and just stretches 
His hands out towards her as He utters the words of 
the text, “ Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” That woman 
says, ““ He means me,” and when the crowd broke up 
she followed at a distance to see where Jesus went. 
Jesus went to the house of Simon, the Pharisee, who 
had invited Him to dinner. As soon as she knows 
where He had gone she hurries to her home, takes out 
of her treasures a very costly box of ointment, the 
most expensive thing that she has, hurries back to 
Simon’s house, goes into the open door through the 
open court, and as Jesus reclines there in the Oriental 
way, she comes up behind, bends over His feet, which 
are bare in the Oriental fashion, and begins to bathe 
them with her tears. The other guests looked up in 
scorn. They say, “ This man pretends to be a prophet; 
He is no prophet, or He would not allow that woman 
to touch Him. If He were a prophet He would know 
what kind of a woman she is; that she is a sinner.” 
Well, He does know. He knows better than any of 
them do, not only that she is a sinner, but that she is a 
repenting sinner. When His feet are wet with her 


144 REAL SALVATION 


tears she takes the long tresses of her beautiful hair 
and wipes His feet with her hair. Then she breaks 
over them the alabaster box of precious ointment, and 
the Lord Jesus turns to her and says, ‘“ Woman, thy 
sins are all forgiven.” Then He says again, “ Woman, 
thy faith hath saved thee, go in peace,” and that wo- 
man, who that day stood on the outskirts of that 
crowd with a breaking heart, went away from that 
house with the rest of God in her heart. Is there any 
woman like her here to-night, or any man down in 
sin, any one burdened with a sense of sin and shame— 
come to the Lord Jesus Christ to-night, and He will 
give you rest. 

In the second place, the Lord Jesus invites every 
man and woman who is burdened by the bondage of 
sin. There are men, for example, here to-night, who 
are in bondage to the appetite for strong drink. You 
want to be sober, you want to lead upright lives; you 
have tried again and again to give up the drink, but 
you failed. And this appetite for strong drink is an 
awful crushing burden to-night. Some of you are 
burdened with the appetite for morphine or cocaine, 
or chloral, or laundanum. Oh, how you have tried to 
be free from your bondage. The Lord Jesus says, 
“Come unto Me and I will give you rest.” Some of 
you are burdened with vileness, with impurity, with 
disgusting sin. How you hate yourself, how you de- 
spise yourself; how you have tried to break away time 
and time again, until at last you have given it up, and 
to-night you are utterly discouraged, crushed by the 
power of your sin. Jesus says, “ Come unto Me and I 
will give you rest.” With some of the rest of you it is 
some other sin, but all over Bingley Hall to-night, if 


HOW TO FIND REST 145 


we could read the secret sorrow of your heart we 
would find hundreds of men and women, crushed to 
the earth by the power of sin. The Lord Jesus says 
to every one of you, “ Come unto Me all ye that labour 
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 

I have a very dear friend in America who was very 
carefully reared by a godly mother. He has as good 
blood in his veins as there is in America. His mother 
was very much afraid that he would become a drunk- 
ard, and so she besought him that he would never 
touch alcoholic liquor. He lived up to eighteen years 
of age without tasting it. He lived in the country, 
and one day he went to town with a man. On the way 
back the man bought some whisky and asked him to 
drink. “No,” he said, “I promised my mother never 
to drink.” “ Well,” he said, “if you don’t drink you 
will insult me.” And that elderly man just worked 
on that boy until he got him to drink his first glass of 
whisky. Then the demon in him was set on fire. From 
that he became almost immediately a drunkard. He 
went down, down, down, in the course of years, lost 
one position after another, and at last was a wrecked 
man in New York city. He had uttered one hundred 
and thirty-eight forgeries against his last employer, 
and the officers of the law were now in search for 
him. 

One night, one awful night, he went into a saloon 
and for a long time sat there in a drunken stupor on 
a whisky keg, and then coming out of the stupor he 
felt all the horrors of delirium tremens coming over 
him. He thought he was going to die. He went up to 
the bar and ordered a glass of whisky, then he rattled 
the glass upon the bar so that the bar shook. He said, 


146 REAL SALVATION 


“Men, hear me, hear me; I shall never drink another 
glass of whisky if I die.” And they all laughed at 
him. He went out of the public-house, went to the 
lock-up, and said to the sergeant of police at the desk, 
“Lock me up; I am going to have the tremens; lock 
me up!” The sergeant sent him down to the cell and 
locked him up. He spent a night of awful agony, 
and the next day of awful agony, and as the night 
was coming on somebody said to him—the lock-up was 
a little way from the Cremorne Mission—‘ Why don’t 
you go to Jerry M’Auley’s Mission.” So as best he 
could, in an awful condition, he went down to Jerry 
M’Auley’s Cremorne Mission, listened to one man after 
another who had been saved giving his testimony, and 
when Jerry M’Auley asked all who would take Christ 
to come to the front, he went up to the front, knelt 
down, and said, “Jerry, pray for me.” Jerry said, 
“Pray for yourself,” ‘ Oh,” he said, “I don’t know 
how to pray. I have forgotten how to pray. Jerry, 
pray for me.” Jerry said, “ Pray for yourself,” and 
that wrecked and ruined man lifted up his broken 
heart to Jesus. He came to Jesus; Jesus met him 
then and there, and took the appetite for whisky from 
him then and there. That man is to-day one of the 
most honoured men in New York city. Some years 
ago I was in the city of Washington, and I met the 
Postmaster-General of the United States. He asked 
me if I would go to dinner with him that night after 
a meeting. I went up to dinner to the house of the 
Postmaster-General of the United States of America, 
and as I entered the drawing-room who should I see 
sitting there as an honoured guest but Mr. Samuel 
Hadley, this poor drunkard of bygone years of whom 


HOW TO FIND REST 147 


I have just spoken, but now an honoured guest in the 
house of the Postmaster-General of the United States 
of America. 

Oh, men, are you burdened? Have you fought 
against sin and failed? Have you tried again and 
again, perhaps signed pledge after pledge, but only to 
break it? Have you some other besetting sin? Are 
you burdened with the weight of an overcoming sin? 
Jesus holds out His hand to you to-night. He says, 
“Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, 
and I will give you rest.” 

He invites everbody burdened with a sorrow. If 
you only knew the sorrow of men and women here 
to-night—how much sorrow is represented in this great 
audience! All the light has gone out of the lives of 
some of you men because your wife has recently died. 
Some of you sons and daughters are broken-hearted 
to-night over the recent death of a loving Christian 
mother. Some of you fathers and mothers are broken- 
hearted because just recently a loved child has been 
taken from your home and sleeps to-night in the quiet 
cemetery. Some of you have met with reverses in 
business. Some of you have other sorrows; but it 
matters not what your sorrow is, how peculiar, how 
great, how overwhelming. To every sorrowing man 
and woman to-night Jesus holds out His hands and 
says, “ Come unto Me and I will give you rest.” 

Some time ago, in our country, there were a gentle- 
man and his wife who had a very happy home. The 
man was prosperous in business in the city of Cleve- 
land in Ohio, but there came a reverse in business and 
the man lost everything he had in the world. The 
home was broken up; his oldest daughter had to go 


148 REAL SALVATION 


out to work to make a living. His two boys were too 
young to work. His wife had to leave him and take 
the two boys and go away to one of the Southern States 
to the home of a sister, and act as housekeeper to make 
a living for herself and boys. The father came to 
Chicago to see if he could not retrieve his fortunes. 
After his wife had been in the South some time, hop- 
ing that a better day might come again, she received 
a telegraphic despatch saying that her husband was 
very ill in Chicago, and she had better come on to 
Chicago at once. She took the train. It was a long 
journey. She reached Chicago that night and went to 
the hospital to which her husband had been taken. 
But by some mistake the authorities of the hospital 
said to her, “ You cannot see your husband to-night ; 
come at nine o’clock to-morrow morning and you can 
see him.” With a heavy heart she went to a place 
where she stopped, and went back to the hospital at 
nine the next morning. As she rang the bell, they met 
her at the door and said, “ Your husband died last 
night.” She took him out and buried him, and so 
great was her loneliness and sorrow, and so frequent 
her weeping, that it affected her eyesight. She went 
to a physician. The physician told her it was not very 
serious, that she could go back to Mississippi and her 
eyes would soon be well. She supposed that he was a 
regular physician; she found out afterwards that he 
was a Christian science physician and was trying to 
cure her by making her feel she was not ill. She went 
back to Mississippi. Her eyes got worse and worse. 
She went to a regular physician. The physician ex- 
amined her eyes. He said, “Madam, your case is 
hopeless. If you had come to me a few weeks ago I 


HOW Or PIN RES 1: 149 


could have helped you. Your trouble has gone so far 
now that there is absolutely no hope for you. You 
will be totally blind.” Home broken up, husband 
buried, eyesight gone. She came on to Chicago. She 
dropped into our church; she heard the Gospel; she 
heard about Jesus. She came to Jesus with all her 
overwhelming sorrow, and Jesus gave her rest. And 
if you come to the prayer meeting at our church any 
Friday night you will see sitting there a woman with 
a refined, beautiful face, dressed in black, eyes closed, 
perfectly sightless, but in that face you will see a 
serener and profounder joy than you have often seen 
in a human face. Very likely you will see her rise to 
her feet in the course of the meeting with a face radiant 
with the sunshine of heaven, and tell how wonderfully 
God has blessed her; and you may hear her say what 
she says often, that she thanks God she has lost her 
sight, for out of her great troubles she was brought 
to Christ and found a joy that she never knew be- 
fore. 

Men and women, there is a place where there is a 
cure for every sorrow. That place is at the feet of 
Jesus. I have a beautiful Testament at home that I 
think very highly of, not because of the beauty of the 
binding, but because my mother gave it to my grand- 
mother, my father’s mother—I think it was at the time 
of my grandfather’s death—and on the flyleaf of the 
Testament in my mother’s own beautiful handwriting 
are these words, “ Earth hath no sorrow that heaven 
cannot heal.” That is true, but something better is 
true. Earth has no sorrow that Jesus cannot heal right 
now before we get to heaven. 

Again, the Lord Jesus invites all who are burdened 


150 REAL SALVATION 


by doubt and unbelief. Now, to some men doubt and 
unbelief are not a burden. They are glad that they 
are sceptics. They are proud of their doubts. But to 
an earnest-minded man, to a man of any real moral 
earnestness, doubt is a burden, a heavy load—he is 
never proud of doubt. He never rejoices in doubt. 
An earnest-minded man wants not doubt, but truth; 
not uncertainty, but certainty; not agnosticism, but 
knowledge of God. I doubt not in this great crowd 
there are some who honestly doubt, and your doubt is 
a burden. Well, Jesus says to you, “Come unto Me all 
ye that are burdened with doubt, and I will give you 
rest.” “ What,” you say, “a sceptic come to Chirist, 
an unbeliever come to Christ, an agnostic come to 
Christ!” Certainly; He is the best One you can come 
to. Thomas was a sceptic. The other disciples had 
seen our Lord after His resurrection. Thomas was not 
present. When Thomas came back the other disciples 
said, ““ We have seen the Lord.” He said, “I don’t 
believe a word of it. I don’t believe you have seen 
the Lord, and I won’t believe it unless I see with my 
own eyes, and put my fingers into the prints of the nails 
in His hand, and thrust my hand into His side.” But 
Thomas was an honest doubter, and when he thought 
that perhaps the Lord Jesus would be around the next 
Sunday evening he was there. He came to Jesus with 
his doubts. Jesus scattered every one of them, and 
Thomas cried, “My Lord and my God.” 

Nathaniel was a doubter, an honest doubter, a 
thorough-going sceptic. Philip came to him and said, 
“ Nathaniel, we have found Him of whom Moses in 
the law, and the prophets, did write—Jesus of Naza- 
reth, the son of Joseph.” Nathaniel said, “I don’t 


HOW TO FIND REST 151 


believe He is the Messiah. He came from Nazareth, 
then He is not the Messiah. Can any good thing come 
out of Nazareth?” Philip said, ‘““ You come and see.” 
Ah, that is the thing to do; come and see. Nathaniel 
said, “I will come.” He came along with Philip; he 
met the Lord, and he had not been with the Lord ten 
minutes when all his doubts were gone, and Nathaniel 
cried, “ Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of 
Israel 

Men, if you are burdened with doubt bring your 
doubts to Jesus. Whatever your burden is, Jesus in- 
vites you, every burdened one, every heavy-hearted 
one, to come unto Him. “Come unto Me and I will 
give you rest.” 

Will you please notice what Jesus invites you to do? 
Jesus says, “Come unto Me”—not, come unto the 
Church; the Church cannot give you rest. I believe in 
the Church; I believe every converted man ought to 
be a member of some church, but the Church never 
gave anybody rest. The Church is full of people to- 
day who have never found rest. They have come to 
the Church instead of coming to Jesus Himself. Jesus 
does not say, “ Come to a creed.” I believe in creeds. 
I think every man ought to have a creed. A creed 
is simply an intelligent, systematic statement of what 
a man believes; and a man ought to believe something, 
and ought to be able to state intelligently what he 
believes, and if. he is an intelligent, studious man, his 
creed will be getting longer all the time. I have a 
creed, a great long one. It is getting longer every day, 
for I am learning something new every day; but, 
friends, no creed ever gave anybody rest. You go to 
the Thirty-nine Articles ; they won’t give you rest. Go 


152 REAL SALVATION 


to the Westminster Catechism—good creed; it won’t 
give you rest, though. There was never a creed writ- 
ten or printed that would give anybody rest. It is not 
going to a creed; it is going to the personal Saviour. 
Many a man is orthodox, orthodox enough for any- 
body—great, long creed—but he never came to the 
personal Jesus, and he has not found rest. The Lord 
Jesus does not say, ‘‘ Come unto the pope,” or, “ Come 
unto the priest,” or, “Come unto the preacher,” or, 
“ Come unto the evangelist,” or “ Come unto any other 
man.” He says, “Come unto Me.” No preacher can 
give you rest, no priest can give you rest, no pope 
can give you rest, no man can give you rest. Jesus 
says, “Come unto Me.” I have sometimes asked peo- 
ple if they have come to Jesus, and they say, “ Oh, I 
am a Protestant.” Well, that never saved anybody. 
There will be lots of Protestants in hell. Others say, 
“T am a Roman Catholic.” That never saved anybody 
either. There will be lots of Roman Catholics in hell. 
When a man says, “I am a Roman Catholic,” I say, 
“Tam not asking you that. Have you come to Jesus?” 
It is not a question of whether you are a Roman Catho- 
lic or a Protestant. Have you come to Jesus? If you 
have not, will you come to-night? 

Oh, men are so anxious to put somebody else in the 
place of Jesus—to come to some man. A lady said to 
me one night in my own church, “I am a Roman 
Catholic. I like to come to hear you preach, and I 
would like to ask you a question. Can I come and 
confess to you? I want to confess to somebody?” 
“No, you can’t,” I said, “ you come to Jesus.” “ Come 
unto Me,” says Jesus. Nobody but Jesus can give 
you rest. Jesus can and He will give rest to any one 


HOW TO FIND REST 153 


who comes to Him to-night. “Come unto Me all ye 
that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest. Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me, for 
I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest 
unto your souls. For My yoke is easy and My burden 
is light.” 

Come to Jesus, take His yoke, surrender absolutely 
unto Him, commit all your sins to Him to pardon, 
commit all your doubts to Him to remove, commit all 
your thoughts to Him to teach, commit yourself to 
Him to believe in Him, to learn from Him, to obey 
Him, to serve Him, and the moment you come to Him 
with all your heart and cast yourself upon Him, He 
will give you rest. You can have rest right now before 
I get through preaching, before I ask you to stand 
up, right there sitting in your chair, right this moment. 
Jesus is nearer to you than the man in the next 
seat. Say, “Jesus, I come,” and He will give you 
TESLs 

One night in my church in Chicago one of the 
officers of my church, going around the upper gallery 
after I was through preaching, and as the audience 
was going out, stepped up to a gentleman and said, 
“ Are you saved?” “ Yes, sir,” he said, “ I am saved.” 
He was very positive about it. ‘“ How long have you 
been saved?” He said, “ About five minutes.” He 
said, “ When were you saved?” “ About five minutes 
ago, while that man was preaching.” He did not wait 
till I got through my sermon. He came to Jesus right 
there and then, and Jesus saved him right there. 

Will you come? Lose sight of me, lose sight of Mr. 
Alexander, see the Lord Jesus standing there, holding 
out His hands to you, one and all, with a heart bursting 


‘154 REAL SALVATION 


with love, breaking with pity and compassion, and say- 
ing to every heavy-hearted man and woman in this 
building, “ Come unto Me all ye that labour and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Will you 
come? 


XI 


JOXPUNSPEAKAB UL EVANDER ULL 
OPT GLOW Y; 


“Though now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice, 
with joy unspeakable and full of glory.”—1 Per. i. 8. 


CHRISTIANS are the happiest people in the world. 
According to our text they “rejoice with joy un- 
speakable and full of glory,” and nobody else does. 
I am going to tell you this afternoon why Christians 
are happy. 

First of all Christians are happy, real ones, because 
they know that their sins are all forgiven. Nobody 
in this world knows that his sins are forgiven except 
a Christian. If any man or woman who is not a Chris- 
tian says, “I know my sins are forgiven,” they say 
what is not true; for their sins are not forgiven. But 
every true Christian knows that his sins are forgiven— 
all forgiven. You say, “ How do they know that?” 
Because God says so. If you will turn to Acts xiii. 39, 
you will see that “ All that believe are justified from 
all things.” God says so. A woman came to Christ 
one day who had been a sinner. She washed His feet 
with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her 
head. Men looked on in scorn, but Jesus turned to 
her and said, ‘“‘ Woman, thy sins, which are many, are 
all forgiven,” and she went out of that place knowing 
that her sins were all forgiven. She knew it because 


155 


156 REAL SALVATION 


Jesus said so. And God says just as distinctly in the 
verse I have just quoted that every Christian’s sins 
are forgiven, just as Jesus said it to the woman. 
Christians know their sins are forgiven in a second 
way—because the Holy Spirit bears witness in their 
hearts that their sins are forgiven. The apostle Peter 
one day was preaching in the household of Cornelius, 
and the apostle Peter said, speaking about Jesus, “To 
Him give all the prophets witness, that through 
His name whosoever believeth in Him shall receive 
remission of sins” (Acts x. 43); and Cornelius and 
his whole household believed it, and immediately the 
Spirit of God came upon them. When you and I 
believe in Jesus, His Spirit comes into our hearts 
bearing witness with our spirit that our sins are all 
forgiven, and that we are children of God. There is 
no joy on earth like the joy of knowing that God has 
forgiven and blotted out every sin you ever committed. 

Suppose a person were in prison for some crime, in 
there for life, and some one should bring him a par- 
don, don’t you think he would be happy? The Gover- 
nor of the State of Pennsylvania once decided to 
pardon a man, and he sent Mr. Moody to tell him that 
he was pardoned. Mr. Moody went to the prison. He 
was going to preach a sermon, but before he began 
the sermon he said, ‘“ The Governor of the State has 
handed me a pardon for one of you men.” He was not 
going to tell till he got through the sernion who the 
man was. But as he looked over the crowd of men he 
saw there was such suspense and such agony, every 
one wondering whether it was he, that he said, “ This 
will never do in the world, to keep these men in sus- 
pense. I must tell them at once who the man is.” 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 157 


So he said, “ The man who is pardoned is a alert 
oh! the joy that filled that man’s heart when he knew 
that out of that great company of criminals he was the 
one whom the Governor had pardoned. But, men, it 
is nothing to know that one is pardoned here on earth 
to knowing that God has forgiven all your sins and 
blotted them all out. Oh, the joy that comes into the 
heart when a man knows that every sin he ever com- 
mitted is pardoned and blotted out, and that God has 
absolutely nothing against him. A great king once 
wrote a song that has lived through the centuries. It 
was a song of joy. That great king had been a great 
sinner, and God had forgiven his sin. He had much 
to make a man happy. He was the greatest king of 
his day. He had great wealth, he had great armies, 
he was the greatest general of the time, he had a great 
palace; but when he came to write his song of joy he 
did not say, “ Happy is the man that has a beautiful 
palace”’ ; he did not say, “ Happy is the man that has 
great armies ”’ ; he did not say, “ Happy is the man that 
is a great general” ; he did not say, “ Happy is the man 
that is beloved by his people.” He said, “ Oh, happy 
is the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin 
is covered; happy is the man unto whom the Lord 
imputeth not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no 
guile” (Ps. xxxii. 1, 2). Every man here to-day who 
takes the Lord Jesus as his Saviour will have his sins 
all forgiven, and will have the joy of knowing that 
every sin is blotted out. 

In the second place, Christians are happy because 
they are set free from sin’s power. Now, everybody 
that sins isa slave. They are slaves to sin. Years ago, 
when I was a boy in the Southern States, where Mr. 


158 REAL SALVATION 


Alexander comes from, there were slaves. The black 
men were slaves. Some of the masters were kind, 
and some of the masters were cruel—oh, so very, very 
cruel—and it makes one’s heart ache to think what 
those poor black men suffered! But, women, there was 
never a slave-owner in the South that was such a cruel 
master as Satan, and there was never a bondage so 
awful as the bondage of sin. Some women are bound 
by the appetite for strong drink. I presume some of 
you men have tried to break away from drink time 
and time again, but you are enslaved by it. Some of 
you are enslaved by morphine, some by laudanum, 
some by cocaine, some by a bad temper, some by an 
ungovernable tongue, some by other things; but every 
man or woman out of Christ is a slave. But when you 
come to Jesus Christ He sets you free. He says in 
John viii. 31 and 32, “If ye continue in My word, 
then are ye My disciples indeed; and ye shall know 
the truth, and the truth shall make you free” ; and He 
says in verse 36, “If the Son shall make you free, ye 
shall be free indeed.” The Lord Jesus Christ takes every 
man and every woman that believes in Him and just 
sets them free from the power of sin, from the power 
of strong drink, from the power of laudanum, from 
the power of bad temper, from the power of impurity, 
from the power of profanity, from the power of every 
sin. I was reading this morning the life-story of a 
very dear friend of mine. I have read it a number of 
times before, but I read it again this morning. He 
told how one night, after he had been a slave for years, 
he knelt down and prayed in a mission, and Jesus 
Christ met him and set him free. And he said, “ From 
that till this I have never had the least desire for 


‘ 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 159 


strong drink.” When he went out of that mission 
that night he knew that, after years of slavery and 
ruin, he was a free man. He just shouted for joy, 
“Glory to God !” and he has been shouting ever since. 
I wish he was here to-day that you might hear him 
shout. I wish he was here on this platform that you 
could look into his face. Oh, the joy of being set free 
from sin after days and weeks or months or, it may be, 
years of slavery. 

In the third place, Christians are happy because they 
know that they are children of God. It is a wonder- 
ful thing to know that you are a child of God. No 
one knows it but the Christian, for no one is a child 
of God but the Christian. You say, “ How does the 
Christian know that he is a child of God?” Because 
God says so. In John i. 12, He says that, “ As many 
as received Him to them gave He power to become the 
sons of God, even to them that believe on His name,” 
and if any man or woman here to-day, young or old, 
takes the Lord Jesus Christ, the moment you do it 
you will be a child of God, and know that you are a 
child of God. Isn’t that enough to be happy over? 
Suppose you knew that you were the son of some great 
man, or the son of a millionaire, or the son of a king, 
or the son of an emperor, don’t you think you would 
be happy? But it is nothing to be the son of any king 
or any emperor to being the son of God, the King of 
Kings. 

One day, years ago, one of your English dukes lay 
dying. He called his younger brother, the one next to 
him, to his bedside, and said, “ Brother, in a few hours 
you will be a duke—and I will be a king.” He was a 
Christian ; he was a child of a king, and he knew that 


160 REAL SALVATION 


when he left his dukedom down here he would get a 
kingdom up there. And, friends, the poorest man or 
woman there is in this audience this afternoon, young 
or old, if you will take Jesus Christ, the moment you 
do you can lift up your head and say, “I am a child 
of a King, I know I am a child of God.” Sometimes, 
as I travel round the world, people will point out a 
man to me and say, “ That man is the son of such and 
such a great man.” Pointing out one to me in Ger- 
many they said “ That is the son of such and such a 
king ;” in another place they said, “ That is the son of 
such and such a king.” What of it? Suppose he is 
a child of a king; I am a child of God. That is better 
than to be a child of a king. Now, they suggested that 
you put silver in the collection to-day. Well, I guess 
that some of you could not put silver in, but I want to 
say that if you can’t put silver in you are just as wel- 
come as anybody, and if you can’t put copper in you 
are just as welcome as anybody. We read in the Bible 
that unto the poor the Gospel was preached. I believe 
in preaching to the rich. They need it as much as 
anybody, but, thank God, the woman that sits here to- 
day and had to walk here because she hadn’t money 
enough to pay a penny to come in the ’bus, the poorest 
woman there is in this building, or the richest, can be- 
come a child of God in a moment by taking Jesus 
Christ, and I would rather be the poorest woman in 
the building that is a child of God than the richest 
woman in the building that is a child of the devil. 
Again, Christians are happy because they are de- 
livered from all fear. A true Christian that believes 
the Bible, and studies it, and remembers it, is not 
afraid of anything or anybody. Now a great many 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 161 


people that are well off, that are very rich, have all 
their joy spoiled because they are constantly thinking 
that some calamity may overtake them. Rich men 
don’t enjoy their riches because they are afraid of 
losing them, and people that have their friends around 
them don’t enjoy their friends because they are afraid 
they will die. People that have all the comforts of life 
don’t enjoy them because they fear that some calamity 
may come and sweep the comforts away. Those with 
very little, who are perhaps just making a living, 
don’t enjoy it because they fear they may be thrown 
out of work and not be able to make a living. But 
the true Christian is delivered from all that fear. There 
is one verse in the Bible which if you are a child of 
God, and believe it, and keep it in mind, will take 
away all anxiety as long as you live. That is Rom. 
vili. 28, “ And we know that all things work together 
for good to them that love God.” Sometimes the devil 
whispers to me, “ Perhaps you will lose everything 
you have in the world.” “ Well,” I say, “ it don’t make 
any difference if I do. If I do, that will be one of 
the ‘all things,’ and ‘all things work together for 
good.’ ” 

Sometimes when I am away from my family the devil 
whispers to me, “ Your wife is ill,” or “ Your son is 
ill,’ or “ Your daughters are ill, and will die before you 
ever see them.” I don’t know how often the devil has 
come and whispered that. When he does, I just lift 
up my head, and say, “ Well, that cannot be unless it 
is the will of God, my Father. And if they do die, it 
is one of the ‘all things’ that work together for 
good.” The devil comes sometimes and whispers, 
“Perhaps you will be taken ill, perhaps you may lose 


162 REAL SALVATION 


your eyesight, or your hearing, and not be able to 
preach any more.” I just lift up my head, and say, 
“Well, if I do, it will be one of the ‘all things,’ and 
‘all things work together for good to them that love 
God.’” So, you see, if a person is a real Christian and 
believes the Bible and bears it in mind, he is not afraid 
of calamity, neither is he afraid of any man. Oh, so 
many people are afraid of men, and tormented by the 
fear of men. A great many of you here to-day would 
come out as Christians but you are afraid if you do 
some man or woman might see you, and you are afraid 
that you will be laughed at, that you will be persecuted 
in the mill, or the factory, or the shop. But a Chris- 
tian is not afraid of man. The Christian reads Rom. 
viii. 31, and says, “If God be for us, who can be 
against us?” A Christian does not fear the face of 
any man or woman on earth. 

In Chicago once a man came to me and said, “ You 
had better look out, there is a man who says he has 
it in for you.” He told me who the man was—a very 
desperate man, a man willing to do almost anything. 
Well, I was not troubled a bit. I did not lie awake 
a single night; I was not troubled two seconds. I said, 
“That is all right. I know he is quite powerful, and 
I have reason to believe he is unprincipled, but I know 
that I am right with God, that God is on my side, and 
if God has undertaken to take care of me, that man 
can’t touch me, unless it is God’s will.” I tell you, 
friends, a living faith in Jesus Christ takes away for 
ever all fear of man. 

It takes away the fear of death. I know so many 
people whose lives are just shadowed and darkened 
by the fear of death. Right in the midst of health 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 163 


and strength they say, “ Oh, if I should be taken with 
consumption, if I should get heart-disease, if I should 
have diphtheria, if I should take small-pox, or have 
some other terrible disease;” but a Christian is not 
afraid of death. Death has lost all its terrors for the 
Christian. A Christian knows that what men call 
death is for him simply to depart and be with Christ. 

I went over one evening in Chicago to see a young 
lady who had sung in my choir—a very beautiful, 
attractive girl—whose life had been full of promise, 
but who had been suddenly cut down by rapid con- 
sumption. She had probably only a few days to live. 
As it turned out, she did not have a day to live. I was 
told that she would like to see me, and I went over to 
see her. I went into the room where the young 
girl, cut down in the very blossom of young woman- 
hood, was lying upon her dying bed. I sat down by her 
dying bed, and her face shone like an angel’s. I said, 
“Humanly speaking, there is no hope for your re- 
covery.” She said, “I know; I don’t care to recover. 
I would have been glad to have recovered to serve 
Christ if it had been His will, but since He has decided 
I can’t recover, and must very soon leave this world, 
I wanted to see you and tell you that I don’t fear 
death. I am looking forward to what men call death 
with great joy and with great anticipation.” I went 
to my church to preach, and when I got up into the 
pulpit they brought me a note. That dying girl had 
asked for paper, and she wrote a note and sent it over 
to the choir of the church, telling them how happy she 
was as she lay face to face with death and eternity. 
Oh, I tell you friends, it is a joyful thing to have no 
fear of death. 


164 REAL SALVATION 


Then, a Christian is delivered from fear of eternity. 
Now, to people out of Christ eternity is a dreadful 
thing to think about, but for people in Christ eternity 
is about the sweetest thing there is to think about. 
There is one word that fills the heart of the Christian 
with joy, but fills the heart of the unsaved with terror. 
That word is ETERNITY. Oh, I love that word eternity, 
where all sorrow is over for ever, all separation, all 
sickness, all death, where all is eternal sunshine. How 
I love that word eternity. But some of you don’t love 
it. I have received letters since I have been here from 
people who say they wish that I would not talk so 
much about eternity. I heard of one man who did 
not want to come to the meetings because I talked so 
much of eternity. But Christians like to have me talk 
of eternity. You write out a card with these words, 
“Where will you spend eternity?” Hand it to a man 
who is not a Christian, and it will make him mad; 
hand it to a Christian, and it will make him glad. He 
will answer, “ Why, I will spend eternity with Christ 
in glory.” 

That leads me to the next reason why Christians are 
happy. It is because they know that they will live for 
ever. Oh, it is a wonderful thing to know that you will 
never die, that throughout the endless ages of God 
you will live on and on and on. As we read in 1 John 
ii. 17, “And the world passeth away, and the lust 
thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for 
ever.” And we read in John iii. 36, “ He that believeth 
on the Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth 
not the Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God 
abideth on him.” Before I was a Christian I did not 
like to look into the future, but how I love to look into 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 165 


the future now! Very often I sit in my room and say, 
“T wonder how many years I will have to preach?” 
Well, I can’t have very many at the outside, prob- 
ably about twenty, possibly twenty-five, barely possibly 
thirty years. That is not very much, and then, what? 
Eternity! That is better than preaching. It is a 
great joy to preach, but oh, to be able to stand and 
look down through the coming ages and see them roll 
on, age upon age, age upon age, and age upon age, 
and know that you are going to live for all eternity 
in happiness and joy ever increasing! I don’t wonder 
that Christians are happy. I don’t wonder that they 
have “ joy unspeakable and full of glory.” 

Two other reasons why Christians are happy. The 
next one is because they know that they are heirs, heirs 
of God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ. They know 
that they have an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, 
and that fadeth not away, laid up in store in heaven 
for them. When one rides down your beautiful Eng- 
lish country roads and looks out on the beautiful man- 
sions and manor houses, and sees the lakes, and the 
forests, and the park, and the gardens, one says, “ It 
must be very pleasant to live in there.” Well, I suppose 
it is, but how long will they live there? The father of 
the family will probably live ten years, twenty perhaps, 
the children will live forty or fifty, possibly sixty. Soon 
gone, soon gone. But, friends, every man, woman, 
and child in this audience this afternoon who takes 
Jesus will have an inheritance that will last for ever, an 
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth 
not away. Every earthly inheritance soon fails—even 
the richest man on earth won’t keep his property very 
long. But the poorest man or woman here to-day, 


166 REAL SALVATION 


young or old, who will take Jesus Christ will get an 
inheritance that will last for ever. 

One day a poor English girl was riding along in a 
third-class carriage, very plainly dressed, looking out 
of the window. They passed by beautiful farms, beau- 
tiful trees, beautiful mansions, and every little while a 
person who sat near the poor girl heard her say, “ That 
belongs to my Father.” They would come to a farm, 
and she would say, “That belongs to my Father” ; 
then to a beautiful mansion-house, “That belongs to 
my Father too” ; then they would pass a lordly castle, 
and she would say, “That belongs to my Father.” 
Finally, the man who was listening turned to her and 
said, “ Well, miss, you must have a rich Father, for 
you have been saying for miles as we passed along, 
‘That belongs to my Father.’ Your Father must own 
a great deal of property. He must be a very rich man.” 
She said, “ He is—I am‘a child of God.” She was very 
rich. 

Men and women, listen. Some of you are having 
a pretty hard time down in this world. I suppose 
you have to work long hours for small pay. Your 
homes are not very comfortable. Well, I want to tell 
you, you won’t have to live in them very long; and if 
you will take Christ, you are going to such a mansion 
as this earth never saw, to such an inheritance as no 
man ever inherited on this earth. When you go by the 
rich man’s mansion you say, “I wish I had a home 
like that.” ‘You could not keep it long. If you will 
take Jesus Christ, you will know that you are heir to 
all God has. The whole world belongs to Him—the 
cattle on a thousand hills; and if you are a child of 
God, if you will take Christ, you will be heir to all 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 167 


He is and all He has; and you can become an heir 
to-day. 

One more reason why Christians are happy. That 
is because God gives to Christians the Holy Spirit to 
dwell in their hearts, and when the Holy Spirit dwells 
in the heart He fills the heart with sunshine and glad- 
ness, and joy unspeakable. One Monday morning a 
poor woman came to my door, rang the bell, and said 
she wanted to see me, and the girl said, “ You know 
he sees no one on Monday.” She said, “ I know it, but 
I have got to see him.” So the girl called me down; 
and when I came down I saw one of the members of 
my church—a poor washerwoman who had to work 
hard for her living. “Oh,” she said, “ Mr. Torrey, 
I knew you didn’t see anybody on Monday, and I 
didn’t like to trouble you, but I received the Holy 
Spirit last night. I could not sleep all night, and I 
made up my mind that I was going to give up one 
day’s work, and just come round and tell you how 
happy I was. I just had to. I can’t very well afford 
to give up a day’s work, but my heart is so full of joy 
I could not keep still. I had to tell somebody, and I 
didn’t know anybody else I wanted to tell as much as 
I wanted to tell you. Though I knew you didn’t see 
anybody on Monday, I thought you would be glad to 
have me come and tell you.” “ Yes,” I said, “I am 
glad.” 

That woman was so happy that she could not work; 
her heart was full of joy. 

So, woman, I don’t care how dark your heart is 
to-day, how full of sadness it is; I don’t care how 
full of bitterness; I don’t care how hopeless; if you 
will really take Jesus Christ as your Saviour, and sur- 


168 REAL SALVATION 


render your whole heart and your whole life to Him as 
your Lord and Master, there will come into your heart 
sweetness above anything to be known this side of 
heaven. 

Christians rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory. But you have to be real Christians. Just going 
to church won’t do it; just saying your prayers won't 
do; just reading your Catechism won't do; just read- 
ing the Bible won’t do; just reading the Prayer-book 
won't do; just being baptized won’t do; just being 
confirmed won’t do it; just going to the Lord’s Sup- 
per won’t do; but if you will take Jesus into your 
heart to be your Saviour, and to rule and reign there, 
and surrender all to Him, I will guarantee that every 
one of you who will do it will get a joy that is heaven 
begun below. People say to me, “Do you expect to 
go to heaven?” Yes, I know I am going to heaven; 
but, thank God, I am in heaven now. I have now a 
present heaven to go to the future heaven in. I feel 
like singing all the time. I used to be one of the 
bluest men on earth. I was constitutionally blue. I 
was despondent; I was gloomy. I inherited it from 
both sides. Oh, I used to sit and have the blues by 
the hour. But, do you know, I never have had the 
blues since I really took the Lord Jesus. I have had 
trouble; I have had losses; I have seen everything 
I had in the world swept away, so I had nothing 
left; I have seen the time when I had a wife and four 
children and not a penny to buy them the next meal 
with. But it came in time, for I knew where to 
go—right to God. I have seen when I didn’t know 
where the rent for the house was coming from, nor 
the wood for the fire in a bitter, cold winter. But I 


JOY UNSPEAKABLE 169 


was happy. I have been in a foreign country where 
I could not talk the language, and some way or other 
there was a failure of supplies, and I was absolutely 
penniless in a foreign city with a wife and child, hardly 
knowing anybody in the whole place. But I was 
happy. I knew Whom I trusted. I knew He would 
get me out somehow, and He did. Oh, if you want 
darkness turned into sunshine, if you want sadness 
turned into joy, if you want despair turned into glory, 
if you want defeat turned into victory, if you want 
all that is bad turned into all that is good—take the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and take Him right now. 


XII 


THE FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH 
A SNARE 


“The fear of man bringeth a snare, but whoso putteth his 
trust in the Lord shall be safe.”—Prov. xxix. 25. 


Two ways—one of ruin, the other of salvation. The 
fear of man bringeth a snare—ruin! ruin!—but whoso 
putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe—the way 
of salvation, trust in Jehovah. Even if you do not 
believe another verse in the Bible, you know that verse 
is true. Every man here, I don’t care how much of 
an infidel he may be, knows that the fear of man 
bringeth a snare. How many people there are in 
Birmingham to-night who have been snared by the 
fear of man! How many a young woman has come 
to Birmingham from a country village an innocent, 
guileless, pure, upright girl, but loving gaiety; and 
coming to Birmingham she has sought gaiety where 
a poor girl is likely to seek it, in the theatre, in 
the dance hall, but meaning no ill. And one night 
as she returns from a dance with a young man in 
whom she had become interested, and who has been 
kind to her, he makes advances that the modesty of the 
girl resents. She colours up. She is indignant. He 
laughs at her, “ Oh,” he says, “ you don’t understand. 
I don’t mean anything wrong. Every one does this 
in the city. You know city life is gayer than country 
life. You don’t understand—that is all.” He laughs 
170 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 171 


at the girl, and she permits what she at first resented. 
A few nights afterwards he goes a little farther. 
Again she is indignant, and again he laughs at her, 
and laughs her out of her puritanical scruples, as 
he calls them. Then he goes farther, and to-night 
that girl is on the street ruined, dishonoured, be- 
longing to the wretchedest class that lives—an out- 
cast woman. The fear of man, the fear of some 
one’s ridicule, has brought a snare that has landed 
that girl in the slums. 

How many a young man has come to Birming- 
ham. He knew enough about life to know that any 
use of intoxicating liquor is dangerous in the day 
in which you and I live. His father and mother 
brought him up to the habits of temperance and total 
abstinence, and he is resolved in coming to the city 
and its perils that he will never visit a public-house; 
that he will never drink even a glass of beer or wine. 
But one night he is out with his new friends to some 
entertainment. After the entertainment is over they 
propose going to a public-house just for one glass of 
beer. “No,” he says, “I never drink; it is perilous 
to drink. I was brought up a total abstainer, and I 
intend to remain a total abstainer till the day of my 
death.” They laugh at him. “Oh,” they say, “be 
a man. Nobody but milksops are total abstainers. 
If you are going to amount to anything in Birming- 
ham you must take an occasional glass of beer. Of 
course, we don’t want you to go to excess. We 
don’t believe in intemperance, but one glass of beer 
won't hurt you. Come, be a man.” He takes his 
first glass of beer. It rouses the demon that is in 
him. That leads to another, and another, and another, 


172 REAL SALVATION 


and many another, and to-night that young fellow is 
a bloated, ruined, penniless drunkard on the streets 
of Birmingham. The fear of man has brought a snare 
that has ruined for time and eternity. 

I received a few weeks ago from a friend one of 
the saddest letters I ever received. It was a letter 
from his brother’s wife. This brother of my friend 
was a very brilliant man, a man of the greatest 
promise, of extraordinary promise; but he got to 
drinking. He found that the drink was fastening 
itself upon him, and he broke off and became a total 
abstainer. He had occasion to go to London to visit 
one of your best known men, a man that everybody 
in this building knows by name. That man was in 
the way of promoting him to great honour. When 
he visited this man, this man offered him a glass of 
wine at his table. He didn’t dare offend his power- 
ful friend by refusing the glass of wine. He thought, 
“Tt is only one glass.” He took it. He was mad. 
He rushed from that house, went to a public house, 
and then to another, and for days his friends did not 
know where he was. They sent detectives on his 
track, who found him helplessly drunk in one of the 
lowest dens in London, and he has been drinking 
from that day to this. ‘The broken-hearted wife wrote 
my friend, his brother—“ He is crazy. He has gone 
and ruined his family; his home is broken up; all our 
prospects are blighted; he is lost; he is mad.” The 
fear of man brought a snare. 

How many a young fellow has come to this city 
who was too much of a man to gamble—for no man 
who gambles is much of a man in that direction— 
too much of a man to gamble, but he likes an occa- 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 173 


sional innocent game of cards. One night he is 
playing cards with his friends, and some one sug- 
gests that they just put up a threepenny bit to make 
it interesting. That is all. “Oh,” they say, “we 
don’t care for the money, but it is just to lend inter- 
est to the game.” “No,” he says; “I never gamble. 
I think gambling is stealing.” He is right, for gam- 
bling is stealing. No self-respecting man will gamble, 
for no self-respecting man wants another man’s 
money. I don’t see how a man who has taken another 
man’s money by gambling can look in the looking- 
glass. I should think he would be ashamed to look 
himself in the face. He says, “ No; gambling is rank 
dishonesty; I never gamble.” “Oh,” they say, “ it 
is not gambling; it is just for a little amusement. 
You better go home and go to Sunday School. Go 
and sit with your mother.” And they laugh him into 
his first game of cards for money. The gambler’s 
passion—a harder passion to overcome than the appe- 
tite for drink ever was—seizes him, and to-night he 
is behind prison bars, because he gambled until 
he took his employer’s money to gamble with. The 
fear of man has brought a snare that has landed him 
in prison. 

Again, the fear of man ensnares Christians into 
a denial of their Lord. It did Peter. Oh, thank 
God, the time came when Peter threw his fear to 
the winds, and stood before the very men that con- 
demned Jesus to die, and confessed his Lord, and 
rebuked their sin. But this night, after he has just 
told his Lord that though all forsake Him, he never 
will, there before the servant-girl that accuses him 
of being a follower of Jesus of Nazareth, he says, 


174 REAL SALVATION © 


“T don’t know the man.” Then a few moments 
after he repeats his denial, and an hour after, with 
oaths and cursings, frightened by what a servant- 
girl may do or say, he denies his Lord. Many of you 
are doing the same every day. Down in your office, 
or shop, or your factory, or your mill, Jesus Christ 
is ridiculed. Hard things are said about the Bible; 
the name of the Lord that died upon the cross of 
Calvary for you is taken in blasphemy, and you are 
not man enough, you are not woman enough, to 
stand up and to say, “I am a Christian. I believe 
in that Christ whom you are ridiculing. I believe in 
that Bible you are laughing at.” You are afraid to be 
laughed at, and the fear of man has ensnared you into 
a denial of the Lord that died on the cross for you. 
Again, the fear of man ensnares professed Chris- 
tians into a guilty compromise with the world. How 
many professed Christians in Birmingham are doing 
things in family life, in social life, in business life, 
that you know are wrong. Your best moral judg- 
ment condemns you for them every time you do them, 
but you say, “ Well, everybody does them. I will be 
considered odd if I don’t do them. I will be ostra- 
cised from my set.” A Christian man in America, 
living in one of the suburbs of Chicago, where there 
is a great deal of the form of godliness, but very little 
of the real power thereof, said to me about his daugh- 
ter, “My daughter is practically ostracised in this 
suburb because she won’t dance, play cards, or go 
to the theatre.” Thank God, she was woman enough, 
young girl though she was, to be willing to be ostra- 
cised rather than compromise. <A lot of you are not. 
You would rather not go to the theatre—you don’t 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 175' 


feel happy there. You would rather not play cards. 
You know the peril of it. You know how many a 
family card-party has been the door through which 
a son has become a gambler. You would rather not 
dance. Your better self is shocked, as the modesty 
of every intelligent thinking woman must be shocked, 
at what you see in every ballroom—a familiarity of 
contact permitted between the sexes that is nowhere 
else permitted in decent society. You know it. You 
are shocked at it. You don’t enjoy it, but you are not 
brave enough to stand for modesty, purity, and God. 
The fear of man has entangled you in a snare which 
has robbed you by your compromise of every bit 
of real power for Jesus Christ. 

Again, the fear of man ensnares Christians into 
a guilty silence and inactivity. There are many of 
you here every evening we have a meeting who, when 
the invitation is given out for Christians to go to 
work and speak to the unsaved, want to do it. Oh, 
you would like to help some one to Christ. What 
a joy it would be to you; but you say, “ Suppose I 
talk to somebody and they don’t like it; suppose they 
laugh at me; suppose they say some hard things to 
me,” and the fear of man, here in the meeting and 
out of the meeting, in your home, in your shop, in 
your hotel, everywhere you go, is shutting your mouth 
and robbing you of the transcendent joy of leading 
others to Jesus Christ. Well, friends, suppose they do 
laugh at you. They spat in your Master’s face. They 
won't spit in yours. They struck Him with their fists. 
They probably won’t strike you. They nailed Him to 
the cross. Are you not willing to be laughed at for 
a Master like that? I believe that the fear of man 


176 REAL? SALVATION 


on the part of professed Christians in Birmingham, 
keeping them back from giving their testimony for 
Christ, and working to bring others to Christ, is doing 
far more to hinder the work of God than any other 
cause in this city to-day. Men are being saved by 
the thousands, but if you Christians would throw your 
fear to the winds, and here in this hall, and on the 
streets, in the shops, homes, hotels, would have the 
boldness to witness and work for your Master, they 
would be saved by the tens of thousands. 

Again, the fear of man ensnares those who are not 
Christians into the rejection of Jesus Christ. There 
are hundreds of men and women here every night 
who would like to be Christians. They see the joy 
of it. They see the Christian life is beyond a per- 
adventure the better life for the life that now is, as 
well as for the life that is to come, but they are afraid 
that if they accept Christ somebody will ridicule them, 
and the fear of man is shutting them out of the accept- 
ance of Jesus Christ. I believe that more people 
are kept from accepting Christ every night here by 
the fear of what some one will say or do than by 
any other cause. If we could get rid of this fear 
I believe there would be five hundred or a thousand 
saved every night instead of two hundred or three 
hundred. 

Again, the fear of man ensnares those, who really 
think they have accepted Christ, into not making a 
public confession of Christ. Now Jesus says dis- 
tinctly, “ Whosoever therefore shall confess Me before 
men, him will I also confess before My Father which 
is in heaven. But whosoever shall deny Me before 
men, him will I also deny before My Father which is 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 177 


in heaven” (Matt. x. 32, 33). Paul says distinctly, 
“With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, 
and with the mouth confession is made unto salva- 
tion” (Rom. x. 10). And yet a host of you men and 
women are trying to be Christians and never stand 
up to say so. You don’t admit that it is the fear of 
man that keeps you from doing it. Oh, no! you say, 
“T don’t believe in this publicity. I don’t believe in 
this standing-up business. I believe in doing things 
more quietly. I don’t believe in excitement.” You 
give a thousand and one reasons, but, men, if you 
were honest with yourselves, as you will have to be 
honest with God some day, and told the truth, you 
would- say, “It is because | am afraid to do it,” 
When we were in Edinburgh a fine-looking young 
fellow came to me one day and said, “I am a cad.” 
I said, “ What is the matter?” He said, “I thought 
I accepted Christ here the other night, and I have 
not been man enough to tell another man in the office 
what I have done. I am a cad.” Well, he was. So 
are you. You professed to take Jesus Christ. You 
told somebody so quietly, but to this day you have 
not told the other men in your office, in your home, 
in your hotel, in your shop. The fear of man has 
sealed your mouth and made you an arrant coward, 
and robbed you of all the joy that there is in an out- 
and-out Christian experience. 

Again, the fear of man ensnares those who start 
out in the Christian life from going on in tt, because 
somebody says some discouraging thing. One night 
when we were in a Scotch town two young men 
both professed to accept Christ. The pastor of one 
of them sat on the platform. He went to his pastor 


178 REAL SALVATION 


and told him what he had done, and his pastor en- 
couraged him. The other man’s pastor was one of 
these convivial pastors, a man whose chief function 
is to serve as a figure-head at big feasts and encour- 
age the fast men of the town by drinking their wine 
and joining in their tastes. If there is any man on 
earth for whom I am tempted to have utter contempt 
it is a convivial minister, the minister whose chief 
function is to adorn big suppers and to drink rich 
men’s wines. I would rather be a publican, a rum- 
seller any day, than a preacher of that kind. I have 
more respect for a good straight-out rum-seller than 
that kind of a preacher. This man was that kind of 
a preacher. He had occasionally been seen on the 
streets when he needed the whole sidewalk. This 
young man went to his preacher and told him what 
he had done. His preacher said, “ Don’t you believe 
a word they are saying up there.” He discouraged 
him. Oh, the man that calls himself a minister of the 
Gospel and dares to discourage a young convert in 
the first glimmerings of a new life, if there is a deeper 
spot in hell than any other it is for the man that bears 
the name of minister and dares to discourage the 
young convert in his first aspirations toward God. 
Well, this man did, and the poor young fellow was dis- 
couraged quite entirely. Not excusable; still, a minister 
of the Gospel had laughed at him, and snared him 
into wretched backsliding, and it may be into hell. 
Oh, men and women starting out in the Christian 
life, no matter who approves or disproves, you are 
right. Go on in spite of everybody. 

Again, the fear of man ensnares people to their 
eternal ruin. Oh, many men and women lie in Christ- 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 179 


less graves to-night, and will pass a Christless eter- 
nity, because the fear of man kept them from the 
acceptance of Christ. When I am home in Chicago, 
if I have a night off, I often run out to another city 
to help ministers. One night I ran across the line 
about twenty miles from Chicago into the city of 
Hammond, Indiana. After speaking I gave out the 
invitation, and among those who were moved by the 
Spirit of God was a young woman. She rose to her 
feet and started to come to the front. The young man 
who sat beside her touched her arm. He was en- 
gaged to marry her. He said, ‘Don’t go to-night. 
If you will wait for a few days I may go with you.” 
For fear of offending her fiancé she sat down. I 
went back the next week to speak in the opera-house. 
At the close of the meeting two young women came 
and said, “Oh, Mr. Torrey, just as soon as you can 
get away from the opera-house come with us. There 
is a young lady who was going to start for the front 
the other night, but the young man to whom she is 
engaged asked her to wait. She did wait, and now 
she has erysipelas. It has gone to her brain and 
she is dying. She probably won’t live until morn- 
ing. Come to see her just as soon as you can get 
away from the opera-house.” I hurried along from 
the opera-house. I entered her home, went into the 
room where the poor girl lay a-dying, face all painted 
black with iodine, hardly recognisable as the same 
person, but perfectly conscious. I urged her then 
and there to take Christ. “No,” she said, “I was 
about to start the last time you were here,” and she 
told me the same story, and she said, “I didn’t start 
then. I am dying; I can’t start now.” I pled with 


180 REAL SALVATION 


her. I besought her. I knew it was her last hour. 
I did everything, but she would not yield, and when 
I passed out of that room of awful darkness a young 
man in the hallway grasped me by the hand, took 
me into a cold dark room, and though I could not 
see him I could feel he was shaking like a leaf. 
“Oh,” he-said, “ Mr. Torrey, I am engaged to marry 
that girl. When you spoke here last week we were 
both at the meeting. When you gave out the invi- 
tation she started for the front. I said, ‘No, don’t 
go, if you wait for me a few days I may go with you. 
She didn’t go, and now she is dying without Christ. 
She is lost, and I am to blame.’ I am to blame.” Oh, 
men and women, in this hall to-night the Spirit of 
God is moving through this building with mighty 
power. Many of you are on the verge of a decision 
for Christ. Don’t let the fear of man frighten you 
out of taking your stand to-night. 

The other part of the text I have scarcely time 
for. ‘‘ Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be 
safe.” He will be safe from all danger of yielding to 
sin and temptation. If you trust God temptation 
has no power. A man cannot yield to temptation 
without distrusting God. Every act of sin is an 
act of distrust of God. He that trusts God will do 
right though the heavens fall. I know a man in 
business in America. This man was unfortunate in 
business, lost about everything he had, had to sell 
off everything in order to pay his honest debts. He 
kept from failing; he paid all his debts, but it left 
him practically penniless. Then an opening came 
for him as fireman on an engine. He came to me 
and said, “ What shall I do? I have wanted to be 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 181 


an engine-driver for years. They say they will pro- 
mote me quickly, but if I take this post on a switch 
engine I must work on the Sabbath. What shall 
I do?” I said, “ Well, you will have to decide for 
yourself, but if you can’t do it with a clear con- 
science, you can’t afford’to do it.” He said, “I can’t 
do it with a clear conscience.’ He refused the posi- 
tion, though he did not know what he was to do 
to support himself and his wife and family of three 
or four children. A day or two after that he got 
a position at only a dollar a day—only four shillings 
—which is very small wages in America. In a few 
days he got a position at $75 (£15) per month, and 
to-day he is head book-keeper of one of the biggest 
mercantile establishments in the Northwest, with a 
big salary, and constantly getting presents from the 
firm—all because he trusted God. 

When I was home this summer I found that there 
had been converted in my absence a young Jewish 
woman; a very brilliant woman in the work that she 
had to do—a very talented woman—but having to 
work for her living to support the family. After 
she was converted she was full of love to Christ, 
as Jews generally are when they are converted. She 
went out of the place where she worked, a very large 
establishment—all you business men would know the 
firm by name, if I should name it—and she com- 
menced talking of Christ to the other employees. 
Some of them did not like it, and they went to the 
head of the firm and said, “ Miss So-and-So is con- 
stantly talking to us about Christ. We don’t like 
it.’ They called her in and said, “ We have no objec- 
tion to Christianity, no objection to your being a 


182 REAL SALVATION 


Christian. It is a good thing, but you must not talk 
it around this establishment.” ‘“ Very well,” she said, 
“T won’t work where I can’t take Christ with me 
and talk for my Master.” She had a family to sup- 
port, an aged mother and other members of the fam- 
ily, and did not know where she was going—just 
converted from Judaism to Christianity. “ Well, 
then,” they said, “you will have to lose your posi- 
tion.” “Very well,” she said, “I will give up my 
position before I will be disloyal to Jesus Christ.” 
“Very well,” they said, “ go back to your work.” She 
went back to work. At the end of the week she got 
a letter from the firm. She said, “ Here is my dis- 
charge,” and she tore it open. The head of the estab- 
lishment said, “ We have a place of very large respon- 
sibility, with a much larger salary than you are get- 
ting. We think you are the woman for the place, 
and we offer it to you.” They saw she could be 
trusted. Business men are looking for men and women 
whom they can trust. 

Again, whoso trusteth in the Lord will be safe 
from danger of every kind. As we read in Rom. 
viii. 31: “If God be for us, who can be against us?” 
Oh, men will persecute you. Yes, they will ridicule 
you. They will do all they can to harm you. Jesus 
says in John xv. 20: “If they have persecuted Me, 
they will also persecute you.” They will, but it won’t 
do you any harm. Some people are frightened to 
death at being persecuted. Why, friends, it is one 
of the greatest privileges on earth for converts to 
be persecuted for Jesus Christ. What does Jesus 
say in Matt. v. 11, 12: “Blessed are ye when men 
shall revile you and persecute you, and shall say all 


FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 183 


manner of evil against you falsely for My sake. Re- 
joice’”’—not cry, not whine—“rejoice and be ex- 
ceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven.” 
When we were in Ballarat in Australia there was 
an organised gang to break up our meeting. I had 
said some pretty plain things about dancing, like 
some I have said here to-night, and I had been in- 
vited to go to a “ decent dance.” I went, and it broke 
up the dance. They were ashamed to dance, and it 
broke up the club, and they never had but one dance 
after it. They regretted one invitation that they sent, 
anyhow. Well, the dancing element were pretty 
badly excited. If we could stop several hundred of 
you society people from dancing here in Birming- 
ham. there would be a high time. I hope we have 
just such a high time. Well, this crowd organised 
to break up the meetings got away off in the far 
gallery. The very first night when they came there 
to break up the meetings the power of God came 
down, and the two ringleaders walked right up from 
that rear gallery the whole length of the hall, came 
down to the front, turned round, and said, “ We 
accept Jesus Christ.” The next day some friends 
of the ringleader of the two met him on the street, 
and knocked him down and pounded him to make him 
swear. But God had taken all the swearing out of 
him, and instead of swearing he wrote one of the 
most beautiful letters—not to me, but to a friend of 
his, who sent it to me—one of the most beautiful 
letters I ever saw in my life, about the joy of suffer- 
ing for Jesus’ sake. Men, they may persecute you. 
They may pound you, they may hound you, but they 
can’t hurt you if you are right with God, 


184 REAL SALVATION 


Once more, the man that trusts in the Lord is 
eternally safe. Jesus says in John x. 28, 29: “I give 
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, 
neither shall any man pluck them out of My hand. 
My Father, which gave them Me, is greater than ° 
all: and no man is able to pluck them out of My 
Father’s hand.” If you trust in the Lord, God the 
Father Almighty’s hand is underneath you and is 
round about you; Christ the Son’s hand is over you 
and round about you, and there you are, in between 
the Almighty hand of God the Father and God the 
Son, and all the devils in hell can’t get you. 

Men, throw away your fear of man to-night. In 
place of it put trust in Jehovah. You compromis- 
ing Christians throw away your compromise. Be 
out and out for God, clean, straight Christians for 
God. Throw away your guilty silence. Go to work 
to-night to bring others to Christ, and keep it up 
to-morrow, and the next day, and the next day. 
Throw away your guilty silence about unpopular 
truth, and declare the whole counsel of God, even 
though they say you are not up to date, because 
you tell the truth, And men and women who are 
rejecting Christ, throw away your fear, fear not what 
anybody says, but stand up and come right down to 
the front, accept Christ, and confess Him before the 
world to-night. 

In the early days of Mr. Moody’s work in Chicago 
there was a man in constant attendance at the serv- 
ices in the Tabernacle. He seemed for a long time 
to be on the point of decision for Christ. At last 
Mr. Moody went to him, and urged him very strongly 
to decide at once. He replied that he could not come 


‘FEAR OF MAN BRINGETH A SNARE 185 


out as a Christian. That there was a man with whom 
he was associated who would ridicule him, and he 
could not endure his ridicule. As Mr. Moody time 
after time kept urging upon him a decision, the man 
at last became irritated and ceased attending the 
church. Some months after, when the man had quite 
dropped out of sight, Mr. Moody received a very 
urgent call to go and see the man at once. He found 
him very ill, apparently dying, and in great anxiety 
about his soul. He was shown the way of life, and 
professed to accept Christ, and his soul seemed at 
rest. To every one’s surprise, he took a turn for the 
better, and full recovery seemed sure. Mr. Moody 
called upon him, and found him sitting out of doors 
in the sunshine. ‘“ Now,” said Mr. Moody, “ that 
you have accepted Christ, and God has raised you 
up, you will certainly come out at once, and confess 
Him as soon as you are able to come to the Taber- 
nacle.” To Mr. Moody’s astonishment the man re- 
plied, “No, not now. I don’t dare come out in Chi- 
cago, but I am intending soon to remove to Michigan, 
and as soon as I get over there I will come out pub- 
licly and take my stand on the side of Christ.” Mr. 
Moody told him that Christ could keep him in Chicago 
as well as in Michigan, but the man’s fear of his friend 
held him back, and he refused to take his stand in 
Chicago. Mr. Moody left him greatly disappointed. 
Just one week from that day the man’s wife called 
upon Mr. Moody and besought him to come at once 
and see her husband, that he had suffered a relapse, 
was worse than ever, and that a council of physicians 
had agreed that there was no possibility of recovery. 
“Did he send for me to come?” asked Mr. Moody. 


186 REAL SALVATION 


“No; he says that he is lost, that there is no hope for 
him. He does not wish to see you or speak to you, 
but I cannot let him die in this way. You must come.” 
Mr. Moody hastened to the house, and found the 
man in a state of utter despair. To all Mr. Moody’s 
pleas for him to take Christ then and there he would 
reply that it was too late, that he was lost, that he 
had thrown away his day of opportunity, and that 
he could not be saved now. Mr. Moody said, “I 
will pray for you.” “No,” said the man, “don’t 
pray for me. It is no use, I am lost. Pray for my 
wife and children. They need your prayers.” Mr. ° 
Moody knelt down by his side and prayed, but the 
heavens above his head seemed brass. His own 
prayers did not seem to go higher than his head. 
He could not get hold of God for this man’s salva- 
tion. When he arose the man said, “There, Mr. 
Moody, I knew that prayer would do no good, I am 
lost.” With a heavy heart Mr. Moody left the house. 
All the afternoon the man kept repeating, “ The har- 
vest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not saved” 
(Jer. viii. 20). All the afternoon he kept repeating 
this text. Just as the sun was setting behind the west- 
ern prairies the man passed away. In his last mo- 
ment they heard him whispering, and leaning over to 
catch his words they heard him murmuring, ‘“ The 
harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not 
saved.” Another soul went out into eternity unpre- 
pared, snared into eternal perdition by the fear of 
man. Oh, men and women, I beseech of you, throw 
away your fear of man, and put your trust in the 
Lord and be saved to-night. 


XIII 
HOW GOD DOV ED THE WORTD 


For God so loved the world, that He gave His only be- 
gotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life”’—JoHN ili. 16. 


Gop has given me for my text to-night that verse 
of Scripture which I suppose has been used to the 
salvation of more people than any other verse in the 
Bible. It is John iii. 16: “God so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlast- 
ing life.’ Thousands of people have been saved by 
that wonderful verse; tens of thousands, hundreds 
of thousands, by simply reading it in the Bible, by 
simply seeing it painted on the wall, by simply hav- 
ing it presented to them on a piece of cardboard. If 
there were time I could tell you to-night of a boy 
who began to read the Bible through, and was brought 
under very deep conviction of sin by just reading the 
Bible. As he read on and on, he came to the New 
Testament and to the Gospel of John, and to the third 
chapter and the sixteenth verse, and there he read, 
“God so loved the world, that He gave His only 
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life.’ And the mo- 
ment he saw it, he saw Christ on the cross for his 
sins, his burden all rolled away, and he found peace. 
187 


188 REAL SALVATION 


I hope that hundreds to-night will be converted in 
this hall through my text, whether you hear my ser- 
mon or not. 

This text tells us some very important things about 
the love of God. It tells us that our salvation begins 
in God’s love. We are not saved because we love 
God; we are saved because God loves us. Our sal- 
vation begins in God’s loving us, and it ends in our 
loving God. 

The first thing our text teaches us about the love 
of God is that the love of God is universal. ‘ God so 
loved the world ’—not some part of it, not some elect 
people, not some select class—‘“ but God so loved 
the world.” God loves the rich, but God loves the 
poor just as much as He loves the rich. If there 
should come into Bingley Hall to-night one of the 
wealthiest men or women in Birmingham, and if when 
I gave out the invitation they should stand up and 
accept Christ, a great many of you people. would be 
greatly pleased. So would I, for the rich need to hear 
the Gospel just as much as the poor, and they are 
not nearly so likely to. But if some poor man should 
come in here to-night, some man that has not a penny, 
some man that does not even know where he is going 
to sleep to-night, and if that man should stand up 
and take Christ, a good many of you people would 
not think it amounted to much, but God would be 
just as pleased to see the poorest man or woman in 
this building accept Christ as He would be to see 
the richest millionaire that you have in Birmingham. 
God loves the educated, but God loves the uneducated 
just as much. God loves the great scholar, the man 
of science, the university professor, and the student, 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 189 


but God loves the man who can’t read or write just 
as much as He loves the most brilliant scientist or 
philosopher that there is on earth. If some of your 
university professors should come in here to-night, 
and should be converted, some of you people would be 
delighted. You would go out saying, “Oh, a won- 
derful thing happened in Bingley Hall. One of our 
learned professors came up there and was converted.” 
But if some man or woman here to-night that can’t 
even read or write should stand up and accept Christ, 
some of you people would not think it amounted to 
much, but God would be just as much pleased as He 
would over the conversion of that university profes- 
sor. But the most wonderful thing of all about it 
is this—that God loves the moral, the upright, the 
virtuous, the righteous, ‘and God just as truly loves 
the sinner, the outcast, the abandoned, the profligate, 
the bad as He does the good. 

One night I was visiting one of the members of 
my church, and his little girl was playing around 
the room. The child did something naughty—I have 
forgotten what it was—and her father called out, 
“Don’t be naughty. If you are a good girl God 
will love you, but if you are not, God won’t love 
you.” I said, “ Charlie, what nonsense are you teach- 
ing that child of yours? That is not what my Bible 
teaches. My Bible teaches that God loves the sinner 
just as truly as He loves the saint.” And do you 
know, friends, it is so hard to make people believe 
this, that God does love the sinner, that God does 
love the outcast, that this is the truth that the Bible 
emphasises the most. For example, turn in your Bible 
to Rom. v. 8: “God commendeth His love toward 


190 REAL SALVATION 


us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us.” 

I was preaching one night in the city of Minnea- 
polis in America—a hot summer’s night, so hot that 
the window frames were all out at the back to let 
a little fresh air in, and the room was packed. Away 
down at the back end of the room a man was sitting 
where the window frame had been taken out, and 
when I gave out the invitation for all who wished to 
be saved that night to hold up their hands, that man 
sitting in the window raised his hand. But as soon 
as I pronounced the benediction that man started for 
the door. I forgot all about my after-meeting. I 
don’t know to this day what became of that after- 
meeting. All I saw was that man starting for the 
door, and I started after him. I caught him just as 
he turned to descend the stairway. I laid my hand 
upon his shoulder just as he turned the corner. I 
said to him, “ My friend, you held up your hand to 
say you wanted to be saved.” “Yes, I did.” ‘“ Why 
didn’t you stay, then, to the second meeting?” He 
said, “It is no use.” “Why?” I said; “God loves 
you.” He said, “ You don’t know who you are talk- 
ing to.” I said, “I don’t care who I am talking to. 
I know God loves you.” He said, “I am the meanest 
thief in Minneapolis.” ‘“ Well,” I said, “if you are 
the meanest thief in Minneapolis I can prove to you 
from the Bible that God loves you.” I opened my 
Bible to Rom. v. 8, and I read, “ God commendeth 
His love toward us, in that while we were yet sin- 
ners, Christ died for us.” “Now,” I said, “if you 
are the meanest thief in Minneapolis you are certainly 
a sinner, and that verse says that God loves sinners.” 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD tor 


It broke the man’s heart, and he commenced to weep. 
I took him to my office with me, and we sat down and 
he told me his story. He said, “I am just out of 
confinement. I was released from prison this morn- 
ing. I had started out this evening with some com- 
panions that I knew to commit one of the most daring 
burglaries that was ever committed in this city, and 
by to-morrow morning I would either have had a big 
stake of money or a bullet in my body. But as we 
were going down the street together we passed the 
corner where you were holding that open-air meet- 
ing. You had a Scotchman speaking. My mother 
was a Scotchwoman, and when I heard that Scotch 
tongue it reminded me of my mother. I had a 
dream about my mother the other night in prison. 
I dreamed that my mother came to me and begged 
me to give up my wicked life, and when I heard 
that Scotchman talk I stepped up to listen. My two 
pals said, ‘Come along,’ and cursed me. I said, ‘I am 
going to listen to what this man says.’ Then they tried 
to drag me across the street, but I would not go. 
What that man said touched my heart, and when you 
gave out the invitation to the meeting I came, and that 
is why I am here.” I opened my Bible, and I showed 
that man from the Bible that God loves sinners, how 
Christ had died for sinners, how he could be saved 
by simply accepting Christ then and there, and then 
and there he did accept Christ. We knelt down side 
by side, and that man offered the most wonderful 
prayer, but one, I ever heard in all my life. 

Is there a thief here to-night? God loves you. Is 
there a pickpocket here to-night? God loves you. Is 
there a lost woman here to-night? God loves you. 


192 REAL SALVATION 


Is there an infidel here to-night? God loves you. Is 
there a blasphemer here to-night? God loves you. 
I will tell you something you can’t find in all Bir- 
mingham. You can’t find in all Birmingham a man 
or woman that God doesn’t love. 

The second thing our text teaches us about the 
love of God is that God’s love is a holy love. “ God 
so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten 
Son.” A great many people cannot understand that. 
They say, “I cannot see why it is if God loves me 
that He doesn’t forgive my sins outright without His 
Son dying in my place. I cannot see the necessity 
of Christ’s death. If God is love, and if God loves 
me and loves everybody, why don’t He take us to 
heaven right away without Christ dying for us.” The 
text answers the question, “ God so loved, so loved.” 
That “so” brings out the character of God’s love. 
It was of such a character that God could not and 
would not pardon sin without an atonement. God 
is a holy God. God’s love is a holy love. Now, God’s 
holiness, like everything in God, is real. There is 
no sham in God. It is real love, real righteousness, 
and real holiness, and God’s holiness, since it is real, 
must manifest itself in some way. It must either 
manifest itself in the punishment of the sinner—that 
is, in our eternal banishment from Him, in your ruin 
and in mine—or it must manifest itself in some other 
way. Now, the atoning death of Jesus Christ upon 
the cross of Calvary was God substituting His aton- 
ing action whereby He expressed His hatred of sin 
for His punitive action whereby He would have ex- 
pressed the same thing. But some man says, “ That 
is not just. The doctrine you teach is this—that God, 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 193 


the first Person, took the sin of man, the second per- 
son, and laid it up Jesus Christ, an innocent third 
Person, and that is not just.” Well, that would not 
be just, but that is not what the Bible teaches, and 
that is not what I teach. I don’t teach, and the Bible 
don’t teach, that God, a holy first Person, takes the 
sins of you and me, guilty second persons, and lays 
them upon Jesus Christ, an innocent third Person. 
Jesus Christ was not a third Person. “God was in 
Christ reconciling the world unto Himself,” and the 
atoning death of Jesus Christ on the cross is not God 
taking my sin off from me and laying it on a third 
person; it is God the Father taking the penalty of 
my sin into His own heart, and dying in His Son, 
in whom He personally dwelt, in place of the rebel. 
And again, Jesus Christ was not merely the first 
Person. He was the second Person too. Jesus Christ 
was the Son of Man, the second Adam, the repre- 
sentative man. No ordinary man could have died 
for you and me. It would have been of no value. 
But Jesus Christ was the second Adam, the second 
head of the race, the second Person, your representa- 
tive and mine, and when Christ died on the cross of 
Calvary I died in Him, and the penalty of my sin 
was paid. Friends, the philosophy of the Atonement 
as laid down in the Bible is the most profound and 
wonderful philosophy the world ever saw or heard. 
The Christian doctrine is a perfect whole. You take 
out one doctrine and the others are irrational, but 
you put them all together and they are a perfect sys- 
tem. For example, if you become a Unitarian and 
take out the deity of Christ the Atonement becomes 
irrational. If you take out the humanity of Christ 


194 REAL SALVATION 


and have Jesus Christ merely Divine the Atonement 
becomes irrational. But you take all that the Bible 
says, that God was in Christ, and that in Christ the 
Word became flesh, real man, God manifest in the 
flesh, and the Atonement of Christ is the most pro- 
foundly and wonderfully philosophical truth the world 
has ever seen. God’s love was a holy love. I thank 
God that it was. I thank God that His method was 
such that in perfect righteousness, and perfect justice, 
and perfect holiness, as well as perfect love, on the 
ground of Christ’s atoning death He could pardon 
and save the vilest of sinners. And, men and women, 
when you are awakened to a proper sense of your 
sinfulness, when you see yourself as you really are, 
and when you see God as He really is, nothing will 
satisfy your conscience but the doctrine that God, the 
Holy One, substituted His atoning action, whereby 
He expressed His hatred of sin, for His punitive 
action whereby He would have expressed the same 
thing, and that in the death of Jesus Christ on the 
cross of Calvary your sin and mine was perfectly 
settled for ever. 

Thank God, the broken law of God has no claim 
upon me. I broke it, I admit it, but Jesus Christ 
kept it, and having kept it, He satisfied its punitive 
claim by dying for those who had not kept it, and 
on the ground of that atoning death there is pardon 
to-night for the vilest sinner. A man sits here in 
the audience to-night. He says, “There is no for- 
giveness for me.” Why not? “ Because I have gone 
down so deep in sin.” Listen, men. You have gone 
down deep into sin; you have gone deeper into sin 
than you realise yourself, but while your sins are as 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD | 109s 


high as the mountains the atonement that covers them 
is as high as heaven. While your sins are as deep 
as the ocean the atonement that swallows them up 
is as deep as eternity, and on the ground of Christ’s 
atoning death there is pardon to-night for the vilest 
sinner in Bingley Hall, for the vilest sinner on the 
face of this earth. 

The third thing our text teaches us about the love 
of God is the greatness of that love. ‘“ God so loved 
the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that 
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish but 
have everlasting life.’ The greatness of God’s love 
comes out in two ways in the text; first of all, in the 
greatness of the gift He offers us—eternal life. It 
does not mean merely a life that is endless in its dura- 
tion. Thank God, it means that, but it means more; 
it means a life that is perfect and Divine in its quality 
as well as endless in its duration, and that is what 
is offered to you to-night. “God so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in Him should not perish but have ever- 
lasting life.” 

I do thank God for a life that is perfect in quality 
and that will never end. Most of us have got to die 
before long, as far as our physical life is concerned. 
A large number of this eight or nine thousand people 
who are now listening to my voice will be in their 
graves in a few months, more of us in a year, more in 
five, still more in ten, almost all of us in forty. Eighty 
years from to-night, probably, there won’t be a per- 
son on this earth, unless the Lord has come before, 
who is in this audience to-night. Well, you say, eighty 
years is a pretty long time. No, it is not. It looks 


196 REAL SALVATION 


long to you young people. It looks long to look for- 
ward to, but when you get to be forty-eight, as I am, 
and there are only thirty-two years of it left, it does 
not look very long. It looks very short. Eighty years 
don’t look very long, and, friends, when the eighty 
years are up, what then? Suppose I had a guarantee 
to-night that I was going to live two hundred years 
in perfect health, strength, and prosperity. Would 
that satisfy me? No, it would not. For when the 
two hundred years are up, what then? Suppose I 
had a guarantee to-night that I was to live a thousand 
years in perfect health and strength and prosperity. 
Would that satisfy me? No, it would not, for when 
the thousand years are up, what then? Suppose I 
had a guarantee to-night that I should live on this 
earth for ten thousand years in perfect health and 
strength and prosperity, would that satisfy me? No, 
it would not; for when the ten thousand are up, what 
then? Men, I want something that never ends, and, 
thank God, in Christ I have got something that never 
ends. Thousands of years will pass into tens of thou- 
sands, tens of thousands will pass into millions, millions 
will pass into hundreds of millions, hundreds of mil- 
lions will pass into billions, and the billions will 
pass into trillions, and I will be living on, and on, and 
on, in ever-growing joy and glory. Eternal life! 
Eternal life! and who can have it? Anybody. “ Who- 
soever believeth on Him.” 

What does “ whosoever” mean? Somebody asked 
a little boy once, ““ What does whosoever mean?” and 
the little fellow answered, ‘“ It means you and me and 
everybody else.” Thank God, it does. It means you 
and me and everybody else. Somebody once said— 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 197 


I think it was John Bradford—that he was glad that 
John iii. 16 did not read that “ God so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son that John Brad- 
ford might have everlasting life,” “for,” he said, “ if 
it read that way I would be afraid it meant some other 
John Bradford. But when I read that “God so loved 
the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that 
WHOSOEVER believeth on Him,’ I know that means 
me.” Thank God, it did, and it means everybody else 
in this building to-night. Friends, I came into this 
building to-night with a pocket pretty well filled with 
shillings, and half-crowns, and half-sovereigns, and 
sovereigns, and cheques, and so on, that have come 
to me through the mail to-day. They are all gone. 
I handed them all over to the treasurer. But to-night 
while I go out with an empty pocket I will go out 
with a full heart—a heart that is full of everlasting 
life, and that is worth millions of sovereigns. Every 
other man and woman in this building can go out the 
same way. 

But the text tells us a second way more wonder- 
ful yet in which the greatness of the love of God 
shows itself, and that is in the sacrifice that God made 
for us. ‘God so loved the world, that He gave His 
only begotten Son.” Now, as I said the other night, 
the measure of love is sacrifice. You can tell just 
how much anybody loves you by the sacrifice that 
he is willing to make for you. God has shown the 
measure of His love by the sacrifice He made. What 
was it? His very best. He “so loved the world, 
that He gave His only begotten Son,” the dearest 
that He had. No earthly father ever loved his son 
as God loved Jesus Christ. I have an only son; how 


198 REAL SALVATION 


I love him! We have oftentimes wished that God in 
His kindness had given us three or four sons, provided 
they were all like the one He gave us, just as He has 
given us four daughters; but I was thinking of it 
this afternoon, and this thought occurred to me, that 
perhaps the reason why God had only given us but 
one son was that I might have a little deeper realisa- 
tion of how much God loved Jesus Christ. Friends, 
suppose some day I should see that boy of mine 
arrested, suppose he went as a missionary to China, 
and I went as missionary to China, and I saw him 
arrested by the enemies of Christ; and suppose they 
blindfolded him, and then they spat in his face, and 
then they punched him in his face, and then plaited 
a crown of great, big, cruel thorns and put it on his 
brow, and then some Chinaman should come along 
and with a heavy stick knock that crown down upon 
his brow until the blood poured down his face on 
either side. How do you suppose I would feel? Then 
suppose they took him, and stripped his garments 
from him, and took him to a post, made him lean over 
until the skin of his back was all drawn tight, and 
bound him to a post, and a soldier came along with a 
long stick that had on the ends of it long lashes of 
leather in which were twisted bits of brass and lead, 
then that soldier laid the lash upon the boy’s back 
thirty-nine times till it was all torn and bleeding, and 
my son’s back was one mass of bloody wounds. How 
do you think I would feel? Then suppose they took 
him and laid a cross down upon the ground and 
stretched his right hand out on the arm of the cross, 
put a nail in the hand, lifted the heavy hammer and 
drove the nail through the hand; then stretched his 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 109 


left arm on the other arm of the cross, put a nail in 
the palm of that hand, and lifted the heavy hammer 
and sent the nail through that hand, then put a nail 
through his feet, and lifted the heavy hammer and 
drove the nail through his feet, and then took that 
cross to which he was nailed and plunged it into a 
hole on the rock, and left him hanging there, the 
agony getting worse and worse every minute. See 
him hanging there beneath the burning sun from nine 
o'clock in the morning till three o’clock in the after- 
noon, and I standing and looking on as my only 
boy dies in awful agony on a cross. How do you 
suppose I would feel? But, men, that is just what 
God saw. He loved His only begotten Son, as you 
and I never dreamt of loving our sons. He saw them 
spit in His face; He saw them blindfold Him; He 
saw them smite Him with their fists; He saw them 
take rods and beat Him with rods; He saw them take 
the crown of awful thorns and press it on His brow, 
and then smite it down with a heavy rod; He saw 
them strip the garments from His back, tie Him to a 
post, make Him lean over until the skin upon His 
back was drawn tight; then He saw a brawny Roman 
soldier take that awful scourge with long leather 
lashes into which were twisted bits of brass and lead, 
and lay it on the His back thirty-nine times till it was 
one mass of aching wounds. He saw them take Him 
and stretch Him on a cross, drive a nail into that 
hand, drive a nail into His feet, and take that cross 
and plunge it into a hole on that rock, and leave Him 
hanging there, aching, all His bones out of joint, tor- 
tured in every member of His body! God looked 
on. Why did He suffer it? Because He loved you 


200 REAL SALVATION 


and me, and it was the only way that you and I could 
be saved, and “God so loved the world, that He gave 
His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on 
Him should not perish but have everlasting life.” 

Men, how are you going to repay that love to-night ? 
I know how some of you are going to repay it. You 
are going to repay it with hatred. You hate God. 
You never said it, but it is true. 

A friend of mine was preaching one time in Con- 
necticut. He was stopping with a physician who had a 
beautiful, amiable daughter. She had never made a 
profession of religion, but she was such a beautiful 
character that people thought she was a Chrsitian. 
One night, after the meetings had been going on some 
time, my friend said to this young lady, “ Are you going 
up to the meeting to-night?” She said, “No, Mr. 
Hammond, I am not.” “Oh,” he said, “I think you 
had better go.” She said, “I will not go.” “ Why,” 
he said, “don’t you love God?” She said, “I hate 
God.” She had never realised it before. I think she 
would have said she loved God up to that time, but 
when the demands of God were pressed home by the 
Holy Spirit she was not willing to obey, and she found 
out that she hated God. 

Some of you have never found it out—that you hate 
God, but it is true. How some of you used the name 
of God to-day! You have used it many times. In 
prayer? No,in profanity. Why? Because you hate 
God. Some of you men here to-night, if your wives 
should take Christ in this meeting and go home, you 
would make life unendurable. Why? Because you 
hate God, and you are going to make your wife misera- 
ble for accepting His Son. Some of you young people, 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 201 


if some other young person in your shop, or your 
factory, or your mill, should accept Christ to-night, you 
would laugh at them for it to-morrow. Why? Be- 
cause you hate God. Some of you people will read 
every infidel book you can get, will go to every infidel 
lecture. You are trying to convince yourself that the 
Bible is not God’s Word, and if anybody would come 
along and bring up some smart objection to the Bible, 
you would laugh at it and rejoice in it. Why? Be- 
cause you hate God, and you want to get rid of God’s 
Book. Some of you men and women here to-night, 
you just love to hold up your heads and toss them, and 
say, “I don’t believe in the Divinity of Christ, I don’t 
believe He is the Son of God.” Why? Because you 
hate God, and if you can rob His Divine Son of the 
honour that belongs to Him, you will do it. You are 
repaying the wondrous love of God with hate. Some 
of you are refusing to accept Christ. You have been 
here night after night during the mission. People 
have been down the hall, and when people speak to you 
you get angry. You say, “I wish you would not talk 
to me. Go about your own business. It is none of 
your business whether I am a Christian or not.” You 
get angry every time anybody speaks to you. Why? 
Because you hate God. Some of you so bitterly hate 
God that you are trying to find fault with the doctrine 
of the Atonement. You are trying to make yourself 
believe that Christ did not die on the cross for you. 
You say, “I cannot understand the philosphy of it.” 
If you loved God, you would not stop to ask the 
philosophy of it. You would simply lift your heart in 
simple gratitude and praise to God, that He so loved 
you that He gave His Son to die for you. 


202 REAL SALVATION 


There is one other thing that our text teaches us 
about the love of God, and that is, the conquering 
power of God’s love. ‘God so loved the world, that 
He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever be- 
lieveth in Him should not perish but have ever- 
lasting life.” The love of God conquers sin; the love 
of God conquers death; the love of God conquers 
wrong, and saves a man from perishing unto everlast- 
ing life. And, men and women, the love of God con- 
quers where everything else fails. The first time I ever 
preached in Chicago—it was several years before I 
went there to live, I was there at a convention—after 
the sermon, among the people who stood up that night 
to say they wanted to be prayed for, I noticed a young 
woman who did not come forward when the rest 
came. I went down to where she was standing and 
urged her to come forward. She laughed, and said, 
“No, I am not going forward,’ and sat down again. 
The next night was not an evangelistic service, but a 
meeting of the convention. I was president of the 
convention. As I looked over the audience, away 
down toward the back I saw that young woman in the 
audience elegantly dressed—the most finely dressed 
woman in the audience. I called somebody else to the 
chair, and slipped around to the back part of the build- 
ing. When the meeting was dismissed I made my 
way to where that young lady was sitting. I sat down 
beside her. I said, ““ Won’t you take Christ to-night? ” 
“No,” she said. “ Would you like to know the kind of 
life I am living?” It was not known that she was 
living that kind of life. She was living it in the best 
society, honoured and respected. Then she com- 
menced to unfold to me one of the saddest stories of 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 203 


dishonour I ever listened to, without blushing, laugh- 
ing as if it was a good joke; and finally she said, “ Let 
me tell you how I spent last Easter.” I cannot tell 
you how it was—how any woman of any sense could 
have told it to any man I cannot imagine—and when 
she had told the story she burst out into a laugh, and 
said, “ That was a funny way to spend Easter, wasn’t 
it?”’ JI was dumbfounded. I simply took my Bible 
—I had a little Bible with fine print—and opened it at 
John iii. 16, passed it over to her, and said, “ Won’t 
you please read that?” She had to hold it very near 
her eyes to see the print, and she commenced in a 
laughing way. “God so loved”—she was laughing 
no more—‘the world ”—there was nothing like a 
laugh now—‘“ that He gave His only begotten Son.” 
And she burst into tears, and literally the tears flowed 
down on to the elegant silk robe that she was wearing. 
Hardened as she was, brazen as she was, shameless 
as she was, trifling as she was, one glimpse of Jesus 
on the Cross of Calvary for her had broken her heart. 
God grant that it may break yours to-night. 

I want to tell you one more incident before I sit 
down. One night I was preaching, and we had an 
after-meeting. The leading soprano in my choir was 
not a Christian. I don’t believe in having an uncon- 
verted choir; we don’t allow anybody in our choir in 
Chicago who is not a converted person to the best of 
our knowledge. You say, “ You must have a pretty 
small choir.” We have two hundred, and every one 
of them, as far as we know, is converted. But in that 
church it was not so, and my leading soprano was not 
a Christian—a gay, worldly girl, not immoral at all, a 
very respectable girl, but very worldly and very gay. 


204. REAL SALVATION 


She stayed to the after-meeting. Her mother rose 
down in the body of the house and said, “I wish you 
would all pray for the conversion of my daughter.” I 
did not look round at the choir, but I knew perfectly 
well how that young woman looked, without looking 
round. I knew her cheeks were burning, I knew her 
eyes were flashing, and I knew that she was angry 
from the crown of her head to the sole of her feet. 
Just as soon as the meeting was over I hurried down 
to the particular door that I knew she would have to 
pass out by. As she came along I advanced toward 
her, held out my hand, and said, “ Good-evening, Cora.” 
Her eyes flashed, and her cheeks burned. She did not 
take my hand. She stamped her foot and said, “ Mr. 
Torrey, my mother knows better than to do what she 
has done to-night. She knows it will only make me 
worse.” I said, “Cora, sit down.” The angry girl 
sat down, and I opened my Bible at Isaiah liii. 5, and 
handed it to her. I said, “ Won’t you please read it?” 
And she read, “He was wounded for our transgres- 
sions, He was bruised for our iniquities, the chastise- 
ment of our peace was laid upon Him.” She did not 
get any further; she burst into tears; the love of God 
revealed in the Cross of Christ had broken her heart. 
I left the city next day. While I was away I gota 
letter saying that this young lady was happily con- 
verted, but very ill. I returned to Minneapolis, called 
at the house, found her rejoicing in Christ, but so ill 
that the physician held out no hope of her recovery. 
A few days after her brother came running up to my 
house in the morning about ten o’clock. He said, 
“Mr. Torrey, come down to the house just as quick 
as you can. Cora has been unconscious all the morn- 


HOW GOD LOVED THE WORLD 205 


ing. She has not spoken a word. She hardly seems 
to be breathing. She is as white as marble, and we 
think she is dying. She seems to be utterly uncon- 
scious.” I hurried down there. And there lay the 
whitest living person I had ever seen, bleeding to death 
through her gums and nose. She was perfectly uncon- 
scious apparently, and had not said a word all the 
morning. Her mother stood at the foot of the bed with 
a breaking heart. ‘‘ Oh,” she said, “ Mr. Torrey, pray, 
pray, please pray!” I knelt down by the bedside and 
prayed. I didn’t suppose the girl would hear a word 
I said. I was praying to comfort her mother. And 
just as soon as I had finished my prayer there came 
from those white lips, in a clear, strong, full, beautiful 
voice, the most wonderful prayer I have ever heard in 
my life. The dying girl said, “Oh, heavenly Father, 
I want to live if it be Thy will, so that as I have sung 
in the past for my own glory, I can sing for the glory 
of Jesus, Who loved me and gave Himself for me. 
Father, I want to live, but if Thou dost not see fit to 
raise me up from this bed, I shall be glad to depart and 
be with Christ.” And she departed to be with Christ. 
The love of God had conquered. 

Men and women, let the love of God conquer your 
stubborn, wicked, foolish, sinful, worldly, careless 
hearts to-night. “God so loved the world that He 
gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believeth 
in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
Yield to that love to-night. Amen. 


f XIV 


TO-DAY—TO-MORROW 


“The Holy Ghost saith, To-day.”—HEp. iii. 7. 
“ Boast not thyself of To-morrow.”—Prov. xxvii. I. 


To-pay is the wise man’s day; to-morrow is the fool’s 
day. The wise man is the man who, when he sees 
what ought to be done, does it to-day. The foolish 
man is the man who, when he sees what ought to be 
done, says, “I will do it to-morrow.” The men who 
always do to-day the thing they see ought to be done 
to-day are the men who make a success for time and 
for eternity. The men and women who put off 
until to-morrow what ought to be done to-day are the 
men and women who make a shipwreck of time and of 
eternity. “The Holy Ghost saith, To-day.” Man, 
in the folly of his heart, says, ‘“ To-morrow.” 

I am going to give you five reasons why every truly 
wise man in this building who has not already accepted 
Christ as his Saviour, surrendered to Him as his Lord 
and Master, and openly confessed Him as such before 
the world, will do it now. I have no doubt that in 
this great audience there are literally hundreds, if not 
thousands, of men and women who intend to be Chris- 
tians some time, but who keep saying, “Not yet,” 
“Not to-day,” and I am going to tell you not merely 
why you ought to become Christians, but why you 
ought to become Christians to-night. 

First, because: The sooner you come to Christ the 

206 


TO-DAY—TO-MORROW 207 


sooner you will find the wonderful joy which is to be 
found in Him. It admits of no controversy that there 
is in Jesus Christ an immeasurably better joy than there 
is in the world, a purer joy, a higher joy, a holier joy, 
a more satisfying joy, a more abiding joy, a more won- 
derful joy in every way. This fact does not admit 
of dispute. Every one here to-night who keeps his 
eyes open knows that it is true. Go to any person who 
has ever tried the world and tried Christ, and put to 
him the question, “ Which joy is better—the joy which 
you found in the world or the joy which you have found 
in Christ?” and you will get the same answer every 
time. The joy found in the world is not for a moment 
to be compared with the joy that is found in Christ. 
I have tried both. I have had abundant opportunity to 
try both. If ever a person had an opportunity to try 
what this world can give, I had it, and I tried it. I 
tried all that could be found in the world, then I turned 
to Christ and tried Him, and my testimony is just like 
the testimony of millions of others who have found 
that the joy of the world is nothing and the joy in 
Christ is everything. I don’t care how fully a person 
may have gone into the joys of this world, or how great 
his opportunity may have been to test them; go to any- 
body that has tried both and you cannot find in all the 
world a man that has really found Christ but will tell 
you there is a joy in Christ higher, deeper, broader, 
wider, longer, more wonderful in every way, than the 
joy that the world gives. Well, friends, the sooner 
you come to Christ the sooner you will have that joy. 

Second: The sooner you come to Christ the sooner 
you will escape the wretchedness and misery that there 
is away from Christ. First of all there is the misery 


208 REAL SALVATION 


of an accusing conscience. No one in this building 
out of Christ has peace of conscience. One night I was 
preaching to an audience of men and women to whom 
a twenty dollar gold piece would have been a great 
help. I put my hand in my pocket as I was preaching, 
and I felt the twenty dollar gold piece. I took it out 
and held it up and said, “ Now, if there is a man in this 
audience out of Christ who has peace in his heart, deep, 
abiding satisfaction and rest, who will come up here 
and say so, I will give him this twenty dollar gold 
piece.” Nobody came up. When the meeting was 
over I went down and stood at the door with the twenty 
dollar gold piece, for I thought they might be timid 
about coming up for it. I said, “ If anybody can claim 
this twenty dollars on the conditions I have named, 
who can say, ‘I have peace of conscience and heart. 
My heart is satisfied without Christ,’ he can have this 
twenty dollar gold piece.” They commenced to file 
out, and nobody claimed the gold piece. Finally a man 
came along, and I said, “Don’t you want this twenty 
dollars?” ‘ But,” he said, “I cannot claim it on those 
conditions.” Neither can you. 

Another night I was preaching in Chicago and I 
asked everybody in the building who had found rest 
and perfect satisfaction through the acceptance of 
Christ to stand up, and hundreds of men and women, 
more than a thousand, rose to their feet, and then I 
asked them to sit down, and then I said, “If there is 
an infidel in this house that can say he has found rest, 
and peace, and perfect satisfaction of heart in infidelity, 
will he please stand?” There were a lot of infidels 
there. One man got up in the gallery, and I said, “I 
see there is a gentleman up there. I am glad that 


TO-DAY—TO-MORROW 209 


he has the courage of his convictions. I would like to 
speak with him in the after-meeting.” He came to the 
after-meeting. I said, “Mr. S , you stood up in 
the meeting to-night to say that you had perfect rest 
and peace of heart without Christ, and that your soul 
was satisfied in infidelity. Was that true?” “Oh,” 
he said, “ Mr. Torrey, that will have to be qualified.” 
I guess it will. There is no peace, saith my God, to 
the wicked. 

Then there is the slavery of sin away from Christ. 
“Whoso committeth sin is the bond-servant of sin” 
(John viii. 34). Away from Christ is apprehension of 
what may happen, apprehension of disaster, apprehen- 
sion of what man may do, apprehension of what may 
lie beyond the grave. Men and women, when you 
really come to Christ you get rid of fear of man; you 
have no fear of misfortune, for you are able to say, 
“ All things work together for good to those who love 
God”; you have no fear of death, for what men call 
death is simply to depart and be with Christ. By 
coming to Christ you get rid of all this wretchedness, 
you get rid of the accusations of conscience, you get 
rid of the slavery of sin, you get rid of all apprehen- 
sions of disaster, you get rid of the dread of death, the 
moment you really accept Christ. Why not get rid 
of it all to-night? Suppose you were on the shore, and 
saw in the distance a wreck and a man clinging to the 
wreck, and every once in a while the cold waters sweep- 
ing over him, and it was a cold wintry night, and you 
and others should go out in a lifeboat and should say 
to him, ‘“ We have come to take you off. Drop into 
the lifeboat’; and the man should say, “ No, I think 
I can hold on until morning; come out again in the 


210 REAL SALVATION 


morning, and I will get into the boat and come ashore ” ; 
you would say, “ Man, are you mad? Stay out here 
to-night when you can come ashore now?” Oh, men 
and women, out on the wreck, every little while the 
cold waves breaking over you, all the wretchedness of 
an accusing conscience, all the wretchedness of the 
bondage of sin, all the wretchedness of the fear of pos- 
sible death, all the multiplied wretchednesses of the soul 
away from God—why cling to the wreck another night, 
when you can come ashore to safety and joy now, if 
you will drop right into the lifeboat? 

Third: The sooner you come to Christ the more you 
can do for Christ. The moment a person is saved he 
wants to do something for the Master. If you are 
saved a year from to-night you will go to work for 
Christ, but there will be one year gone that will never 
come back, between to-night and a year from to-night 
(if you come a year from to-night). You can never 
go back over this year. You are associated with 
friends that you can lead to Christ between now and 
a year from now who may be past your reach then. 
Before I was converted I had a friend, and we were 
often together. We lived in the same building. We 
went pleasuring together. If I had been a Christian 
I could have led him to Christ. Three years later, 
after I had accepted Christ, that young man passed 
beyond my reach. The day I went back to the Univer- 
sity to study for my second degree my father picked 
up The New York Herald and began to read about a 
young man who was out playing ball. The man out in 
the centrefield threw the ball in. This young man’s 
back was towards the centrefield, and he was struck 
at the base of the brain, and never regained his con- 


TO-DAY—TO-MORROW 211 


sciousness. As my father read this and came to the 
name, he said, “‘ Archie, is not that your old friend?” 
I took up the paper and read it, and said, “‘ Yes; it is 
my old friend.’ Called into eternity without a 
moment’s warning, and my opportunity of bringing 
him to Christ gone for ever! Oh, how often in the 
years that have come since, and God has used me to 
lead others to Christ, how often I have thought back 
of Frank. In spite of all those who are now coming 
to Christ, Frank has gone, and my opportunity of sav- 
ing him lost for ever. Men and women, you postpone 
taking Christ for thirty days, and people that you might 
have reached during these thirty days will have passed 
beyond your reach for ever. 

In my first pastorate a woman a little over fifty 
years of age who had been a backslider was saved 
through and through, and became the best worker in 
all the community, but her own two sons had grown up 
during these years that she was afar from God. They 
had both married and passed beyond her reach, and 
though she has been used to bring I don’t know how 
many to Christ, she has never been able to bring these 
two sons to Christ. Her day of opportunity for them 
was while she was living in the world. Fathers and 
mothers, afar from God, if you are not saved to-night, 
you may be some other day ; but these sons and daugh- 
ters that you might bring with you if you come to-night 
will very likely have passed beyond our reach for ever. 
The sooner you come to Christ the more you can bring 
with you, so come to-night. 

Fourth: The sooner you come to Christ the richer 
will be your eternity. We are saved by grace, we are 
rewarded according to our works. Every day of a 


212 REAL SALVATION 


man’s life after he is saved he is laying up treasures 
in heaven, and every day you live for Christ you 
will be that much richer for all eternity. Now, some 
people have an idea that a man can be saved on his 
deathbed and have just as abundant an entrance into 
the Kingdom of God as he could have if he had been 
saved forty years. Oh, what nonsense! You have 
neither common sense nor Bible for it. A man may be 
saved on his deathbed. I don’t say that no man ever 
is; I believe some are, though not very many. A man 
may be saved on his deathbed, but he is saved “so as 
by fire.” His works are all burned up, and he enters 
heaven penniless. The man that is saved forty years 
before he dies, and serves Christ for forty years, every 
day of these forty years he is making his deposits in 
eternity, for which he will be richer throughout all 
eternity. “Lay up for yourselves treasures in 
Heaven.” 

Oh, 1nen and women! the sooner you come to Christ 
with so much fuller hands can you enter the Kingdom 
of God. I do thank God I was converted when I was, 
but what would I give for those six wasted years 
through which I deliberately resisted the Spirit of God! 
But I can’t call them back. 

Fifth: The sooner you come to Christ the surer you 
are to come to Christ. If you are not saved to-night 
you may be to-morrow night, but you may not. I 
believe there are scores of people here who will be saved 
to-night or never. When a person stands on a plat- 
form like this, and looks over such a vast audience, 
and feels in his very soul that the eternal salvation of 
hundreds of souls is trembling in the balances as 
the result of that sermon, it is an awful feeling ; but that 


TO-DAY—TO-MORROW 213 


is the feeling I have now. I believe there are hundreds 
of people that hear every word I am just now saying 
who will either be saved to-night or never. The Spirit 
of God may leave you. People think they can turn 
to Christ when they will, but, men and women, when 
the Spirit of God is in the room, as He is in this build- 
ing now, passing from seat to seat, and heart to heart, 
it is an awful moment. To say Yes, means life; to 
say No, means death. To say Yes, means heaven; to 
say No, means hell. Oftentimes a man will be so near 
the Kingdom, and he will say, “I am so interested I 
will certainly be just as much interested to-morrow ”; 
but the critical hour has come, and if you do not yield 
to-night you will have no interest to-morrow. 

I once received a message from a wealthy young 
fellow in New Haven, Conn., saying that he wished 
to see me that night at Mr. Moody’s meeting. I went 
and met him at the close of the meeting. He was on 
the verge of a decision. As we stood talking in Chapel 
Street, opposite the College, the College bell rang out 
a late hour. I said to myself, he is so near a decision 
I can leave him safely until to-morrow morning. 
So I said, “ Good-night, Will. I will be around to 
your room to-morrow morning at ten.” It was one of 
the most fatal mistakes I ever made. I was there at 
ten and he was there, but his convictions had all left 
him. He was hard as flint. His opportunity had 
come and gone. Oh, men and women, you may be 
very near a decision to-night, on the very borders of 
the Kingdom, but if you say “ No” to-night, to-mor- 
row will be for ever too late. 

Then, again, who of us can tell who will be called 
out of the world into eternity in a moment? At our 


214 REAL SALVATION 


first Men’s Meeting in the Empire Theatre in Edin- 
burgh a Roman Catholic young man accepted Christ. 
Little did he or we realise that is was his last chance. 
The next day he was hurried to the Infirmary for an 
operation, and the operation proved fatal. By accept- 
ing Christ at that meeting he was just in time. If he 
had waited a day he would have been lost for ever. 

‘Men and women, you have a chance to-night. 
Don’t throw it away. The sooner you take Christ the 
surer you will be to take Him. Take Him now. You 
can have the joy of salvation to-night; why wait a 
week? You can be saved from a life of wretched- 
ness away from Christ to-night. Why stand it another 
week? The sooner you come to Christ the more you 
can do for Christ. Why not come to Him to-night? 
The sooner you come to Christ the richer you will be 
throughout all eternity. Why not come to Him to- 
night and begin to lay up treasures in the bank of 
heaven? The sooner you come to Christ the surer 
it is that you will come. Come now. “The Holy 
Ghost saith, To-day.” “ Boast not thyself of to-mor- 
row; for thou knowest not what a day may bring 
forth,” 


XV. 


HE THAT WINNETH SOULS IS 
WISE 


“He that winneth souls is wise.”—PRov. xi, 30. 


Ir I should go up and down the streets of Birmingham 
and ask the different men and women whom I met, 
“ Whom do you regard as the wise man?” I would get 
a great variety of answers. I might go, for example, 
into some of your banks and ask the man who was at 
the head of the bank, “ Whom do you regard as the 
wise man?” and very likely I would get an answer like 
this, “I regard the man who succeeds in getting the 
most money as the wise man—the man who by virtue 
of rare business sagacity and unusual industry amasses 
a fortune of first a thousand pounds, and then ten 
thousand pounds, and then a hundred thousand pounds, 
and then a million pounds, and then two, three, four, 
five, ten million pounds, I regard him as the wise man.” 
If I should go into your political offices I would get a 
different answer. Very likely the man would reply, 
“T regard the man who studies the economic and 
political problems of the day until he has mastered 
them, who succeeds in finding out what is best for his 
country’s financial welfare, who wins the confidence of 
his fellow-citizens, and so is elected to Parliament, and 
is afterwards made a Cabinet Minister, and then is 
made Prime Minister, I regard him as the wise man.” 
If I should go to your military men I would get a dif- 
215 


216 REAL SALVATION 


ferent answer still. Very likely the reply would be 
something like this: “I regard the man who masters 
the art of war, who studies the science of tactics and 
manceuvres until he knows how to manceuvre great 
forces on the field of battle, to lead them on to victory, 
the man who first becomes a captain, then a major, 
then a lieutenant-colonel, then a colonel, then a briga- 
dier-general, then a major-general, then a lieutenant- 
general, and finally a field-marshal, I regard him as the 
wise man.” If I should go to your young men and 
women I would get a different answer. Very likely 
they would say to me, “I regard the man or woman 
who gets the most pleasure out of life, who finds the 
most fun by day and the most amusement by night, 
I regard him as the wise man.” But when I turn away 
from men with all these discordant answers and look 
up to God and say, “Heavenly Father, whom dost 
Thou regard as the wise men,” there comes thunder- 
ing down from yonder throne of eternal light this 
answer, ‘“ He that winneth souls is wise.” Not he that 
wins money, not he that wins political distinctions and 
honour and position, not he that wins renown in the 
field of battle, not he that wins the most sport and 
amusement in life, but he that wins the most men and 
women to a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, he is 
the wise man. 

Men and women, in the eyes of God the wise man is 
the man that makes soul-winning the business of his 
life, and my main proposition this afternoon is this, 
that every follower of Jesus Christ should make the 
winning of others to Christ the business of his life. 
I know that some of you say, “I don’t believe that; 
I believe that the statement is altogether too strong.” 


ey PaAL WINNET IO SOULS IS .WISE' 217 


I am going to give you this afternoon six unanswerable 
reasons why soul-winning should be the business of 
life on the part of every follower of Jesus Christ. 

First of all, soul-winning should be the business of 
life with every Christian because that is the work that 
Jesus Christ has commanded us to do. When the 
Lord Jesus Christ left this earth, He left His marching 
orders to the Church. You will find them in Matt. 
XXviii. 19, “ Go ye into all the world and make disciples 
of all the nations.” That commandment was not 
merely for the first twelve disciples; it was for every 
follower of Jesus Christ in every age of the Church’s 
history. If you will take the Book of Acts you will 
see very plainly that in the early Church every Chris- 
tian considered that the great commission to make dis- 
ciples, to win souls, was for himself. For example, if 
you will turn to Acts viii. 4, you will read these words, 
“They that were scattered abroad went everywhere 
preaching the Word”; and these that were scattered 
abroad were not the apostles, but the rank and file, the 
ordinary everyday members of the Church. 

Some years ago when I was speaking in the city of 
Minneapolis in America, I noticed down in the audi- 
ence a young lawyer. When the meeting was over I 
made my way to him and said, “ Are you a Christian?” 
“Well, sir,” he said, “I consider myself a Christian.” 
I said, “ Are you bringing other men to Christ?” He 
said, “No, I am not, that is not my business; that’s 
your business, I am not called to do that. I am called 
to practise law; you are called to preach the Gospel.” 
I said, “If you are called to be a Christian you are 
called to bring other men to Christ.” He said, “I 
don’t believe it.’ I said, “Look here.” Then I 


218 REAL SALVATION 


opened my Bible at Acts viii. 4, and asked him to read, 
and he read, “ They that were scattered abroad went 
everywhere preaching the Word.” “Oh yes,” he said, 
“but these were the apostles.” I said, “ Will you be 
kind enough to read the first verse of the chapter, and 
he read, “ They were all scattered abroad except the 
apostles,” and “they that were scattered abroad went 
everywhere preaching the Word.” He had nothing 
more to say. What could he say? 

Men and women, every man and every woman here 
who believe themselves Christians and are not winning 
others to Christ are disobedient to Jesus Christ. It is 
serious business in war to be disobedient to your com- 
manding officer, and it is serious business for a Chris- 
tian to be disobedient to Jesus Christ. Jesus says, 
“Ye are My friends, if ye do whatsoever I command 
you” (John xv. 14). One evening I was told that 
a minister’s son was to be present in my congregation, 
and that though he professed to be a Christian he did 
not work much at it. JI watched for him and selected 
the man in the audience who I thought was he, and 
selected the right man. At the close of the service I 
hurried to the door by which he would leave, and 
shook hands with different ones as they passed out. 
When he came I took his hand and said, “ Good-even- 
ing! I am glad to see you; are you a friend of Jesus?” 
“ Yes,” he replied heartily, “ I consider myself a friend 
of. Jesus.’ Jesus “says,” J replied. > ye are My 
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you.” His 
eyes fell. ‘If those are the conditions, I guess I am 
not.” J put the same question to you, Are you a friend 
of Jesus? Are you doing whatsoever He commands 
your Are you winning souls as He commands? If 


HE THAT WINNETH SOULS IS WISE 219 


I should ask every friend of Jesus to arise, could you 
conscientiously get up? 

In the second place, soul-winning should be the busi- 
ness of life with every Christian, because it was the 
business of life with Jesus Christ Himself. What is it 
to be a Christian? To bea Christian is to be a follower 
of Christ. What is it to be a follower of Christ? To 
be a follower of Christ is to have the same purpose in 
life that Jesus Christ had. What was Christ’s purpose 
in life? He Himself defines it in Luke xix. 10. He 
says, “ The Son of man is come to seek and to save 
that which was lost.” The Lord Jesus Christ had just 
one purpose in coming down to this earth. He had 
just one purpose in leaving the glory of heaven for the 
shame of earth. There was just one thing He lived 
for, one thing He suffered for, one thing He died for, 
that was to save the lost. Is that your purpose? Is 
that what you live for? Is that the one great ambi- 
tion of your life? Is that the all-absorbing passion of 
your life? If it is not, what right have you to call 
yourself a Christian? If Christ had one purpose in 
life and you have an entirely different purpose in life, 
what right have you to call yourself a follower of Jesus 
Christ? Jesus Christ says in Matt. iv. 19, “ Follow 
Me, and I will make you fishers of men.” Are you 
following Christ? are you fishing for men? Suppose 
I had asked at the beginning of this service every fol- 
lower of Christ to stand up, I think that almost every 
man and woman in this audience would have stood 
to their feet; but suppose I should now ask every 
follower of Christ to rise, how many of you could 
stand up? 

In the third place, soul-winning should be the busi- 


220 REAL SALVATION 


ness of life with every Christian, because that is the 
work in which we enjoy the unspeakable privilege of 
the personal fellowship of Jesus Christ. There is a 
wonderful promise in this Book, one of the most pre- 
cious promises that it contains, a promise that men and 
women are quoting constantly. I do not wonder that 
men and women so often quote the promise! what I 
do wonder at is that they quote the promise without 
reference to the context and the condition. The prom- 
ise is this (Matt. xxviii. 20), “Lo, I am with you 
alway, even unto the end of the world.” Is there a 
more precious promise than that between the covers of 
this book? Ah, but notice the condition. You will 
find it in the preceding verse. Jesus said, “ Go ye into 
all the world and make disciples of all the nations, 
p and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the 
end of the world.” 

In other words, Jesus says, “ You go my way, and 
I will go yours. You go out with me in fellowship, 
in work, and I will go out with you in personal fellow- 
ship.” 

I want to ask you a question: Have you any right to 
this promise? You have often quoted it; you have 
often built upon it, but have you any right to it? Are 
you going out, as far as your line extends, making 
disciples, winning souls? Your line may not extend 
very far, but as far as your line extends, are you going 
out to bring other men or women to Christ? If you 
are, you have a right to that promise. If you are not, 
you have no right to that promise. 

In the fourth place, soul-winning should be the busi- 
ness of life with every one of us, because that is the 
work in which we enjoy the fulness of the Holy Spirit's 


HE THAT WINNETH SOULS IS WISE ar 


presence and power. Men and women, there is no 
greater blessing than to receive the Holy Ghost, to be 
filled with the Holy Ghost, to be baptized with the 
Holy Ghost. Oh, the joy of personally receiving and 
being filled with and baptized with the Holy Ghost! 
It is heaven come down to earth. But listen, that 
blessing is given for a specific purpose, and can only 
be had along the line of that purpose. What that 
purpose is, is revealed in Acts i. 8. Jesus says, “ Ye 
shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come 
upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto Me both in 
Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto 
the uttermost parts of the earth.” The baptism with 
the Holy Ghost, the gift of the Holy Ghost, is given 
to you and me to make us effective in God’s service. 
There is many a man who is praying for the baptism 
with the Holy Ghost day after day, week after week, 
month after month, year after year, and getting noth- 
ing. Why? Because he is seeking a blessing that 
terminates in himself. You are seeking God’s bless- 
ing, but you are not seeking it on God’s line. When 
you are ready to go out and tell others about Christ as 
best you can in God’s power, when you are willing to 
go out and plead with men and women and children 
to accept the Lord Jesus Christ, then and only then can 
you have the gift of the Holy Ghost. 

In the fifth place, soul-winning should be the busi- 
ness of life with every one of us, because it 1s the work 
that produces the most beneficent results. There is no 
other work so beneficent, no other work that is for a 
moment comparable to the work of bringing other 
men and women to a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. 
To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to better house 


222 REAL SALVATION 


the poor, to instruct the ignorant, is blessed work, and I 
rejoice in all the work of that kind that is being done. 
But, men and women, to clothe the naked, to feed the 
hungry, to house the poor, to instruct the ignorant, 
is not for a moment to be compared with the glory, the 
honour, and the beneficence of bringing lost men and 
women to a saving knowledge of Jesus Christ. There 
is no work like it. There is one passage in this Book 
which, if I could quote it, as it ought to be quoted,— 
that is, if I could so repeat that passage as to bring out 
the full meaning and force of three words in that pas- 
sage,—I would be willing to leave Birmingham without 
preaching another sermon, for if I could quote that 
passage as it ought to be quoted, if I could so quote it as 
to make you men and women realise the full and entire 
meaning and force of three words in that passage, this 
whole audience at the close of this meeting would rise 
en masse and go out of Bingley Hall, to go up and 
down the streets of Birmingham for days, and weeks, 
and months, and years to come, beseeching men and 
women to be reconciled to God. You say, “ What is 
this passage?” It is a very familiar one. You all 
know it, but the trouble is you know the words so well 
you have never stopped to weigh the meaning. Jas. 
v. 20: “ Let him know that he which converteth a sin- 
ner from the error of his way shall save a soul from 
death.” Oh, I would to God that I could burn these 
words into your hearts to-day—“ he which converteth 
a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul 
from death.” The three words to note and weigh are, 
pave, -  OUl, «)) Dents 

Let us begin with the middle one of the three words 
—soul. “Shall save a sout from death.” Oh, if I 


HE THAT WINNETH SOULS IS WISE 223 


only had power to make you men and women in 
Bingley Hall this afternoon see the value of a soul as 
God sees it, not merely the value of the soul of the 
philosopher, or the soul of the highly-educated man, or 
the soul of the prince or the nobleman, but the value 
of the soul of the drunkard and the outcast woman, of 
the uneducated man and the ignoramus, of the little, 
ragged, dirty boy or girl upon the street. Oh, if I 
could make you see and feel the value of one soul as 
God sees it! What can I put in comparison with it? 
Gold is nothing in comparison with the value of a soul. 
Precious stones are nothing, all the gems of earth are 
as nothing. In 1893, during the World’s Fair in Chi- 
cago, there was a place in the Manufacturer’s Building, 
in the Tiffany Exhibit, that I could never get close 
to that I might see what the people were looking at. 
Time and time again, and day after day, I went to that 
place, at all hours of the day and night, but there was 
always such a crowd there that, if I wanted to see 
what they were looking at, I had to stand on my tip- 
toes and look over the heads of the crowd in front of 
me. What were they looking at? Nothing but a cone 
of purple velvet revolving upon its axis, and towards 
its apex was a large, beautiful diamond of fabulous 
value. Day after day people by the thousand came to 
see it, and during the course of the World’s Fair people 
literally by the million came to look at that one stone. 
Well, it was worth looking at, but I have never thought 
of that sight since but the thought has occurred to me, 
that the soul of one man or woman, the soul of the 
most worthless drunkard on the street, the soul of the 
vilest and most abandoned woman, the soul of the rag- 
gedest and filthiest and most ignorant boy or girl 


224 REAL SALVATION 


upon the street is of infinitely more value in God’s 
sight than ten thousand diamonds like that. 

I had two friends in New York city in the same 
business, and both of them prospered in it. One of 
these men started in life in New York city practically 
penniless, but he had very rare business ability, and he 
succeeded in amassing a fortune of first a million dol- 
lars, than of two million dollars, then of three million 
dollars, and then of four million dollars. One day he 
was walking toward his beautiful home up on Fifth 
Avenue, and as he crossed one of the lower avenues of 
the city he was run into by a tram-car and taken home 
to die. He had left four million dollars. Yes, he left 
it all. He did not take a penny of it with him. And I 
remember how the New York and the Brooklyn papers 
came out with editorials upon this self-made man, 
speaking of his remarkable business ability. He had 
come to New York as a young man absolutely without 
money, and had gone to work and amassed a fortune of 
four million dollars, and then died. The other man was 
in the same business. He, too, had prospered. I don’t 
know just how much he accumulated. I think about 
half a million dollars. Then one day God came into 
that man’s home and took out of it a beautiful daughter, 
a child only four years of age, the idol of that man’s 
heart. A few days after her burial he was riding up 
in the elevated train towards his home, and as he 
thought of his little daughter the blinding tears came to 
his eyes, and he held the newspaper up before his face 
to hide the tears from the strangers in the train. He 
kept thinking about his little daughter Florence, and 
this question came into his heart, “ Your daughter is 
dead ; what are you doing for other men’s daughters?” 


HE THAT WINNETH SOULS IS WISE 225 


He said, “I am doing nothing, but I will,” and the 
next year he put ten thousand dollars into the rescue 
of fallen girls in New York city, the next year put 
eleven thousand dollars into the same work, and the 
next year he put himself into the work. He turned 
his back upon his place of business down in Fulton 
Street, and I have oftentimes known of his not going 
to his place of business more than two hours a week, 
and spending eighteen or twenty hours a day down in 
the slums of New York city, seeking the perishing. 
Finally, he turned his back on the business altogether, 
capitalised it, and gave his whole time and strength to 
going up and down the world, telling lost men and 
women about Jesus Christ. He is upwards of seventy 
years of age—the youngest seventy-year-old man I 
know. God has used him to lift thousands of men and 
women from the deepest depths of sin to a saving 
knowledge of Jesus Christ. Now, I am going to ask 
you a question. In the light of eternity, in the light of 
that great judgment day to which we are all hurrying, 
which of these two men made the best use of his time, 
his talents, his money—the man who devoted his entire 
energies to saving four million dollars, and then left it 
all and died, went down to eternity a pauper, or the 
man who devoted his strength to saving thousands of 
souls, who will meet and welcome him in a glorious 
eternity? 

The second word—pveaTH. “ Shall save a soul from 
death.” Oh, men and women, that word death is one 
of the most awful words in our language. People in 
our day, poets and theologians, try to paint death in 
fair colours. There is nothing fair about death. 
Death is a hideous thing, death is a horrid thing, death 


226 REAL SALVATION 


is an appalling thing, death is our enemy. Thank 
God, for the Christian it is a conquered enemy, for 
Jesus Christ has abolished death and brought life and 
immortality to light through the Gospel. But death 
itself is an appalling thing. Now, listen. When you 
go to a man, or woman, or child, and lead them to a 
saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, you have saved a 
soul from death. Remember, the death of the soul 
does not mean mere non-existence; death does not 
mean annihilation, death does not mean mere cessation 
of being; death does not mean mere non-existence any 
more than life in the New Testament means mere 
existence: Life means right existence, holy existence, 
God-like existence, the ennoblement and the glorifica- 
tion and the deification of existence, and death means 
just the opposite. Death means wrong existence, 
unholy existence, the corruption, and the defilement, 
and the debasement, and the shame, and the igno- 
miny, and the ruin, and the despair of existence. When 
you and I lead a man or woman to Christ we save a 
soul from death. 

Then look at that other word—save. That is one of 
the great words. Oh, you sometimes narrow it down 
and make it a very small sort of word, but as it is 
used in the Bible the word “ save” is one of the mag- 
nificent words. It means not merely to save from, 
but to save to, not merely to save from hell, but to save 
to glory, to save to holiness, to save to happiness, to 
save to heaven, to save to a knowledge of God, com- 
munion with God, likeness to God. 

Suppose it were announced that I were to tell this 
afternoon, in Bingley Hall, to the business men of 
Birmingham, a process whereby they could go out 


HE THAT WINNETH SOULS IS WISE 227 


through the streets of Birmingham and into your 
country roads, and stoop down in the mud and dirt of 
your streets and pick up common ordinary stones, and 
by the mysterious process of the lapidary, which I was 
to tell you here this afternoon, transform them into real 
diamonds of the very first quality. Suppose it had 
been announced that I was to do that this afternoon in 
Bingley Hall, and that the business men of Birming- 
ham knew I really had such a process, do you think 
there would have been anybody in this meeting this 
afternoon? There would not have been seats enough 
in this building to accommodate the crowd of men that 
would have come. Men and women, I can tell you that 
very thing. I can tell you how to go out through the 
streets of Birmingham, out into your country roads, 
and to scoop down into the mud and dirt and mire of 
sin, and pick out the common, ordinary, rude stones 
of lost souls, and by the glorious art of the soul-win- 
ner transform them into diamonds worthy of a place 
in the Saviour’s eternal diadem. Don’t you think that 
is worth while? Is anything else so well worth while? 

Once more, soul-winning should be the business of 
life with every Christian because it is the work that 
brings the most abundant reward. There is another 
verse which I wish might sink into your heart. It is 
Dan. xii. 3, “ They that be wise shall shine as the 
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many 
to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.” Some 
people want to shine down here. Men and women, it 
is not worth while. The brightest star in any earthly 
galaxy will soon fade. The brightest star in the 
financial firmament, the brightest star in the political 
firmament, the brightest star in the social firmament, 


228 REAL SALVATION 


how long will they shine? Only a few years, and then 
they will go out for ever. The brightest star in our 
political firmament about three years ago, at this time, 
a star that shone with absolutely unrivalled splendour, 
a man about whom the world was speaking and begin- 
ning to couple his name with the names of America’s 
greatest statesmen, with the names of Washington and 
Lincoln—one dark night that star was snuffed out by 
the crack of the revolver of a half-crazy anarchist, and 
to-day that great statesman is practically forgotten. 
In America almost no one ever speaks about McKinley 
to-day. You can look through our papers day after 
day and never see his name. It is all Roosevelt now; 
it used to be all McKinley. Ten years from now it will 
all be somebody else. It is so here in England. You 
go through your English papers to-day. It is all 
Chamberlain now. Ten years from now Chamberlain 
will be practically forgotten. It don’t pay to shine 
down here. It does pay to shine up there. They that 
shine up there shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. 
Men and women, we could not, most of us, shine down 
here if we wanted to, but thank God, there is not one of 
us who can’t shine up there. There is only one way to 
shine up there, and that is by saving the lost, by bring- 
ing them to a saving knowledge of Christ. 

Before I close I must tell you a story. This incident 
is so remarkable that when I first heard it it seemed 
to me that it could not possibly be true. Yet the man 
that told it was of such a character that I felt that it 
must be true because he told it, and yet I said, “I 
must find out for myself whether that story is true or 
not.” So I went to the librarian of the university 
where the incident was said to have occurred and I 


HEVLHAT SWINNETH SOULS IS WISE. 229 


found out that it was true. The story as I tell it to 
you to-day is as I got it from the brother of the main 
actor in the scene. The story is this: About twelve 
miles from where I live, twelve miles from the 
city of Chicago, is the suburb of Evanston, where 
there is a large Methodist university, I think the 
largest university of the Methodist denomination in 
America; at all events, a very great university. Years 
ago, before the college had blossomed into a great 
university, there were many students in it, and among 
them two young country boys from the State of Iowa 
—strong vigorous fellows, and one of them was a 
famous swimmer. Early one morning word came to 
the college that down on Lake Michigan, just off the 
shores of Evanston, there was a wreck. It proved to 
be the Lady Elgin. The college boys with everybody 
in town hurried down to the shores of Lake Michigan. 
Off yonder in the distance they saw the Lady Elgin 
going to pieces. Ed. Spencer, this famous swimmer, 
threw off all his superfluous garments, tied a rope 
round his waist, threw one end to his comrades on 
the shore, sprang into Lake Michigan, swam out to the 
wreck, grasped one that was drowning and gave the 
sign to be pulled ashore. And again, and again, and 
again he swam out and grasped a drowning man or 
woman and brought them safe to shore, until he had 
brought to shore a seventh, an eighth, a ninth, and a 
tenth. Then he was utterly exhausted. They had 
built a fire of logs upon the sand. He went and stood 
by the fire of logs that cold bleak morning, blue, 
pinched, trembling, hardly able to stand. He stood 
before that fire trying to get a little warmth into his 
perishing members. As he stood there he turned and 


230 REAL SALVATION 


looked round on Lake Michigan, and off in the dis- 
tance, near the Lady Elgin, he saw men and women 
still struggling in the water. He said, “ Boys, I am 
going in again.” “No, no, Ed.,” they cried, “it is 
utterly vain to try; you have used up all your 
strength, you could not save anybody ; for you to jump 
into the lake will simply mean for you to commit 
suicide.” “ Well,” he said, “ boys, they are drowning, 
and I will try, anyhow.” And he started to the shore 
of the lake. His companions cried, “No, no, Ed., no, 
don’t try.” He said, “I will,’ and he jumped into 
Lake Michigan and battled out against the waves, and 
got hold of a drowning man that was struggling in 
the water. And again, and again, and again, until he 
had brought an eleventh, a twelfth, a thirteenth, a 
fourteenth, and a fifteenth safe to shore. Then they 
pulled him in through the breakers. He could scarcely 
get to the fire on the beach, and there, trembling, he 
stood before that fire trying to get a little warmth into 
his shivering limbs. As they looked at him it seemed 
as if the hand of death was already upon him. Then 
he turned away from the fire again, and looked over 
the lake, and as he looked away off yonder in the dis- 
tance he saw a spar rising and falling upon the waves. 
He looked at it with his keen eye, and saw a man’s head 
above the spar. He said, “ Boys, there’s a man trying 
to save himself.” He looked again and saw a woman’s 
head beside the man’s. He said, ‘“ Boys, there’s a 
man trying to save his wife.” He watched the spar as 
it drifted toward the point. He knew that to drift 
around that point meant certain death. He said, 
“ Boys, I am going to help him.” “No, no, Ed.,” 
they cried, “ you can’t help him. Your strength is all 


Beata lL WINNE LE SOULS. [Sy WISE 5231 


gone.” He said, “I will try, anyway.” He sprang 
into Lake Michigan, swam out wearily toward the 
spar, and reaching it he put his hands upon the spar, 
summoned all his dying strength, and brought that 
spar around the right end of the point to safety. Then 
they pulled him in through the breakers, and loving 
hands lifted him from the beach and carried him to 
his room up in the college. They laid him upon his 
bed, made a fire in the grate, and his brother Will 
remained by to watch him, for he was becoming 
delirious. As the day passed on Will Spencer sat by 
the fire. Suddenly Will heard a gentle footfall behind 
him, felt some one touch him on the back; he looked 
up and there stood Ed. looking wistfully down into his 
faces He said.) Wiat is it,- Hd. He said, “Will 
did I do my best?” ‘“ Why, Ed.,” he said, “ you saved 
seventeen.” He said, “I know that, but I was afraid 
I didn’t do my very best. Will, do you think I did 
my very best?”’ Will took him back to bed and laid 
him upon it, and sat down by his side. As the 
night passed, I am told, Ed. went into semi-delirium, 
and Will sat by the bed and held his hand and tried 
to calm him in his delirium. All that he thought about 
were the men and women that perished that day, for 
with all his bravery many went down to a watery 
grave. Will sat there and held Ed.’s hand, and tried 
to calm him. “ Ed.” he said, “ you saved seventeen.” 
He said, “ I know it, Will, I know it; but oh, if I could 
only have saved just one more.” 

Men and women of Birmingham, you and I stand 
this afternoon beside a stormy sea. Oh, as we look out 
at this tossing sea of life round about us on every hand 
there are wrecks. Will you and I sit here calmly 


232 REAL SALVATION 


while they are going down, going down, going down, 
going down to a hopeless eternity! 

Men and women, let us plunge in again and again 
and again and again, until every last ounce of strength 
is gone, and when at last in sheer exhaustion we 
fall upon the shore in the earnestness of our love for 
perishing men, let us cry, “Oh, if I could only save 
just one more.” 


XVI 


THE MOSD eh PE GRIN tein EO.) 
OF SOUL-WINNING 


“He first findeth his own brother Simon . .. And he brought 
him to Jesus.”—JOHN i. 41, 42. 


THE one who brought his brother to Jesus in this 
passage was Andrew. We are not told that Andrew 
ever preached a sermon in his life. If he did, the 
Holy Spirit did not think it was worth putting on 
record; but this brother, whom he brought to Jesus, 
preached a sermon that led three thousand people to 
Jesus in one day. Where would Simon Peter’s ser- 
mon have been if it had not been for Andrew’s personal 
work? The most important kind of Christian work in 
the world is personal work. We look at the men who 
stand on the platform and speak to great crowds; but 
I believe God pays more attention to the man who sits 
down with a single soul. 

A blind woman once came to my office in Chicago 
and said, “ You don’t think my blindness will keep 
me from doing Christian work, do you?” “No,” I 
replied. “On the contrary, I think it might be a great 
help to you. A great many people, seeing your blind- 
ness, will come and sit down with you, and you can talk 
with them about the Saviour.” ‘That is not what I 
mean. I don’t want to talk to one person. When a 
woman can talk to five hundred or six hundred, she 


233 


/234 REAL SALVATION 


don’t want to spend time talking to one.” “ Your 
Master could talk to five thousand at once, for we have 
it on record, and He did not think it beneath His 
dignity to talk to one at a time.” 

Have you ever thought of the tremendous power 
that there is in personal hand-to-hand work? One day 
a man in Boston had in his Sunday. School class a boy 
fresh from the country. He was a very dull boy, and 
he knew almost nothing about the Bible. He did not 
even know where to look to find the Gospel of John. 
He was very much put out because the other boys were 
bright boys and knew their Bibles. He was just a 
green country boy, seventeen years of age; but that 
Sunday School teacher had a heart full of love to 
Christ and perishing souls. So one day he went down 
into the boot-shop where that boy worked, and said, 
“Would you not like to be a Christian?” The boy 
had never been approached that way before. No- 
body had ever spoken to him about his soul. He 
said, “ Yes; I would like to be a Christian.” And 
that Sunday School teacher explained what it meant 
to be a Christian, and then he said, “Let us pray.” 
They knelt down in the back of that boot-shop, and 
the boy, as far as he knew, became a Christian. That 
boy was Dwight L. Moody. If it had not been for 
Edward Kimball’s faithful, personal work, where would 
Dwight L. Moody and his great work throughout the 
world have been? 

Probably there are some Sunday School teachers 
here who say, “I wish I could get down to the great 
meeting in the big hall; but I have to stay here just 
teaching a lot of little boys or girls.’ Who knows 
who there is in that little class of yours? Who knows 


METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING 235 


what your ignorant little ragged boy may become? 
Every teacher of you make up your mind, by God’s 
help, you will at least make an honest effort to lead 
everybody in your Sunday School class to Christ to- 
day. This world will never be saved by preaching; 
but this world could soon be evangelised by personal 
work. Let us see. Let us suppose there are two 
thousand people in this audience this morning, suppose 
every one of you became a personal worker, and sup- 
pose, by your very best effort, you only succeeded in 
leading one to Christ in a year, and that one led one to 
Christ the next year, and so on, what would be the 
result? At the end of the year there would be 4000, at 
the end of two years there would be 8000, at the end 
of three years 16,000, at the end of four years 32,000, 
at the end of five years 64,000, at the end of six 
years 128,000, at the end of seven years 256,000, 
and at the end of eight years your whole city would be 
won for Christ. At the end of thirty-five years every 
man, woman, and child on the face of the earth would 
have heard the Gospel. There is not one that cannot 
lead at least one to Christ this year. You can instruct 
every one that you lead to Christ to go out and be a 
soul-winner. After you get hold of them, send them 
out, when converted, to lead others, and he bringing 
one, and that one bringing in another, you will soon 
touch the whole city. 

I want to talk about the advantages of personal 
work. 

1. The first advantage is that anybody can do it. 
You cannot all preach. I am glad you can’t.. What 
an institution this world would be if we were all 
preachers! You cannot all sing like Alexander. I 


236 REAL SALVATION 


am glad you can’t, for if you could he would be no 
curiosity, and you would not come out to hear him 
sing, and give me a chance to preach to you. You 
can’t all even teach Sunday School classes. Some 
people have an idea that any converted person can 
teach a Sunday School class. I don’t believe it. I 
think we are making a great mistake in this respect, 
in setting unqualified persons to teaching in Sunday - 
Schools; but there is not a child of God who cannot 
do personal work. A mother with a large family 
knows she is not called to be a preacher (at least I hope 
she does) ; but she can do personal work better than 
anybody else. 

A lady came to me one time—she had five children 
—and said (I think she had been reading the life of 
Frances Willard), “I wish I could do some work like 
that for Christ:” I said, “‘ You can work for Christ 
among all the people you move among.” I watched 
that woman. Every one of her children was brought 
to Christ—every one! Every maid that came to work 
in that home was dealt with about her soul. Every 
butcher’s boy or grocer’s boy that came around to the 
door was dealt with about his soul. Every time she 
went out shopping she made it a point to talk with the 
man or woman behind the counter. And when, one 
dark day, death came into that home, and took away a 
sweet little child, she did not forget to speak to the 
undertaker, that came to do the last offices for the 
dead, about his soul. He told me that nothing had 
ever impressed him in his life as that woman, in the 
midst of her sorrow, being interested in his soul. 

An invalid can do personal work. I have a friend 
in New York city who has left a life of wealth and 


METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING 237 


fashion to go out to work among the outcast. One 
day she got hold of a poor outcast girl. She did not 
live much more than a year after that lady had led her 
to Christ. She took her to her home to die. As Delia 
was dying, she wrote to her friends, some in Sing Sing 
prison, some in the Tombs of New York city—all her 
friends were among the criminal class—about Christ. 
Those who were not behind prison bars she invited to 
come and see her. My friend told me, “ There was a 
constant procession up the stairway of outcast women 
and men who come to see Delia, and I knew before 
Delia died of one hundred of the most hopeless men 
and women in New York city that she had led to 
Christ.” That puts us to shame! Suppose God 
kindled a fire right here in your hearts, and that you 
received the anointing of the Spirit of Christ, and 
every one of you should start out to do personal work. 
You would not need any evangelist to come from 
abroad. That is what we have come for, to stir you 
up to do it. 

2. The second advantage is that you can do it in 
any place. You cannot preach in every place. You 
can preach in the churches two or three times a week; 
you can preach in the town hall occasionally ; you can 
preach in the streets sometimes. But you cannot go 
down in the factories and preach often, you cannot go 
there and hold services; but you can go there and do 
personal work, if you just hire out there. One man 
came to our meetings in Liverpool from Hudson’s 
dry soap factory, and he was converted, and every 
once in a while I get a letter telling me of their meet- 
ings there, and now they have a meeting that they 
conduct outside the building somewhere. In Bradley’s 


238 REAL SALVATION 


foundry a workman got a card to the meetings, and he 
could not come, so he handed it over to the wickedest 
man in the shop, and that man was grateful for the 
invitation, thought he would appreciate it by going, 
and was converted at the very first meeting, and went 
back and told his companions, and there was a revival 
in the foundry. A telegraph messenger boy was con- 
verted in Manchester, and before we were through 
there were seventy messenger boys converted in Man- 
chester. There is not a hotel, or a factory, or a public- 
house where you cannot do personal work. 

3. The third advantage is that you can do it at any 
time. Any hour of the night, 365 days in the year 
(366 this year, for it is leap year). Certainly you 
cannot preach every hour of the day. If you preach 
three times a day, you are doing well; but there is not 
an hour of the day or night, between twelve one night 
and twelve the next night, that you cannot do personal 
work. You can go out on the streets at night and find 
the poor wanderers. When I lived in Minneapolis I 
employed a missionary just to go out on the streets at 
night, to speak to the drunkards, outcast women, and 
night-workers, and some of the best conversions were 
among these people. She had been an outcast herself 
at one time, and was leading them to the Christ that 
she had found. 

Soon after Mr. Moody was converted he made up 
his mind that he would not let a day go by without 
speaking to some one about his soul. One night he 
came home late—it was nearly ten o’clock. He said, 
“ Here, I haven’t spoken to my man to-day. I guess 
I have lost my chance.” He saw a man standing 
under the lamplight, and said to himself, “ There’s my 


METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING 239 


last chance.” He hurried up to him, and said, “ Are 
you a Christian?’’ “It’s none of your business, and 
if you were not a sort of preacher I would knock you 
into the gutter.” “ Well,’ Mr. Moody said, “I just 
wanted to lead you to Christ.” The next day he went 
to a friend of Mr. Moody’s, and said, “That man 
Moody has got zeal without knowledge. He spoke 
to me in the street last night, and asked me if I was a 
Christian. It is none of his business. If he had not 
been a sort of preacher, I would have knocked him 
down. He has got zeal without knowledge. He is 
doing more harm than good.” This friend of Mr. 
Moody’s came to him and said, “ See here, Moody, it is 
all right to be in earnest ; but you have got zeal without 
knowledge. You are doing more harm than good.” 
(Let me say here, it is better to have zeal without 
knowledge than knowledge without zeal.) Mr. 
Moody went out, feeling rather cheap and crestfallen. 
A few weeks passed, and one night there was an awful 
pounding at his door. Mr. Moody got up and opened 
the door, and there was this very man. He said, “ Mr. 
Moody, I have not had a night’s peace since you spoke 
to me that night under the lamp-post. I have come 
to ask you to show me how to be a Christian.” Mr. 
Moody took him in, and showed him the way of life, 
and when the Civil War broke out that man went and 
laid down his life for his country. 

Another time the thought came to him after he 
was in bed, “ You have not spoken to your man to- 
day.” But he said, “I am in bed. I cannot get up 
and go out now.” But he could not rest, so he 
got up, and went and opened the door, and it was 
pouring. “ Well,” he said, “there is no use going 


240 REAL SALVATION 


out on the street this awful night. There won’t be 
a soul out in this pouring rain.” Just then he heard 
the patter of a man’s feet, and saw a man coming. 
As he came up, Mr. Moody rushed out, and said, 
“Can I have the shelter of your umbrella?” “Cer- 
tainly.” “Have you got a shelter in the time of 
storm?” and he pointed him to Jesus. 

4. The fourth advantage is that it reaches all classes. 
There are a great many people that cannot be reached 
in any other way than by personal work. Thousands 
of people could not come to church if they would, 
and thousands would not come to church if they could. 
This is a splendid hall, just adapted for our purpose, 
and will hold about 10,000 women this afternoon, and 
10,000 men to-night, that is twenty thousand people 
inside, and there will be 580,000 outside. It is the 
580,000 that we are after. You cannot reach them 
by the church, you cannot reach them by the open-air 
meeting, you cannot reach them by rescue missions. 
There is only one way you can reach them, and that is 
by personal work. ‘There is not a man, woman, or 
child that you cannot reach by personal work. You 
can reach the policemen, the tramcar men, the railway 
men, and there is not anybody you cannot reach by 
personal work. 

5. The fifth advantage is that it hits the mark. 
In preaching you have to be more or less general. 
In personal work you have just one man, just one 
woman, to talk to, and you can hit the mark every 
time. You have heard of Henry Ward Beecher. 
He went out with his father one day, shooting. He 
had often gone before, but he had never shot any- 
thing in his life. Way down yonder was a squirrel. 


METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING 241 


His father said, “Henry, do you see that squirrel? ” 
“Yes, father.” “ Would you like to hit it?” “ Yes, 
father; but I never hit anything in my life.” “ You 
lay the barrel of your gun across the top rail down 
here, and,” he said, “look right down along the bar- 
rel. Henry, do you see the squirrel?” “ Yes, father.” 
“Well, pull the trigger.” He pulled the trigger, and 
the squirrel fell at the first shot. The first thing he 
ever shot in his life. Why? Because it was the first 
thing he had ever aimed at. That is the trouble with 
a good deal of our preaching: we aim at nothing, and 
hit it every time. This is the advantage of personal 
work: we aim at one definite person. But in our 
preaching, as Mr. Moody used to say, “I speak to 
this lady on the front seat, and she passes it over 
her shoulder to the man back of her, and he passes 
it to the woman back of him, and she passes it to the 
man back of her, and they keep passing it on till they 
pass it out the back door.” We have a wonderful 
power of applying the good points of a sermon to 
somebody else. When it comes to personal work, 
there is nobody else to apply it to. I try to be per- 
sonal in my preaching; but, be just as personal as you 
can, and yet you will miss your mark. 

A man came to my church one morning, unctuous, 
not having unction, but unctuous, a man who was all 
the time talking about “the deeper life,” and had 
not got an ordinary decent every-day kind of Chris- 
tian life. He had all the phraseology of the deepest 
Christian experience; a man that talked about being 
filled with the Spirit, and cheated other people in busi- 
ness. I saw him coming into the audience, and I said 
to myself, “I am glad you have come. I will hit you 


242 REAL SALVATION 


this morning. I have a sermon just adapted to you. 
While I was preaching I would look right at him, 
so he would know I meant him, and he sat there, 
beaming up at me, and when the sermon was over, 
he came down to me rubbing his hands. “Oh,” he 
said, “ Brother Torrey, I came eight miles to hear 
you this morning. I have s@ enjoyed it.” That was 
just what I did not want. I wanted to make him 
miserable. But I had him now face to face, and he 
did not enjoy it. That is the advantage of personal 
work. You can aim right square at the mark and 
hit it. A man can stand preaching all day, but he 
will say, “I don’t like this personal work.’ It hits 
too hard. You don’t like to have a person come up 
and say, “Are you a Christian?” The minister can 
preach all he pleases, but when he looks you right in 
the eye you know it means you. It aims right straight 
at the mark and hits it. 

6. The sixth advantage is that it is effective. Per- 
sonal work succeeds where every other kind of work 
fails. I don’t care who the preacher is, how good a 
preacher he may be; a man or woman who has not 
been affected by the sermon will be reached by some 
very ordinary person with the love of God and of 
souls in his heart. Take Mr. Moody, for example. 
I think Mr. Moody was as good a preacher as I ever 
heard. I would rather hear Mr. Moody preach a 
sermon that I had heard a dozen times than to hear 
any other man preach a sermon I had never heard 
at all; but as good a preacher as Mr. Moody was, 
thousands of people would go out utterly unmoved 
by his sermons. I have seen very ordinary working 
people, uneducated people, but people who had the 


METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING 243 


love of Christ and of souls in their heart, get hold of 
the man or woman who had gone out of Mr. Moody’s 
meeting utterly untouched, and in ten or fifteen min- 
utes lead them to the Lord Jesus Christ. 

7. The seventh advantage is that it meets the specific 
need and every need of the individual. Even when 
a man comes to Christ he has difficulties and doubts, 
and troubles and questions. He cannot ask them of 
the preacher. How often a man sits down in the 
audience and says, “I wish I could speak to that 
preacher alone.” In this personal, hand-to-hand work 
a man can ask all the questions he wants to, and you 
can meet all his difficulties. I am getting letters from 
people all over the world who have difficulties. My 
father used to tell a story (he did not vouch for its 
truth), but the report was that there was a physician 
in the village who had a jug, and he took a little of 
every kind of medicine he had in his shop and put 
in that jug and shook it up, and when any one came 
to him and he did not know just what was the matter 
with them, he would give them a spoonful out of that 
jug, thinking, “There is something in it that will 
meet their case, anyhow.” ‘That is the way we do in 
our preaching; we take a little comfort and put it in 
the sermon, a little bit of conviction, a little bit to 
show the way of life, and shake it all up and give it to 
the people. If I were going to be doctored, I would 
want the doctor to find out my specific difficulty, and 
I would want to take the kind of medicine that met 
my specific need. In personal work you give specific 
passages of Scripture for specific difficulties. 

8. The eighth advantage is that it produces abun- 
dant results. The great services, where the ministers 


244 REAL SALVATION 


speak to 500, or 1000, or 5000, do not produte as 
abundant results. Suppose a man were pastor of a 
church of 100 members, and suppose he was a very 
faithful minister, and that as a result of his preaching 
there were added fifty to his church each year on 
confession of faith. That would be a pretty good 
record. In the report of the Presbyterian churches 
of America there were only 200 of the 7000 that re- 
ported over fifty accessions for the year. But suppose 
by his faithful preaching this pastor added fifty a 
year. Now suppose that pastor said, “I am going 
to train my people to do personal work,” and trained 
his people to do personal work, and suppose only 
one-half of them would consent to do it. Suppose 
that these fifty trained workers only succeeded in 
winning one a month apiece to Christ. That would 
mean 600 a year. Preaching is not in it with personal 
work, 

But, friends, some of us think we pay the minister 
to do the work. You don’t do anything of the kind. 
Your minister is your leader, and you are supposed 
to work under his leadership. One reason why the 
church of which I am pastor always has a revival is 
because the people are trained to do personal work. 
It has had a revival ever since I have been pastor of 
it. I have been pastor ten years. There have been 
ten years of revival. There has never been a month 
that we have not received new members. There has 
never been a Sabbath without conversions. We would 
not know what to make of it if there were a Sabbath 
without conversions. I do not think there has been 
any day in the week of all this time—3650 days in 
all—that some one has not been won to Christ in or 


METHOD OF SOUL-WINNING 245 


about the building. There will be a good many people 
converted there to-day. You say, “ Who is going to 
preach?” I don’t know. But whoever preaches, there 
will be conversions, and in the Sabbath School this 
afternoon there will be conversions, and in the even- 
ing meeting to-night. Why? Because I have a church 
that believes in and does personal work. Every Sun- 
day evening while I preach I know there is some one 
right near every one in that church who knows how 
to lead a soul to Christ. There are workers in every 
section of the church. If anybody gets up and goes 
out, I like it in Chicago, because just as sure as any- 
body gets up and leaves I know that there is at least 
one person that is going to be spoken to that night. 
Some one will drop down the stairs behind them, 
perhaps follow them a block or two before they speak 
to them. 

Go out to the people and ask God to give you power. 
The Holy Spirit is for every one of us. I do thank 
God that the great gift of the Son is for the whole 
world, and that the gift of the Holy Ghost is for 
every saved one. “If ye, being evil, know how to 
give good gifts to your children, how much more 
will your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to 
them that ask Him.” Just ask, and then go out. Of 
course, you need to know something about your Bibles 
in order to do personal work, but you only need one 
text to start with. 

When Mr. Moody first came to New Haven we 
thought we would go out and hear this strange, un- 
educated man. I was in the senior class in the Theo- 
logical Department of the University, and was just 
about to take my B.D. degree. I knew more then than 


246 REAL SALVATION 


I will ever know in my life again. We thought we 
would patronise Mr. Moody a little bit. He did not 
seem at all honoured by our presence, and, as we 
heard that untutored man, we thought, “ He may be 
uneducated, but he knows some things we don't.” 
Some of us had sense enough to go to him and say, 
“Mr. Moody, we wish you would tell us how to do 
it.” And he told us to come round early the next 
night and he would tell us, and we theologues went 
up to the meeting, and he said a few words to us, 
gave us a few texts of Scripture, and then said, “ You 
go at it.’ The best way to learn how to do it is to 
do it. “He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing 
precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoic- 
ing, bringing his sheaves with him.” If, however, you 
make a stupid blunder the first time, go at it again. 
But if you never start until you are sure you will not 
make a blunder, you will make the biggest blunder of 
your life. Go alone with God first, and see if you are 
right with God; put away every known sin out of 
your life, surrender absolutely to God, ask for the 
Holy Spirit, and then pitch in. 


XVII 


Suv tier tr OD Sie Bi) Were Gr 
ANY ONE CAN WIN OTHERS 
{PO y LEASES Ing 


“Then the Spirit said unto Philip, ‘Go near, and join thyself 
to this chariot.’ And Philip ran thither to him, and heard him 
read the Prophet Esaias, and said, ‘Understandeth thou what 
thou readest?’”—AcTs viii. 29, 30. 


One of the greatest joys on earth is the joy of bring- 
ing others to a saving knowledge of Christ. I have 
heard people tell, that when they were converted the 
whole world seemed different; the sun seemed to 
shine with a new light, there was new music in the 
song of the birds, all nature seemed clothed with new 
beauty and glory. I had no such experience when 
I was converted. In fact, I was converted in the 
middle of the night, and the sun was not shining at 
all. But I did have such an experience the first time 
that I led another to a definite acceptance of Jesus 
Christ as their definite Saviour. I had been dealing 
with this person for two solid hours, and seemed to 
be making but little headway, then at the very close 
they yielded and accepted Christ. When I left the 
building where this decision had been made, it was 
nearly sunset in the spring-time, the whole world 
seemed to have a beauty that I had never seen in it 
before. It seemed as if I were walking on air; my 
heart was filled with joy such as I had never known. 


247 


248 REAL SALVATION 


There is no other joy like the joy of saving men, and it 
is possible for every child of God, no matter how humble 
and ungifted, to have this joy. God’s most approved 
method of winning others to Christ is indicated in the 
text, the method of personal hand-to-hand dealing 
with the lost. The high estimate that God places 
upon this form of work is seen in the context. Philip 
was in the midst of a great revival in Samaria, great 
crowds were assembling daily to listen, and an appar- 
ently strange command comes to arise and leave 
this great work that had stirred the whole city, and 
to go down into the way that leadeth from Jerusa- 
lem into Gaza, “ which is desert.” Wise man as he 
was, strange as the order must have seemed, Philip, 
without a moment’s questioning or hesitation, “ arose 
and went.” An inquiring soul passes by in his char- 
iot. The Spirit of God whispers to Philip, ‘ Go near, 
and join thyself to this chariot,” “and Philip ran.” 
Would that we were as prompt to obey the first whis- 
per of the Spirit when He bids us go and speak to 
others. Our Master did not consider it beneath Him 
to speak to one at a time. We have more frequent 
records of His dealing with individuals than we have 
of His preaching sermons to vast audiences. The 
one by one method of soul-winning is the method that 
God delights to honour. But how shall we do it? 


I. Setect Your Man To WIN. 


In personal work, as in all forms of work definite- 
ness is of tremendous importance. There are hosts 
of people who have a longing to win some one to 
Christ, but they do not pick out any definite individual 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 249 


to win, and so they fail. A definite purpose to lead 
some definite individual to a definite acceptance of a 
definite Saviour will accomplish vastly more than an 
indefinite longing to lead an indefinite number of in- 
definite persons with some definite experiences. But 
how shall we select the individuals whom we are to 
win to Christ? 

1. First of all, by prayer—There are some who are 
the peculiar property of each of us. We can lead 
them to Christ, and no one else can. Who these per- 
sons are God alone knows, but He is willing to tell 
us if we will only ask Him. We should go to Him 
and ask Him to show us who the persons are whom 
He would have us to lead to Christ. Then we should 
wait upon Him, listen for His voice—it is a still, 
small voice—as it speaks in our hearts. When He 
mentions that one, we should write that one’s name 
down, and determine that we will lead that one to 
Christ. 

2. Select those who are accessible-—The most 
accessible of all are those in our own family, and 
that is the place to begin, in your own home. Jesus 
said to the demoniac whom He had healed, and who 
wished to accompany Him on His missionary jour- 
neys, “Return to thine own house, and show how 
great things God has done for thee.” When Andrew 
found Christ, he went first of all to his own brother 
Simon and “brought him to Jesus.” No one of us 
should rest as long as any member of our own house- 
hold is unsaved. I do not mean that we should con- 
fine our efforts to them, but we should begin with 
them, and keep after them. There are those who say 
that the hardest persons to lead to Christ are those in 


250 REAL SALVATION 


our own households. This is not true. If your life is 
right with God no one will know it so well as those 
who live with you, and no one else can influence 
them as well as you can. The holiest and sweetest 
privilege that a father or mother has is the privilege of 
bringing their own children to Christ. This we are 
commanded in the Word of God to do (Eph. vi. 4): 
“ And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath; 
but bring them up in the nurture and admonition of 
the Lord.” And this we can do, for God does not 
command the impossible. I should feel that my wife 
and I had been robbed of one of the sweetest privi- 
leges of life if any one else than we should lead one of 
our children to Christ. Of course, I would infinitely 
rather they would be led by some one else to Christ 
than not to be led at all, but it is our sacred privilege 
to do it ourselves. Next to those in your own family 
are those with whom you are associated in business 
or in work. If you are a shop assistant, go to work 
with your own shopmates; if you area labouring man. 
go to work with your fellow-labourers; if you are a 
business men, go to work with your partners and your 
employees; if you are a student, go to work with 
your fellow-students. Try first for the man next to 
you. I meet many people who wish to win men to 
Christ in China, but are not willing to make any 
strong effort to win to Christ the unsaved members 
in their own homes or their next-door neighbours. 
It is a suicidal policy to send any one out as a for- 
eign missionary who has not first demonstrated their 
love for souls and their capacity to win them to Christ 
by winning others to Christ at home. 

3. Select those who are approachable.—Those of 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 251 


the same age are, as a rule, more approachable than 
those of a widely differing age. Young men are 
best to deal with young men; middle-aged men with 
middle-aged men, and old men with old men. Chil- 
dren often have more influence with children than 
adults do. 

Select those of the same sex, as a rule; that rule 
has a few exceptions, but not many; it is best for 
men to deal with men, and women to deal with women. 
Immense mischief has come through the disregard 
of this rule of practical wisdom. I always take it as 
a bad sign when I see young men who are constantly 
dealing with young women, or young women who 
are constantly dealing with young men. I have never 
known a case of this kind that did not turn out badly. 
Some of the saddest tragedies I have ever known have 
come through mistakes of this sort. Of course, an 
elderly, motherly woman can deal wisely with young 
men and boys, and occasionally elderly men can deal 
wisely with little girls and young women, but a long 
experience with Christian workers has strengthened 
in me the conviction of the wisdom of the rule, men 
with men, and women with women. 

Select people of the same station in life. This rule 
also has exceptions. There are notable instances on 
record where servants have led their masters to Christ 
{the great Earl of Shaftesbury was led to Christ by a 
nurse in the home), but, as a rule, people can be 
most readily approached by others in the same class 
of society. No one can deal so well with a lawyer 
as another lawyer; no one can deal so well with a 
physician as another physician; no one, as a rule, 
can deal so well with an artisan as a fellow-artisan; 


252 REAL SALVATION 


no one can deal so effectively with a student as a 
fellow-student. 

Select those who are congenial. To all of us some 
people are congenial and others are not. Just why 
they are congenial we cannot always tell, but we 
know it is a fact. There are those who take to Alex- 
ander that do not take to me, and there are those 
who take to me who do not take to Alexander. Now 
those who take to me are the ones for me to deal 
with, and those who take to Alexander are the people 
for Alexander to deal with. Alexander can reach 
people that I could not touch, but I can reach people 
that Alexander cannot touch. However we may ac- 
count for these things, they are facts, and a wise soul- 
winner always takes account of facts. He concerns 
himself more with facts than with the philosophy of 
the facts; he acts upon the facts, and lets the phil- 
osophy of them take care of itself. There is not a 
person here in this audience to-day who has not some 
acquaintance that he can touch, and nobody else in 
the world can touch him. You are responsible before 
God for that one. You need not confine yourself abso- 
lutely to those whom you select to win, be always 
ready at the slightest opening of opportunity to 
win any one to Christ that comes your way. But 
make a speciality of the one you do select. Never 
lose sight of the fact that you are to win that man 
for Christ, and never rest until he is won. 


II. Lay Srece ror Him. 


When you have selected your man to win, the next 
thing is to lay siege for him. Do you know what it 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 253 


is to lay siege for a soul? Did you ever select a cer- 
tain individual and lay siege for that individual to win 
him to Christ, cost what it might, and take as long as 
it might? You know how an insurance agent conducts 
his business. He goes into a town and selects those 
who seem to him to be likely risks, then he lays siege 
for them. He writes them letters, he sends them liter- 
ature, he calls upon them, he persistently follows them 
up, he studies them. He learns their tastes and how 
they can be best approached, and never rests until he 
has insured these persons that he has selected to insure. 
I have had some experience with the persistent atten- 
tions of these insurance agents. I have nothing to 
say against their pertinacity, I simply want to recom- 
mend their methods to soul-winners. Ought we not to 
be as businesslike and as much in earnest in insuring 
people for eternity as an insurance agent is about 
insuring them for time. He does it for the money 
that he can make out of it; we do it for a higher object, 
the glory of God and the salvation of those whom 
we are pursuing. But how shall we lay siege for 
them? 

1. First of all, by prayer.—When you have selected 
a man to win for Christ, you should pursue him by 
prayer day and night, day after day, week after week, 
and if need be, year after year. In order to be definite 
make a prayer list. Write on a sheet of paper, “ God 
helping me, I promise to pray earnestly and work per- 
sistently for the salvation of the following persons,” 
then kneel down and ask God to tell you whom to put 
on that list. Do not make it too long. When you 
have made it keep your promise. One by one as they 
accept Christ you can take their names off the list and 


254 REAL SALVATION 


add others. Everywhere we have gone around the 
world we have had people make such prayer lists as 
this, and people are constantly coming to us and tell- 
ing us, “ Another one gone off my prayer list.” One 
of the leading business men of Belfast, an active Chris- 
tian worker, made such a prayer list when we were in 
that city. He came to me toward the close of the 
mission and said, “ The last one has gone off my prayer 
list to-day. They have all been saved.” 

2. Lay siege to them by personal effort.—lIt is well 
to pray, but it is not enough to pray. Praying for the 
salvation of others is an act of insincerity, unless we 
are willing to go to those for whom we pray, and talk 
with them, and beseech them to be reconciled to God. 
Sometimes you will not go at the conquest of the soul 
directly ; you will first prepare the way. Last season 
while I was going round the country holding missions, 
my family resided in Southport. I would go there 
to spend my holidays. The first time I went there I 
met a man whom God laid upon my heart, and whom 
I determined to win for Christ. He was a most un- 
likely case. He had once been in a good position, but 
had gone down through drink. I began to cultivate 
his acquaintance, gaining his friendship, and watching 
for my opportunity to win him for Christ. Every 
time I met him on the street I would speak with him. 
When he became disposed to show me little acts of 
kindness, I accepted them in order to win him. Time 
after time I met him, and the opportunity to speak 
about the great question did not come. When I was in 
Manchester I referred to him, and about my waiting 
for an opportunity, and a man in the audience said to 
another, “ Well, he will die before he speaks to him.” 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 2:55 


But he was mistaken. I was watching and praying, 
and God was listening, and the opportunity came. I 
returned from a mission, and heard that this man had 
caught cold and was quite ill. I met his daughter, and 
asked if I could see her father. She said, “ Yes; he 
heard that you were coming home, and wondered if 
you would not come to see him.” I went to the room 
where he was lying in bed, and found him very ill and 
very approachable. In fact, his wife was trying to 
read the Bible to him. I took the Bible and read pas- 
sages that point out our need of a Saviour, God’s love 
to us though we are sinners, and God’s way of salva- 
tion. I then explained the way of salvation, and 
prayed with him. The next evening I met his daughter 
again, and asked her if I could see her father again. 
“Yes; he was hoping that you would come again, 
and wondered if you would not.” I heard that he had 
been talking about me and about my son, whose ac- 
quaintance he had also made. A part of the time he 
had been in delirium, and in his delirium he had been 
talking about my son. I went to see him, and found 
him perfectly clear in mind, but I felt that he could not 
pull through the night. I was more definite than the 
night before, explained the way of life simply and 
fully, and he professed to accept Christ. I then knelt 
by his bed and prayed, and afterwards asked him to 
follow me in prayer. Word by word he followed me in 
the confession of his sin, in the expression of his be- 
lief in God’s testimony about Jesus Christ, that Jesus 
had borne his sin in His own body on the tree; he 
asked God to forgive his sins, because Jesus had 
borne them in His own body on the cross; He told his 
heavenly Father that he trusted He had forgiven his 


256 REAL SALVATION 


sins, because of the atoning death of Christ, and then 
he told his Father that if it was His will he wished to 
be raised from this bed of sickness in order to serve 
Christ, but that if it was not His will to raise Him 
up, that he was willing to be taken from this world, 
and to depart and be with Christ. When I arose he 
seemed to be resting in the Lord Jesus. Two hours 
later there was a rap on my door, and a lady came in 
and told me that he had passed away trusting in 
Christ about an hour after I left. 

3. Lay siege to them by letters—There are many 
whom we cannot reach by a conversation whom we 
can reach by letters. A letter is sometimes more effec- 
tive than direct personal conversation. A letter can 
be read at leisure and apart by one’s self, and it can 
be read again and again. Eternity alone will reveal how 
many thousands have been won to Christ by the me- 
dium of letters from earnest Christians. There is 
tremendous power in the pen. Have you consecrated 
your pen to Christ? You may not be able to write 
books, but you can write letters, and letters are often- 
times more effective than books. I know a woman in 
America, in humble circumstances, who makes a prac- 
tice of writing letters to criminals in prison all over 
the United States. She has to do extra work to make 
the money to pay the postage on these letters, but her 
efforts have been greatly blessed of God. I have per- 
sonally known a number of criminals in different 
States who have been won to Christ by the letters of 
this godly woman. 

In one of our missions one of the most prominent 
men in the town was just leaving the town as we 
entered it. In the good providence of God the steamer 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 257 


upon which he was sailing ran aground, and he had 
to return to the town. The next day being the Sab- 
bath, this man attended the meeting and was some- 
what impressed. A leading lady of the town hearing 
that he had been unable to get away, and had been at 
the meeting, wrote him a letter urging him to accept 
Christ. This letter was accompanied by much prayer, 
and did its work, and this man came forward pub- 
licly, and stood up and told the great throng that he 
had accepted Christ. His conversion made a great 
impression upon the whole community. 

4. Lay siege to them by tracts and booklets and 
books.—There is great power in well-chosen tracts and 
books. The writer of one tract, before his death, had 
letters from sixteen hundred people, saying they had 
been brought to Christ by that tract. Sometimes you 
can hand a tract directly to those you wish to lead out, 
but oftentimes you can reach people more effectively 
by indirection. They would be offended if you handed 
them a tract, but if you leave it around they will pick 
it up out of curiosity and read it. If there is an es- 
pecially difficult case, it is well to invite him to your 
home. On the first night of his arrival retire early; 
have some well-chosen book that you wish him to read; 
see that every other book is taken out of his room, 
and see to it that there is a good light to read by. 
When he has been shown to his room at this unusually 
early hour, he will not wish to retire for the night. 
He will say, “ Why do these people go to bed so 
early? I wonder if there is not something to read.” 
He will look around and find there is just one book 
in the room to read. He will say, “It is a religious 
book,” and very likely will add, “I don’t care for 


258 REAL SALVATION 


religious books, but there is nothing else to read.” 
He will sit down and begin to read that. All this 
time you are in another room praying for him. 

Sometimes it is well to put a tract under a person’s 
pillow. When they are restless in the night they feel 
the touch of that tract as they put their hand under 
their pillow. All men are naturally curious; they will 
light a light and read the tract, and may be saved 
by it. 

A young man in London was urged again and again 
by his godly mother to accept Christ. He was de- 
termined that he would not, and at last, to escape the 
unceasing pleadings of his mother, he left home and 
went to a town in the north of England. He ob- 
tained lodgings in this town. The woman with whom 
he obtained them was a godly woman. Seeing this 
young man away from home, her heart went out 
towards him, and she put a tract under his pillow. 
When he went to bed that first night, away from 
home, he was restless; putting his hand under his pil- 
low he felt the tract and wondered what it was. He 
struck a light, and found it was a religious tract. He 
said to himself, “ Here I have ran away from home 
to get rid of my mother’s constant pleadings with 
me to become a Christian, and here, the first night 
away from home, I find a tract under my pillow; I 
might as well give in,’ and he did, and accepted 
Christ. A friend of mine was once calling in a godless 
home. When he left the home he left his Bible be- 
hind him, with a tract in the Bible. After he had gone 
the lady of the house opened his Bible from curiosity, 
and it opened to where the tract lay. She read the 
tract, was converted by it, and when he came back 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 259 


several days after for his Bible he found that several 
members of the household had been led to Christ by 
the tract. 

By such methods as this, and by all methods, by 
every kind of sanctified ingenuity, lay siege for those 
whom you have selected to win for Christ. 


III. GENERAL SUGGESTIONS. 


A few general suggestions as to the spirit in which 
the work is to be done. 

1. Be persistent.—It is at this point that many would- 
be soul-winners fail. They make one or two attempts 
to lead others to Christ, and these attempts appear to 
be unsuccessful, and they give it up. No one can win 
souls to Christ in this way. The way to succeed in any 
kind of business is by persistence. One can do pretty 
much anything in this world that he makes up his 
mind that he will do if he will only stick to it. Stick- 
to-itiveness is a priceless grace, especially in soul-win- 
ning. If one effort does not succeed, make another; if 
the second does not succeed, make another; if the 
hundredth effort does not succeed, make the hundred- 
and-first. Don’t give up until you win, if it takes fifty 
years. I prayed and worked for the salvation of one 
man for fifteen years. I seemed to make absolutely no 
headway. He wandered farther and farther from God, 
but I did not give up. There could hardly be a more 
unlikely case than he, utterly sunken in worldliness 
and sin; but I won, and I had the joy of seeing that 
man a preacher of the Gospel, and to-day he is in 
heaven. When he was converted his old friends could 
hardly believe it; it seemed to them utterly preposter- 


260 REAL SALVATION 


ous that such a person had been converted ; but he had. 
You can win any one to Christ if you are willing to 
keep at it. 

2. Be courteous.—There is nothing that costs less, 
and there are few things that pay better in this world, 
than courtesy. It pays in business. But there is no 
place where it pays better than in soul-winning work. 
You may be poor, but you can be well bred. Treat 
every man with whom you deal as a gentleman, and 
every woman with whom you deal as a lady. I have 
seen people go at others in a most overbearing, dis- 
courteous, and irritating way. They assume an air 
of superiority. They treat the one with whom they 
are dealing as if he had no sense; they act as if they 
were determined to pound their ideas into another 
man’s head. Now, every person of sense and char- 
acter resents this kind of treatment. The person with 
whom you deal may be utterly wrong, yet you can 
treat his opinions and his feelings with consideration 
and kindness. You are far more likely to win him in 
that way. Never have heated arguments with those 
you would lead to Christ. Listen to what they have 
to say. Treat them with deference. It is quite pos- 
sible to expose the hatefulness of another’s sin, and yet 
to do it in a courteous and considerate way. You will 
produce far deeper conviction in that way. Avoid all 
familiarities with those with whom you are dealing. 
A gentleman or a lady always resents undue familiarity. 
I have seen a man sit down in our after-meetings beside 
a young woman and put his arm along the seat-back 
of the woman. Any lady resents such conduct, and 
is likely to get up and leave the meeting. It is all right 
when a man is dealing with a drunkard that has not 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 261 


had a kindly action shown him in years, to put his arm 
around him as you kneel in prayer. It is all right fora 
lady when dealing with a fallen sister who has had 
nothing but curses and abuse for years, to put her arm 
around her. It is the first touch of a loving hand that 
she has had for many a long year, and may soften her 
heart. But every worker must be careful to treat 
every one with whom they deal with all due deference 
and courtesy. 

3. Be earnest—Many would-be soul-winners are 
utterly professional. Those with whom they deal 
cannot but see that they have no real interest in their 
spiritual welfare, no deep concern for their souls. 
Such a worker may have a large technical knowledge 
of the Bible, and of just the right passages to use in 
dealing with certain classes of men and women, but 
his knowledge counts for nothing unless there is deep 
reality and earnestness back of it. Other workers 
may have a comparatively small knowledge of the 
Word, and yet such an earnest love for the perishing 
that their little knowledge is used vastly beyond the 
superior knowledge of the other. 

In a certain town there was an infidel blacksmith. 
He was well read in infidel literature, and rejoiced 
in his power to defeat in argument any opponent. A 
deacon in the town had a great longing for this man’s 
salvation. He read up infidel literature, and the ar- 
guments in reply to it. When he thought he had 
mastered the subject he called upon this blacksmith 
to persuade him that he was wrong in his infidel 
opinions, but he proved no match for the blacksmith. 
In a few moments the blacksmith had shattered his 
arguments and defeated him utterly. The deacon 


262 REAL SALVATION 


knew that he was right, but he could not prove it to 
the blacksmith, but in his deep yearning for the salva- 
tion of the blacksmith he burst into tears, and said, 
“All I can say is, I have a great spiritual concern for 
your soul.” He then left, went to his home, burst 
in upon his wife, and said, “ Wife, I am a botch on 
God’s work. God knows, I really love that black- 
smith’s soul, and I went down to prove to him that he 
was wrong, and in a few minutes he beat me utterly 
in argument. Iam only a botch on God’s work.” -He 
then retired to his room and knelt down to pray. He 
said, “O God, I am only a botch on Thy work. Thou 
knowest that I have a real desire for that man’s salva- 
tion, but I have failed utterly in my attempt. I am 
only a botch on Thy work.” But soon after he had 
left the blacksmith’s shop the blacksmith went into 
his house and said to his wife, who was a godly 
woman, “ Wife, Deacon was just over talking 
to me. He used one argument I did not understand. 
He said he had a great spiritual concern for my soul. 
What did he mean?” His wife, who was a canny 
woman, said, “ You had better go and ask him.” The 
blacksmith hung up his apron and went across the 
fields to the deacon’s house. Just as he ascended 
the piazza and was at the door, he heard the deacon in 
prayer saying that he was a botch on God’s work. He 
pushed open the door and cried, ‘“ Deacon, you are no 
botch on God’s work. I thought I knew all the argu- 
ments for Christianity, and that I could answer them 
all, but you used an argument this morning I never 
heard before, and I cannot answer. You said you 
had a great spiritual concern for my soul.” The 
deacon had the joy then and there of leading that man 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 263 


to Christ. Have you a great spiritual concern for the 
souls of the perishing? If not, the sooner you get it 
the better for you and for the lost. 

4. Be winsome-——A winsome manner goes a great 
way in soul-winning. It is just as easy to smile as 
it is to scowl. It is just as easy to -be genial and 
winning as it is to be rude and repellant. Some 
people seem to take pride in their brusque, over- 
bearing manner; but brusqueness is not a fruit of 
the Spirit. ‘“ The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, 
long-suffering, gentleness,” etc. A winning manner, 
the outcome of a life controlled by the Holy Spirit, is 
of more importance in soul-winning than a theological 
education. Acts of kindness go a long way toward 
paving the way to the gate to a man’s heart. 

A young missionary in Chicago in her visitation 
found an infidel dying with consumption. Day after 
day she visited him with little gifts to make his last 
days on earth pleasanter. One day it would be a glass 
of jelly, another day something else. After about 
thirty days of such kindly ministrations she became 
fearful that his time was short. She came to me at 
the close of my Bible class one Sunday afternoon and 
said, “ Won’t you come with me to see a dying man? 
I am afraid he will not live through the night.” I 
hurried down with her to the poor room where the 
infidel lay dying. His wife was a Roman Catholic. 
I sat down by his bed and read the Scriptures to him, 
the Scriptures that make plain the love of God to 
sinners, the death of Christ in our stead, and the way 
of salvation through our crucified Saviour. I then 
asked him if I might pray with him, and he consented. 
I prayed God to open his eyes to show him that he 


264. REAL SALVATION 


was a lost sinner, but that Jesus had borne all his sins 
in His own body upon the cross. Then I began to 
sing in a low tone by his bed— 


“Just as I am, without one plea, 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bidst me come to Thee— 
O Lamb of God, I come! 


I sang it through, verse after verse, until I reached 
the last verse, and then I heard the dying infidel in a 
feeble voice join with me in the verse— 


“Just as I am—Thou wilt receive, 
Wilt welcome, pardon, cleanse, relieve, 
Because Thy promise I belieye— 
O Lamb of God, I come! I come!” 


I looked up and asked him if he really had come. 
He said that he had. He passed into eternity that 
night. I was asked to conduct the funeral services. 
Standing by his casket with his infidel friends stand- 
ing on the other side, I told how utterly insufficient 
his infidel views had proven in the time of crisis and 
of death, and how in those last hours he had accepted 
Christ. Then I said, “ Who of you to-day will take 
the same step?” One stalwart infidel reached his 
hand across the casket, and said, “I will. I have 
sympathised with this man in his infidel views, but I 
give it up now and take Christ.” His wife also 
accepted Christ, and is to-day a devoted member of 
our church in Chicago. But it was not my brief visit 
that won him to Christ. It was the kindly Christ-like 
conduct of the young woman missionary. 

5. Last of all, be full of love-—Love is the first fruit 


"METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 265 


i 
of the Spirit, and it is the all-conquering power in soul- 


winning work. I doubt if there is a heart on earth 
that cannot be conquered by love. We have in Amer- 
ica a devoted Christian woman of culture, refinement, 
and position, with a heart full of love to the most out- 
cast and abandoned. She has devoted much of her 
life and strength to getting matrons appointed in jails 
and lock-ups for the reception and charge of female 
prisoners. Oftentimes she has found it hard work 
to induce the authorities to put a woman in charge of 
the female prisoners. In one city they said to her, 
“Mrs. Barney, no woman can manage the class of 
women with whom we have to do.” Mrs. Barney 
replied, “ You never had a prisoner that I could not 
manage.” “We would like to have you try your 
hand on ‘Old Sal,’” was the laughing reply. “I 
would like to,” replied the gentle lady. ‘“‘ Well, the 
next time we have her under arrest we will send for 
you.” Not long after, early one morning, Mrs. 
Barney received word that “Old Sal” was under 
arrest, and she hurried down to the lock-up. She 
asked to be shown to “ Old Sal’s” cell. The sergeant 
at the desk protested that it was not safe. “ Look 
there,” he said to Mrs. Barney, pointing to four police- 
men with torn clotches and faces, “ there is a specimen 
of ‘Old Sal’s’ handiwork. It took these four men 
to arrest her.” “Never mind,” said Mrs. Barney, 
“show me to her cell.” “ Well, if you must go, an 
officer must go with you. “No, I will go alone. Just 
let the turnkey open the door, and I will go to her cell 
alone.” Before going down Mrs. Barney had asked 
the sergeant at the desk for ‘“ Old Sal’s” right name. 
“Why,” he said, “we always call her ‘Old Sal.’” 


266 REAL SALVATION 


“Yes,” said Mrs. Barney, “but I wish her right 
name. What is her right name?” “It is a long time 
since we first booked her, and we always book her 
now as ‘Old Sal.’” “Look up her right name,” said 
Mrs. Barney. The sergeant went back through the 
books and found “Old Sal’s” proper name. The 
turnkey opened the door and pointed to her cell down 
the corridor. When Mrs. Barney reached the door 
she saw a wild creature with gray, torn hair, dishev- 
elled garments, and glaring eyes crouching inthe cor- 
ner of the cell waiting to spring upon the first police- 
man that should enter. “ Good-morning, Mrs. Ae 
said Mrs. Barney, calling her by her true name. 
“Where did you get that name?” said the poor 
creature. Without answering her question Mrs. 
Barney said, “ Sarah, do you remember the first time 
you were committed here?” “ My God,” she cried, 
“don’t I? I spent the whole night crying on the 
floor of my cell.” “Suppose,” said Mrs. Barney, 
“there had been some kind Christian woman here to 
have received you that night, and to have treated 
you gently, do you think your life would have been 
different?” “Altogether different,” she replied. 
“ Well,” said Mrs. Barney, “I am trying to get them 
to appoint a woman in this lock-up to receive young 
girls when they are brought here for the first time, as 
you were when you were brought here that first night. 
Will you help me?” “TI will do all that I can,” she 
said. All the time Mrs. Barney had been drawing 
nearer, and was now kneeling by her side upon the 
cell floor, gathering up her torn and grizzled hair, 
fastening it up with pins taken out of her own hair, 
pulling together the torn shreds of her garments, 


METHODS TO WIN OTHERS TO CHRIST 267 


and fastening them with pins taken from her own 
garments. The work was now done, and Mrs. Bar- 
ney, rising to her feet, said, “Sally, we are going into 
the court-room. If you will be good they will ap- 
point a woman in this lock-up. Shall I go in on 
your arm, or will you go in on mine?” The strong 
woman looked at Mrs. Barney, and said, “I think 
I am stronger than you are. You had better go in 
on my arm.’ And in they went into the court, the 
gentle lady leaning on the arm of the hardened old 
criminal. Sally restrained herself through the whole 
trial, answered the judge’s questions pleasantly. She 
forgot herself once, and swore at the judge, but imme- 
diately begged his pardon. Everybody was amazed 
at the transformation. A woman was appointed as 
matron of the jail, but, best of all, Sally got her feet 
upon the Rock of Ages, and to-day “ Old Sal” is in 
the glory. Love had conquered. It always will. 

Oh, men and women, young and old, go out to 
do this work, seek the filling of the Spirit that God 
is so ready to give to us all, and in the power of that 
Spirit day after day, and month after month, and year 
after year, labour on for the definite salvation of the 
definite souls that God shall bring your way. The 
time is getting short, let us make the most of it. 


THE END 


ah 


i a 
, 

: p 
dh at} 


J ! ed bet 
5 A od 


Ve Ee eS Eve 


ROBE RTE. SPREE, 


Ms8SIONARY PRINCI- 
PLES AND PRACTICE. 
A Discussion of Christian 
Missions and some Criti- 
cisms upon them. 8vo, 
cloth, net $1.50. 
THE PRINCIPLES OF 
JESUS. 


As applied to some Ques- 
tions of to-day. 16mo, 
cloth, net 80c. 


CHRIST AND LIFE. 


Papers on the Practice of 
the Christian Life. 16mo, 
cloth, net $1.00, 


REMEMBER 


JEsUs CHRIST. 


And other talks about 
Christ and the Christian 
Life. Long 16mo, cloth, 


75Ce 
STUDIES OF THE MAN 
CHRIST JESUS. 
Twelfth Thousand, Long 
16mo, cloth, 75c. 
STUDIES OF THE 
Man Pav. 


Uniform with the Man 
Christ Jesus. Long 16mo, 
cloth, 75c. 


MISSIONS AND POLITICS 
IN ASIA. 


Studies of the Spirit of the 
Eastern peoples, the pres- 
ent making of history in 
Asia, and the part therein 
of Christian Missions. 
Student’s Lectures on 
Missions, Princeton, 
12mo, cloth, $1.00. 


A MEMORIAL OF A 
TRUE LIFE. 
A Biography of HucH 
MCALLISTER BEAVER. 


With Portrait, Iamo, 
cloth, $1,00. 


GAMBLING AND 
BETTING. 
A Frank Talk to Young 


Men of To-day, paper, net 
loc, 


THE SITUATION 
InN CHITA. 
A Record of Cause and 


Effect. I2mo, paper, net 
Ioc, 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


NEW YORK 


CHICAGO 


TORONTO 


WORKS BY PROF. 
W. G. MOOREHEAD 


OUTLINE STUDIES 
IN THE BooKsS 

oF THH 

OLD ToSTAMENT. 


12mo, cloth, $1.50, 


“There is not a super- 
fluous sentence in the 
book.”’—The Christian In- 
structor, 

“The style is clear and 
simple, sothat the meaning 
is always plain, without any 
mystification,’— Christian 
Guardian, 

“It puts in few words the 
vest results of careful schol- 
arship.”"—The Untted Pres- 
byterian. 

“The results, rather than 
the processes of scholar- 
ship are given in the text. 
The record, unburdened 
with Greek and Hebrew, 
reads smoothly, and will 
not fail to be enjoyed by 
the thoughtful student,’— 
Zion's Herald, 

“This is a most valuable 
book for any one who 
wishes a_ safe, scholarly, 
conservative statement as 
to the age, authorship, gen- 
eral circumstances, mean- 
ing and connection of each 
of the books of the Old 
Testament,”— Herald and 
Presbyter, 


STUDIES IN THH 
Four GOSPELS. 


1zmo, cloth, net, $1.00. 


‘To assimilate the con- 
tents... will result both 
in intellectual stimulus and 
the possession of much val- 
uable teaching material. 
They are not intended to 
be skimmed, but to be pa- 
tiently thought out.’’—7o- 
ronto Teachers Monthly. 


STUDIES IN THE 
Mosaio 
INSTITUTIONS. 


1zmo, cloth, net, $1.00, 


“One of the most valua- 
able of recent additions to 
the libraries of Bible stu- 
dents." — Jnternational 
Evangel, 


“Besides being a valu- 
ble treatise on the religious 
rites and ceremonies of the 
ancient Jews, shows the 
vital connection between 
them and the truths of 
Christianity as taught in 
the New Testament.’ — 
Journal and Messenger, 


ELEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


PUBLISHERS 


WoRKS BY G. 
CAMPBELL MORGAN 


A New Popular Edition LiFm PROBLEMS. 


THE CRISES OF THE 
CHRIST. 


Dr. MorGan's Most 
COMPREHENSIVE WORK. 
8vo, cloth, $1.50 net. 


Litrre Books SERIES. 
Long 16mo, 50 cents, 


THE TEN COMMamD- 
MENTS. 


STUDIES IN THE LAW OF 
MOSES AND THE Law oF 
CHRIST. 

I2zmo, cloth, 50 cents net. 


A First CENTURYMES: 
68aGE TO TWENTIETH 
CENTURY CHRISTIANS. 


ADDRESSES UPON **THE 
SEVEN CHURCHES OF 
Asta.”” Cloth, net $1.00, 


DISCIPLESHIP. 


Littte Books SERIES. 
Long 16mo, cloth, soc. 


Tae Spirit or Gop. 


Izmo, cioth, $1.25, 


THe HIDDEN YEARS 
AT NAZARETH. 


Gonp's METHODS WITH 
May, 


In Time—PAST, PRES- 
ENT AND FUTURE. 

With colored chart. 
I2mo, paper, 50 cents, 
Cloth, $1.00. 


Quiet Hour SEriss. 
18mo, cloth, 25 cents, 


THe Tron ESTIM4«TB 
or LIFE. 


AN ENTIRELY New, RE- 
VISED AND ENLARGED 
EpDITION. 

80 cents net. 


WHuHeErEIn Have Wu 
ROBBED GOD? 


MALACHI’S MESSAGE TO 
THE Men oF To-Day. 
Iamo, cloth, 75 cents. 


“ALL TuisGs Naw.” 


A MxssaGzE TO NEw 
CONVERTS, 
16mo, paper, 10 cents net 


Gonv’'s PrRFrnroT 
WILL, 


16mo, cloth, 50 cents net. 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


OnICc4GO 


BEWwW yYorxqK TOROZTO 


THE WORKS OF 
ESRUEIKG sh (deta bn Wk CO 1E< 


CULTURE AND 
RESTRAINT 


8vo, Decorated, cloth, Gilt 
Top, $1.50 net, 


“It is not an indifferent 
problem of abstract phil- 
osophy, but an urgent 
question of every-day life, 
and it is not as a pendant, 
but as a practical man, 
that Mr. Black deals with 
it, anxious not to spin 
plausible theories, but to 
give facts their exact 
weight. His work is that 
of a critic in the true sense 
of the word.”’\—Evening 
Post. 


THE DREAM OF YOUTH 


12zmo, Decorated Boards, 
30 cts. 

“An excellent discourse, 
based on Solomon's choice 
of wisdom in a dream, . 
+ +» The stress on the 
relation of what youth as- 
pires to, and the conse- 
quent” career, is enforced 
with Scotch vigor,”"— The 
S. S. Times. 


FRIENDSHIP 


With an Introductory 
Note by W. Robertson 
Nicoll,D.D.; and marginal 
and other decorations by 
F. Berkeley Smith. 
Printed in two colors. 
Thirty-fifth theusand, 
1zmo, decorated cloth. 
gilt top, boxed. $1.25. 


Half Persian Morocco, 
gilt top, boxed. $2.00 net. 


Full Persian Morocco, 
round corners, red under 
gold edges, $2.sonet. 


“Mr, Black is a man of 
great spiritual earnestness, 
simplicity of nature, and 
very fine intellectual qual- 
ity. This volume, which 
is tender and winning,and 
at the same time vigorous 
and incisive, shows the 
fine grain of the man's 
nature. The subject is 
an old one; the treatment 
is fresh, vivacious, and 
genuinely religious,"* — 
The Outlook, 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


NEW YORK 


CHICAGO 


TORONTO 


WORKS BY THE REV. 
Go PY NDA PE. LD: 


ELECTRICITY AND ITS 
SIMILITUDES 


The Analogy of Phenom- 
ena, Natural and Spiritual. 
Illustrated, 1Izmo, cloth, 
net $1.00. 


Dr. Tyndall holds a mem- 
bership in more than one 
society ofelectrical engin- 
eers,and speaks with au- 
thority. But more, he is 
also an expert object les- 
son teacher. He points out 
the moral and spiritual sig- 
nificance of the scientific 
facts that he discusses. His 
fertility in ilJustration is 
rare, Electricity is the 
objeet out of which he 
draws a multitude of les- 
sons. Dr, Tyndall has 
given us an unworked 
mine. The book itself is 
an illustration ofa method; 
it is a stimulant to obser- 
vation. It helps one to the 
habit of looking through 
the material to the spirit- 
ual 


OBJECT LESSONS FOR 
CHILDREN 


Hooks and Eyes. Truth 
Linked to Sight. 12mo, 
cloth decorated,  illus- 
trated, $1.25. 

“The writer was the 
pioneer author in this 
country in teaching re- 


ligious truths by means of 
objects. The present work 
marks an advance upon all 
others of its kind in that 
it employs the three suc- 
cessful methods of impart- 
ing truth, namely, the use 
of objects, of the black- 
board, and of stories.’’— 
The Presbyterian Fournal. 


“‘For busy pastors, Sunday- 
school superintendents,and 
others, we know no better 
work of its kind on the 
market.’"-— The Cumber- 
land Presbyterian, 


OBJECT SERMONS IN 
OUTLINE 


With an introduction by 
Rev. A. F, Schauffler,D.D. 
Profusely illustrated with 
pictures of the common ar- 
ticles of every-day life, 
12mo, cloth, $1.00. 


“This little volume con- 
tains outlines of,and direc- 
tions for several dozens of 
sermons illustrated by dif- 
ferent objects, such as 
umps, lamps, bread, a 
ird’s nest, masks, an an- 
chor, etc. There is noth- 
ing sensational in them, 
and they are aimed directly 
at the making of spiritual 
impressions.’’ — The Con- 
gregationalist. 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


NEW YORK 


CHICAGO 


TORONTO 


THIGH WwW aOe Re Kt omOae. 
H. CLAY TRUMBULL 


Old Time Student Volunteers. My 


Memories of Missionaries. 12mo, cloth, 


net $1.00. 

Impressionistic personal recollections of half-a-hundred 
missionaries who were in the foreign field at least as early as 
fifty years ago. The world that regards the missionary simply 
as a religious teacher needs to know how much commerce, 
science, scholarship, literature, and in fact many of our comforts 
of life owe to the comprehensive service of these noble heroes of 
the nineteenth century. 


Border Lines in the Field of Doubt- 
ful Practices. cloth, gold top, $1.00. 


“*Basily at the head of the many books that have been writ- 
ten on doubtful amusements. Dr, Trumbull’s long experience 
has furnishsd for the book hundreds of telling anecdotes, his 
sunny temper keeps¥it from even the suspicion of sternness and 
gloom, and through it all is a sturdy common-sense which com- 
pels assent.”"—The C, E. World. 


Illustrative Answers to Prayer. A 
Record of Personal Experiences. Uniform 
with ‘*Prayer: Its Nature and Scope.”’ 


16mo, cloth, 6oc. 

“The little book is worthy of a place alongside George 
Muller’s ‘ Life of Trust." Its autobiographical instances are 
most confirmatory of faith, and every example given of definite 
answers to prayer is so presented as to bring outa fresh and im- 
portant principal in Christian living.’"—The C. E, World, 


Prayer: Its Nature and Scope. 16mo, 


cloth, 6oc. 


““One of the most helpful and uplifting little books that 
have come to our table in a long time is ‘ Prayer’ by H. Clay 
Trumbull, It is a book which we would like to place in the 
hands of every Christian.."—The Churchman, 


FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 
NEW YORK CHICAGO TORONTO 


Vr 


Se 


pa a's 
oe 


| Me 
, wie 


ies 
tof 


wi» 
nena 


te 


Sead 


ay ; 


i +. 

if ? ay on ne i PM 

ws i oS mee 
J, ' 


* me 


ce 


Sh | eH 

‘F P : ' > 
ih a Ua ail 

an ih Ale: Aa 2 , van rae) - AD ; 

x *) 


‘ 
ae) oe ern Ph iS hk ues oY ee 


DATE DUE 


ee 


10rrey, KR. A. TOR 
AUTHOR CoD 


Real Salvation 


DATE DUE BORROWER'S NAME 


Torrey, R.A. 
Real Salvation TOR 


SALVATION ARMY CFOT CHICAGO 
36065700178495 


UV ANUAN /A AAA 
<7 O8-BLE-729 


