EIOH  AND  POOR ! 


A  TRACT  FOR  THE  TIMES. 


BEING    THOUGHTS     ON    LUKE    XVI.     19,-23, 


BY  THE 


EEY.  J.  C.  EYLE,  B.A. 

CHRIST    CHURCH,    OXFORD, 

RECTOR  OF  HELMINGHAM,  SUFFOLK. 

Author  of  "  Living  or  Dbad  ?  " 
"Assurance/'  &c. 


"  In  all  time  of  our  wealth. 
Good  Lord  deliver  us.'* 

Liturgy  of  the  Church  of  England, 


IPSWICH : 

HUNT  &  SON,  12,  TAVERN  STREET. 

LONDON: 

WERTHEIM  &  MACINTOSH,  24,  PATERNOSTER  ROW; 

NISBET  &  Co.,  21,  BERNERS  STREET. 

Price  Two  Shillings  per  Dozen. 

M.DCCC.LIII. 


-nM- 


THE  J     p    Q 

HARRISON 

COLLECTION  OF 

NINETEENTH  CENTURY 

BRITISH  SOCIAL  HISTORY 


1^ 


EICH  AND  POOE. 


LUKE  XYI.  19—83, 


^^ There  teas   a  certain  rich  man,  mhich  was  clothed  in 
purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously  every 


*^And  there  was  a  certain  leg  gar  named  Lazarus,  which 

was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores, 
*'And  desiring  to  he  fed  with  the  crumbs  which  fell  from 

the  rich  man's  table :  moreover,  the  dogs  came  and 

liclced  his  sores. 
^^And  it  came  to  pass,  that  the   beggar  died,  and  was 

carried  by  the  angels   into  Abraham^ s  bosom  :  the 

rich  man  also  died,  and  was  buried ; 
^^And  in  hell  he  lifted  up  his  eyes,  being  in  torments,  and 

seeth  Abraham  afar  off,  and  Lazarus  in  his  boso^nJ^ 

There  are  probably  few  readers  of  the  Bible 
who  are  not  familiar  with  the  parable  of  the  rich 
man  and  Lazarus.  It  is  one  of  those  passages 
of  Scripture  which  leave  an  indelible  impression 
on  the  mind.  Like  the  parable  of  the  Prodigal 
Son,  once  read  it  is  never  forgotten. 

The  reason  of  this  is  clear  and  simple.  The 
whole  parable  is  a  most  vividly  painted  picture. 
The  story,  as  it  goes  on,  carries  our  senses  with  it 
with  irresistible  power.  Instead  of  readers,  we 
become  lookers  on.     We  are  witnesses  of  all  the 


events  described.  We  see.  We  hear.  We  fancy 
we  could  almost  touch.  The  rich  man's  banquet, 
— the  purple, — the  fine  linen, — the  gate, — the 
beggar  lying  by  it, — the  sores, — the  dogs, — the 
crumbs, — the  two  deaths, — the  rich  man's  burial, 
— the  ministering  angels, — the  bosom  of  Abraham, 
— the  rich  man's  fearful  waking  up, — the  fire, — 
the  gulf, — the  hopeless  remorse, — all,  all  stand 
out  before  our  eyes  in  bold  relief,  and  stamp  them- 
selves upon  our  minds.  This  is  the  perfection 
of  language.  This  is  the  attainment  of  the  famous 
Arabian  standard,  "  He  speaks  the  best  who  turns 
the  ear  into  an  eye." 

But  after  all,  it  is  one  thing  to  admire  the 
masterly  composition  of  this  parable,  and  quite 
another  to  receive  the  spiritual  lessons  it  contains. 
The  eye  of  the  intellect  can  often  see  beauties 
while  the  heart  remains  asleep,  and  sees  nothing 
at  all.  Hundreds  read  Pilgrim's  Progress  with 
deep  interest,  to  whom  the  struggle  for  the  celestial 
city  is  foolishness.  Thousands  are  familiar  with 
every  word  of  the  parable  before  us  this  day,  who 
never  consider  how  it  comes  home  to  their  own 
case.  Their  conscience  is  deaf  to  the  cry  which 
ought  to  ring  in  their  ears  as  they  read,  '*  Thou 
art  the  man."  Their  heart  never  turns  to  God 
with  the  solemn  enquiry,  '*  Lord,  is  this  my 
picture  ? — Lord,  is  it  I  ?  " 

Reader,  I  invite  you  this  day  to  consider  the 
leading  truths  which  this  parable  is  meant  to  teach 
us.  I  purposely  omit  to  notice  any  part  of  it  but 
that  which  stands  at  the  head  of  this  tract.  May 
the  Holy  Ghost  give  you  a  teachable  spirit,  and  an 
understanding  heart,  and  so  produce  lasting  im- 
pressions on  your  soul ! 


I.  Observe,  first  of  all,  how  different  are  the 
conditions  which  God  allots  to  different  men. 

The  Lord  Jesus  begins  the  parable  by  telling  ns 
of  a  rich  man  and  a  beggar.  He  says  not  a  word 
in  praise  either  of  poverty  or  of  riches.  He  de- 
scribes the  circumstances  of  a  wealthy  man  and 
the  circumstances  of  a  poor  man;  but  neither 
condemns  the  temporal  position  of  one,  nor  praises 
that  of  the  other. 

The  contrast  between  the  two  men  is  painfully 
striking.     Look  on  this  picture,  and  on  that. 

Here  is  one  who  possessed  abundance  of  this 
world's  good  things.  *'  He  was  clothed  in  purple 
and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously  every  day." 

Here  is  another  who  has  literally  nothing.  He 
is  a  friendless,  diseased,  half-starved  pauper.  ^*He 
lies  at  the  rich  man's  gate  full  of  sores,"  and  begs 
for  crumbs. 

Both  are  children  of  Adam.  Both  came  from 
the  same  dust,  and  belong  to  one  family.  Both 
are  living  in  the  same  land  and  subjects  of  the 
same  government.  And  yet  how  difi'erent  is  their 
condition ! 

But  we  must  take  heed  that  we  do  not  draw 
lessons  from  the  parable  which  it  was  never  meant 
to  teach.  The  rich  are  not  always  bad  men,  and 
do  not  always  go  to  hell.  The  poor  are  not  always 
good  men,  and  do  not  always  go  to  heaven.  We 
must  not  rush  into  the  extreme  of  supposing  that 
it  is  sinful  to  be  rich.  We  must  not  run  away 
with  the  idea  that  there  is  anything  wicked  in  the 
difierence  of  condition  here  described,  and  that  God 
intended  all  men  to  be  equal.  There  is  nothing  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  words  to  warrant  any  such 
conclusion.     He  simply  describes  things  as  they 


are  often  seen  in  the  world,  and  as  we  must  expect 
to  see  them. 

Universal  equality  is  a  very  high-sounding  ex- 
pression, and  a  favourite  idea  with  visionary  men. 
Many  in  every  age  have  disturbed  society  by 
stirring  up  the  poor  against  the  rich,  and  hy 
preaching  up  the  popular  doctrine  that  all  men 
ought  to  be  equal.  But  so  long  as  the  world  is 
under  the  present  order  of  things,  this  universal 
equality  cannot  be  attained.  Those  who  declaim 
against  the  vast  inequality  of  men's  lots,  will 
doubtless  never  be  in  want  of  hearers ;  but  so 
long  as  human  nature  is  what  it  is,  this  inequality 
cannot  be  prevented. 

So  long  as  some  are  wise  and  some  are  foolish, 
— some  strong  and  some  weak, — some  healthy  and 
some  diseased ; — so  long  as  children  reap  the  fruit 
of  their  parents'  misconduct ; — so  long  as  sun,  and 
rain,  and  heat,  and  cold,  and  wind,  and  waves, 
and  drought,  and  blight,  and  storm,  and  tempest 
are  beyond  man's  control, — so  long  there  always 
will  be  some  rich  and  some  poor.  All  the  political 
economy  in  the  world  will  never  make  the  poor 
altogether  cease  out  of  the  land. 

Take  all  the  property  in  England  by  force  this 
day,  and  divide  it  equally  among  the  inhabitants. 
Give  every  man  above  twenty  years  old  an  equal 
portion.  Let  all  take  share  and  share  alike,  and 
begin  the  world  over  again.  Do  this,  and  see 
where  you  would  be  at  the  end  of  fifty  years. 
You  would  just  have  come  round  to  the  point 
where  you  began.  You  would  just  find  things  as 
unequal  as  before.  Some  would  have  worked  and 
some  would  have  been  idle.  Some  would  have 
been  always  careless  and  some  always  scheming. 


Some  would  have  sold  and  others  would  have 
bought.  Some  would  have  wasted  and  others 
would  have  saved.  And  the  end  would  be,  that 
some  would  be  rich  and  others  poor. 

Reader,  do  not  listen  to  those  vain  and  foolish 
talkers,  who  say  that  all  men  were  meant  to  be 
equal.  They  might  as  well  tell  you  that  all  men 
ought  to  be  of  the  same  height,  weight,  strength 
and  cleverness, — or  that  all  oak  trees  ought  to  be 
of  the  same  shape  and  size, —  or  that  all  blades 
of  grass  ought  to  be  of  the  same  length. 

Settle  it  in  your  mind  that  the  main  cause  of  all 
the  suffering  you  see  around  you,  is  sin.  Sin  is 
the  ffrand  curse  of  the  enormous  luxury  of  the  rich, 
and  the  painful  degradation  of  the  poor, — of  the 
heartless  selfishness  of  the  highest  classes,  and  the 
helpless  poverty  of  the  lowest.  Sin  must  be  first 
cast  out  of  the  world.  The  hearts  of  all  men  must 
be  renewed  and  sanctified.  The  devil  must  be 
bound.  The  Prince  of  Peace  must  come  down 
and  take  His  great  power  and  reign.  All  this 
must  be  before  there  ever  can  be  universal  happi- 
ness, or  the  gulf  be  filled  up  which  now  divides 
the  rich  and  the  poor. 

Beware  of  expecting  a  millennium  to  be  brought 
about  by  any  method  of  government,  by  any 
system  of  education,  by  any  political  party. 
Labour  might  and  main  to  do  good  to  all  men. 
Pity  your  poorer  brethren,  and  help  every  reason- 
able endeavour  to  raise  them  from  their  low  estate. 
Slack  not  your  hand  from  any  endeavour  to  in- 
crease knowledge, — to  promote  morality, — to 
improve  the  temporal  condition  of  the  poor.  But 
never,  never  forget  that  you  live  in  a  fallen  world, 
that  sin  is  all  around  you,  and  that  the  devil  is 


8 

abroad.  And  be  very  sure  that  the  rich  man  and 
Lazarus  are  emblems  of  two  classes  which  will 
always  be  in  the  world  until  the  Lord  comes. 

IL  Observe  in  the  next  place,  that  a  man's 
temporal  condition  is  no  test  of  the  state  of  his  soul. 

The  rich  man  in  the  parable  appears  to  have 
been  the  world's  pattern  of  a  prosperous  man.  If 
the  life  that  now  is  were  all,  he  seems  to  have  had 
everything  that  heart  could  wish.  We  know  that 
he  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared 
sumptuously  every  day.  We  need  not  doubt  that 
he  had  everything  else  which  money  could  procure. 
The  wisest  of  men  had  good  cause  for  saying, 
'•  Money  answereth  all  things."  ^'  The  rich  hath 
many  friends."  (Eccles.  x.  19.     Prov.  xiv.  20.) 

But  who  that  reads  the  story  through  can  fail 
to  see  that  in  the  highest  and  best  sense  the  rich 
man  was  pitiably  poor?  .Take  away  the  good 
things  of  this  life,  and  he  had  nothing  left, — no- 
thing after  death,  —  nothing  beyond  the  grave, 
nothing  in  the  world  to  come.  With  all  his  riches 
he  had  no  treasure  laid  up  in  heaven.  With  all 
his  purple  and  fine  linen  he  had  no  garment  of 
righteousness.  With  all  his  boon  companions  he 
had  no  Friend  and  Advocate  at  God's  right  hand. 
With  all  his  sumptuous  fare  he  had  never  tasted 
the  bread  of  life.  With  all  his  splendid  palace  he 
had  no  home  in  the  eternal  world.  Without  God, 
without  Christ,  without  faith,  without  grace,  with- 
out pardon,  without  holiness,  he  lives  to  himself 
for  a  few  short  years,  and  then  goes  down  hope- 
lessly into  the  pit.  How  hollow  and  unreal  was 
all  his  prosperity !  Reader,  judge  what  I  say, — 
The  rich  man  was  very  poor. 

Lazarus  appears  to  have  been  one  who  had 


9 

literally  nothing  in  the  world.  It  is  hard  to  con- 
ceive a  case  of  greater  misery  and  destitution  than 
his.  He  had  neither  house,  nor  money,  nor  food, 
nor  health,  nor,  in  all  probability,  even  clothes. 
His  picture  is  one  that  can  never  be  forgotten. 
He  lay  at  the  rich  man's  gate,  covered  with  sores. 
He  desired  to  be  fed  with  the  crumbs  that  fell 
from  the  rich  man's  table.  Moreover,  the  dogs 
came  and  licked  his  sores.  Verily  the  wise  man 
might  well  say,  *'  The  poor  is  hated  even  of  his 
neighbour."  "  The  destruction  of  the  poor  is 
their  poverty."  (Pro v.  xiv.  20  :  x.  15.) 

But  who  that  reads  the  parable  to  the  end  can 
fail  to  see  that  in  the  highest  sense  Lazarus  was 
not  poor  but  rich  ?  He  was  a  child  of  God.  He 
was  an  heir  of  glory.  He  possessed  durable  riches 
and  righteousness.  His  name  was  in  the  book  of 
life.  His  place  was  prepared  for  him  in  heaven. 
He  had  the  best  of  clothing, — the  righteousness 
of  a  Saviour.  He  had  the  best  of  friends, — God 
Himself  was  his  portion.  He  had  the  best  of 
food,  he  had  meat  to  eat  the  world  knew  not  of. 
And  best  of  all  he  had  these  things  for  ever.  They 
supported  him  in  life.  They  did  not  leave  him  in 
the  hour  of  death.  They  went  with  him  beyond 
the  grave.  They  were  his  to  eternity.  Surely  in 
this  point  of  view  we  may  well  say,  not  *'  poor 
Lazarus,"  but  ''rich  Lazarus." 

Eeader,  you  would  do  well  to  measure  all 
men  by  God's  standard, — to  measure  them  not  by 
the  amount  of  their  income,  but  by  the  condition 
of  their  souls.  When  the  Lord  God  looks  down 
from  heaven  and  sees  the  children  of  men.  He 
takes  no  account  of  many  things  which  are  highly 
esteemed  by  the  world.    He  looks  not  at  men's 


10 

money,  or  lands,  or  titles.  He  looks  only  at  the 
state  of  their  souls,  and  reckons  them  accordingly. 
Oh !  that  you  would  strive  to  do  likewise !  Oh ! 
that  you  would  value  grace  above  titles,  or  in- 
tellect, or  gold  I  Often,  far  too  often,  the  only 
question  asked  about  a  man  is,  ''How  much  is  he 
worth  ?"  It  would  be  well  for  us  all  to  remember 
that  every  man  is  pitiably  poor,  until  he  is  rich  in 
faith,  and  rich  toward  God. 

Wonderful  as  it  may  seem  to  some,  I  believe 
that  all  the  money  in  the  world  is  worthless  in 
God's  balances  compared  to  grace !  Hard  as  the 
saying  may  sound,  I  believe  that  a  converted 
beggar  is  far  more  important  and  honourable  in 
the  sight  of  God  than  an  unconverted  king.  The 
one  may  glitter  like  the  butterfly  in  the  sun  for  a 
little  season,  and  be  admired  by  an  ignorant  world  ; 
but  his  latter  end  is  darkness,  and  misery  for  ever. 
The  other  may  crawl  through  the  world  like  a 
crushed  worm  and  be  despised  by  every  one  who 
sees  him ;  but  his  latter  end  is  a  glorious  resurrec- 
tion and  a  blessed  eternity  with  Christ.  Of  him 
the  Lord  says,  ''I  know  thy  poverty,  but  thou  art 
rich.''  (Rev.  ii.  9.) 

King  Ahab  was  ruler  over  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel. 
Obadiah  was  nothing  more  than  a  servant  in  his 
household.  Yet  who  can  doubt  which  was  most 
precious  in  God's  sight,  the  servant  or  the  king  ? 

Ridley  and  Latimer  were  deposed  from  all  their 
dignities,  cast  into  prison  as  malefactors,  and  at 
length  burnt  at  the  stake.  Bonner  and  Gardiner, 
their  persecutors,  were  raised  to  the  highest  pitch 
of  ecclesiastical  greatness,  enjoyed  large  incomes, 
and  died  unmolested  in  their  beds.  Yet  who  can 
doubt  which  of  the  two  parties  were  on  the  Lord's 
side? 


11 

'  Baxter,  the  famous  divine,  was  persecuted  with 
savage  malignity,  and  condemned  to  a  long  im- 
prisonment by  a  most  unjust  judgment.  Jeffreys, 
the  lord  chief  justice,  was  a  man  of  infamous 
character,  without  either  morality  or  religion. 
Baxter  was  sent  to  jail  and  Jeffreys  was  loaded 
with  honours.  Yet  who  can  doubt  which  was  the 
good  man  of  the  two,  the  lord  chief  justice  or  the 
author  of  the  ''  Saint's  Rest  ? " 

Header,  be  very  sure  that  riches  and  worldly 
greatness  are  no  certain  marks  of  God's  favour. 
They  are  often  on  the  contrary,  a  snare  and  hind- 
rance to  a  man's  soul.  They  make  him  love  the 
world  and  forget  God.  What  says  Solomon? 
'^  Labour  not  to  be  rich."  (Prov.  xxiii.  4.)  What 
says  St.  Paul?  ^^They  that  will  be  rich,  fall  into 
temptation  and  a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and 
hurtful  lusts,  which  drown  men  in  destruction  and 
perdition."  (1  Tim.  vi.  9.) 

Reader,  be  no  less  sure  that  poverty  and  trial 
are  no  certain  proof  of  God's  anger.  They  are 
blessings  in  disguise.  They  are  always  sent  in 
love  and  wisdom.  They  often  serve  to  wean  man 
from  the  world.  They  teach  him  to  set  his  affec- 
tions on  things  above.  They  often  show  the  sinner 
his  own  heart.  They  often  make  the  saint  fruitful 
in  good  works.  What  says  the  book  of  Job? 
'*  Happy  is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth ;  there- 
fore despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Al- 
mighty." (Job  V.  17.)  What  says  St.  Paul? 
''Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."  (Heb. 
xii.  6.) 

One  great  secret  of  happiness  in  this  life  is  to 
be  of  a  patient,  contented  spirit.  Strive  daily  to 
realize  the  truth  that  this  life  is  not  the  place  of 


12 

reward.  The  time  of  retribution  and  recompense 
is  yet  to  come.  Judge  nothing  hastily  before  that 
time.  Eemember  the  words  of  the  wise  man,  *'  If 
thou  seest  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  and  violent 
perverting  of  judgment  and  justice  in  a  province, 
marvel  not  at  the  matter :  for  He  that  is  higher 
than  the  highest  regardeth,  and  there  be  higher 
than  they."  (Eccles.  v.  8.)  Yes !  there  is  a  day 
of  judgment  yet  to  come.  That  day  shall  put  all 
in  their  right  places.  At  last  there  shall  be  seen 
a  mighty  difference  between  him  that  feareth  God, 
and  him  that  feareth  him  not.  The  children  of 
Lazarus  and  the  children  of  the  rich  man,  shall  at 
length  be  seen  in  their  true  colours,  and  every  one 
shall  receive  according  to  his  works. 

III.  Observe,  in  the  next  place,  how  all  classes 
alike  come  to  the  grave. 

The  rich  man  in  the  parable  died,  and  Lazarus 
died  also.  Different  and  divided  as  they  were  in 
their  lives,  they  had  both  to  drink  of  the  same  cup 
at  the  last.  Both  went  to  the  home  appointed  for 
all  living.  Both  went  to  that  place  where  rich 
and  poor  meet  together.  Dust  they  were,  and 
unto  dust  they  returned. 

This  is  the  lot  of  all  men.  It  will  be  our  own 
unless  the  Lord  shall  first  return  in  glory.  After 
all  our  scheming,  and  contriving,  and  planning, 
and  studying, — after  all  our  inventions  and  dis- 
coveries, and  scientific  attainments, — there  re- 
mains one  enemy  we  cannot  conquer  and  disarm, 
and  that  is  death.  The  chapter  in  Genesis,  which 
records  the  long  lives  of  Methuselah  and  the  rest 
which  lived  before  the  flood,  winds  up  the  simple 
story  of  each  by  two  expressive  words,  '^he  died." 
And  now,  after  4800  years,  what  more  can  be  said 


13 

of  the  greatest  among  ourselves  ?  The  histories 
of  Marlborough,  and  Washington,  and  Napoleon, 
and  Wellington,  arrive  at  just  the  same  hum- 
bling conclusion.  The  end  of  each,  after  all  his 
greatness,  is  just  this,  '^he  died." 

Death  is  a  mighty  leveller.  He  spares  none, 
he  waits  for  none,  and  stands  on  no  ceremony. 
He  will  not  tarry  till  you  are  ready.  He  will  not 
be  kept  out  by  moats,  and  doors,  and  bars,  and 
bolts.  The  Englishman  boasts  that  his  home  is 
his  castle,  but  with  all  his  boasting,  he  cannot 
exclude  death.  An  Austrian  nobleman  forbade 
death  and  the  small-pox  to  be  named  in  his  pres- 
ence. But,  named  or  not  named,  it  matters  little, 
in  God's  appointed  hour  death  will  come. 

One  man  rolls  easily  along  the  road  in  the  best 
appointed  carriage.  Another  toils  wearily  along 
the  path  on  foot.  Yet  both  are  sure  to  meet  at 
last  in  the  same  home. 

One  man,  like  Absalom,  has  fifty  servants  to 
wait  upon  him  and  do  his  bidding.  Another  has 
none  to  lift  a  finger  to  do  him  a  service.  But 
both  are  travelling  to  a  place  where  they  must  lie 
down  alone. 

One  man  is  the  owner  of  hundreds  of  thousands. 
Another  has  scarce  a  shilling  that  he  can  call  his 
own  property.  Yet  neither  one  nor  the  other  can 
carry  one  farthing  with  him  into  the  unseen 
world. 

One  man  is  the  possessor  of  half  a  county. 
Another  has  not  so  much  as  a  garden  of  herbs. 
And  yet  two  paces  of  the  vilest  earth  will  be  amply 
sufiicient  for  either  of  them  at  the  last. 

One  man  pampers  his  body  with  every  possible 
delicacy,  and  clothes  il  in  the  richest  and  softest 

c 


( 


14 

apparel.  Another  has  scarce  enough  to  eat  and 
seldom  enough  to  put  on.  Yet  both  alike  are 
hurrying  on  to  a  day  when  *^  ashes  to  ashes,  and 
dust  to  dust,"  shall  be  proclaimed  over  them,  and 
fifty  years  hence  none  shall  be  able  to  say,  ^*  this  was 
the  rich  man's  bone  and  this  the  bone  of  the  poor." 

Reader,  I  know  that  these  are  ancient  things. 
I  do  not  deny  it  for  a  moment.  I  am  writing 
stale  old  things  that  all  men  know.  But  I  am 
also  writing  things  that  all  men  do  not  feel.  Oh  ! 
no !  if  they  did  feel  them,  they  would  not  speak 
and  act  as  they  do. 

You  wonder  sometimes  at  the  tone  and  language 
of  ministers  of  the  Gospel.  You  marvel  that  we 
press  upon  you  immediate  decision.  You  think 
us  extreme  and  extravagant,  and  ultra  in  our 
views,  because  we  urge  u'pon  you  to  close  with 
Christ,  to  leave  nothing  uncertain,  to  make  sure 
that  you  are  born  again  and  ready  for  heaven. 
You  hear,  but  do  not  approve.  You  go  away,  and 
say  to  one  another :  ''  The  man  means  well,  but 
he  goes  too  far." 

But  do  you  not  see  that  the  reality  of  death  is 
continually  forbidding  us  to  use  other  language  ? 
We  see  him  gradually  thinning  our  congregations. 
We  miss  face  after  face  in  our  assemblies.  We 
know  not  whose  turn  may  come  next.  We  only 
know  that  as  the  tree  falls  there  it  will  lie,  and 
that  ^^  after  death  comes  the  judgment."  We 
must  be  bold  and  decided,  and  uncompromising 
in  our  language.  We  would  rather  run  the  risk 
of  ofiending  some,  than  of  losing  any.  We  would 
aim  at  the  standard  set  up  by  old  Baxter, — 

"I'll  preach  as  though  I  ne'er  should  preach  again, 
And  as  a  dying  man  to  dying  men  I " 


15 

We  would  realize  the  character  given  by  Charles 
II,  of  one  of  his  preachers:  '*That  man  preaches 
as  though  death  was  behind  his  back.  When  I 
hear  him  I  cannot  go  to  sleep." 

Oh!  that  men  would  learn  to  live  as  those 
who  may  one  day  die !  Truly  it  is  poor  work  to 
set  our  affections  on  a  dying  world  and  its  short- 
lived comforts,  and  for  the  sake  of  an  inch  of  time 
to  lose  a  glorious  immortality  !  Here  we  are 
toiling,  and  labouring,  and  wearying  ourselves 
about  trifles,  and  running  to  and  fro  like  ants 
upon  a  heap ;  and  yet  after  a  few  years  we  shall  all 
be  gone,  and  another  generation  fill  our  place.  Live 
for  eternity,  reader.  Seek  a  portion  that  can 
never  be  taken  from  you.  And  never  forget  John 
Bunyan's  golden  rule,  *'  He  that  would  live  well, 
let  him  make  his  dying  day  his  company-keeper." 

IV.  Observe,  in  the  next  place,  how  precious 
a  believers  soul  is  in  the  sight  of  God. 

The  rich  man,  in  the  parable,  dies  and  is  buried. 
Perhaps  he  had  a  splendid  funeral, — a  funeral 
proportioned  to  his  expenditure  while  he  was  yet 
alive.  But  we  hear  nothing  further  of  the  moment 
when  soul  and  body  were  divided.  The  next  thing 
we  hear  of  is  that  he  is  in  hell. 

The  poor  man,  in  the  parable,  dies  also.  What 
manner  of  burial  he  had  we  know  not.  A  pauper's 
funeral  among  men  is  a  melancholy  business.  The 
funeral  of  Lazarus  was  probably  no  better.  But 
this  we  do  know,  that  the  moment  Lazarus  dies 
he  is  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom, 
— carried  to  a  place  of  rest,  where  all  the  faithful 
are  waiting  for  the  resurrection  of  the  just. 

Reader,  there  is  something  to  my  mind  very 
striking,  very  touching,  and  very  comforting  in 


16 

this  expression  of  the  parable.  I  ask  your  especial 
attention  to  it.  It  throws  great  light  on  the  re- 
lation of  all  sinners  of  mankind  who  believe  in 
Christ,  to  their  God  and  Father.  It  shows  a  little 
of  the  care  bestowed  on  the  least  and  lowest  of 
Christ's  disciples,  by  the  King  of  kings. 

No  man  has  such  friends  and  attendants  as  the 
believer,  however  little  he  may  think  it.  Angels 
rejoice  over  him  in  the  day  that  he  is  born  again 
of  the  Spirit.  Angels  minister  to  him  all  through 
life.  Angels  encamp  around  him  in  the  wilderness 
of  this  world.  Angels  take  charge  of  his  soul  in 
death,  and  bear  it  safely  home.  Yes!  vile  as 
he  may  be  in  his  own  eyes,  and  lowly  in  his  own 
sight,  the  very  poorest  and  humblest  believer  in 
Jesus  is  cared  for  by  his  Father  in  heaven,  with 
a  care  that  passeth  knowledge.  The  Lord  has 
become  his  shepherd,  and  he  can  want  nothing. 
Only  let  a  man  come  unfeignedly  to  Christ,  and 
he  shall  have  all  the  benefits  of  a  covenant  ordered 
in  all  things  and  sure. 

Is  he  laden  with  many  sins  ?  Though  they  be 
as  scarlet,  they  shall  become  white  as  snow. 

Is  his  heart  hard  and  prone  to  evil  ?  A  new 
heart  shall  be  given  to  him,  and  a  new  spirit  put 
in  him. 

Is  he  weak  and  cowardly?  He  that  enabled 
Peter  to  confess  Christ  before  His  enemies,  shall 
make  him  bold. 

Is  he  ignorant?  He  that  bore  with  Thomas' 
slowness,  shall  bear  with  him,  and  guide  him  into 
all  truth. 

Is  he  alone  in  his  position  ?  He  that  stood  by 
Paul  when  all  men  forsook  him,  shall  also  stand 
by  his  side. 


17 

Is  he  in  circumstances  of  special  trial?  He 
that  enabled  men  to  be  saints  in  Nero's  household, 
shall  also  enable  him  to  persevere. 

The  very  hairs  of  his  head  are  all  numbered. 
Nothing  can  harm  him  without  God's  perniission. 
He  that  hurteth  him,  hurteth  the  apple  of  God's 
eye,  and  injures  a  brother  and  member  of  Christ 
Himself. 

His  trials  are  all  wisely  ordered.  Satan  can 
only  vex  him  as  he  did  Job,  when  God  permits 
him.  No  temptation  can  happen  to  him  above 
what  he  is  able  to  bear.  All  things  are  working 
together  for  his  good. 

His  steps  are  all  ordered  from  grace  to  glory. 
He  is  kept  on  earth  till  he  is  ripe  for  heaven,  and 
not  one  moment  longer.  The  harvest  of  the  Lord 
must  have  its  appointed  proportion  of  sun  and 
wind,  of  cold  and  heat,  of  rain  and  storm.  And 
then  when  the  believer's  work  is  done,  the  angels 
of  God  shall  come  for  him  as  they  did  for  Lazarus, 
and  carry  him  safe  home. 

Ah !  reader,  the  men  of  the  world  little  think 
whom  they  are  despising,  when  they  mock  Christ's 
people.  They  are  mocking  those  whom  angels 
are  not  ashamed  to  attend  upon.  They  are  mock- 
ing the  brethren  and  sisters  of  Christ  Himself. 
Little  do  they  consider  that  these  are  they  for 
whose  sakes  the  days  of  tribulation  are  shortened. 
These  are  they  by  whose  intercession  kings  reign 
peacefully.  Little  do  they  reck,  that  the  prayers 
of  men  like  Lazarus  have  more  weight  in  the 
affairs  of  nations,  than  hosts  of  armed  men. 

Believers  in  Christ  who  read  this  tract,  you 
little  know  the  full  extent  of  your  privileges 
and  possessions.      Like  children  at  school,  you 


19 

know  not  half  your  Father  is  doing  lor  your 
welfare.  Learn  to  live  by  faith  more  than  you 
have  done.  Acquaint  yourselves  with  the  fulness 
of  the  treasure  laid  up  for  you  in  Christ  even  now. 
This  world,  no  doubt,  must  always  be  a  place  of 
trial  while  we  are  in  the  body.  But  still  there  are 
comforts  provided  for  the  brethren  of  Lazarus, 
which  many  never  enjoy. 

V.  Observe,  in  the  last  place,  what  a  dangerous 
and  soul-ruining  sin  is  the  sin  of  selfishness. 

You  leave  the  rich  man  in  the  parable,  in  a 
hopeless  state.  If  there  was  no  other  picture  of 
a  lost  soul  in  hell  in  all  the  Bible,  you  have  it 
here.  You  meet  him  in  the  beginning,  clothed  in 
purple  and  fine  linen.  You  part  with  him  at  the 
last,  tormented  in  the  everlasting  fire. 

And  yet  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  this  man 
was  a  murderer,  or  a  thief,  or  an  adulterer,  or  a 
liar.  There  is  no  reason  to  say  that  he  was  an 
atheist,  or  an  infidel,  or  a  blasphemer.  For  any- 
thing we  know,  he  attended  to  all  the  ordinances 
of  the  Jewish  religion.  But  we  do  know  that  he 
v\ras  lost  for  ever. 

There  is  something  to  my  mind  very  solemn  in 
this  thought.  Here  is  a  man  whose  outward  life 
in  all  probability  was  correct.  At  all  events  we 
know  nothing  against  him.  He  dresses  richly; 
but  then  he  had  money  to  spend  on  his  apparel. 
He  gives  splendid  feasts  and  entertainments ;  but 
then  he  was  wealthy,  and  could  well  afibrd  it. 
We  read  nothing  recorded  against  him  that  might 
not  be  recorded  of  hundreds  and  thousands  in  the 
present  day,  who  are  counted  respectable  and  good 
sort  of  people.  And  yet  the  end  of  this  man  is 
that  he  goes  to  hell.  Surely  this  deserves  serious 
attention. 


19 

I  believe  it  is  meant  to  teach  us  to  beware  of 
living  only  for  ourselves.  It  is  not  enough  that 
we  are  able  to  say,  '^  I  live  correctly.  I  pay 
every  one  his  due.  I  discharge  all  the  relations  of 
life  with  propriety.  I  attend  to  all  the  outward 
requirements  of  Christianity."  There  remains 
behind  another  question,  to  which  the  Bible  re- 
quires an  answer.  ^'To  whom  do  you  live,  to  your- 
self or  to  Christ?  What  is  the  great  end,  aim,  object, 
and  ruling  motive  in  your  life  ? "  Let  men  call 
the  question  extreme  if  they  please.  For  myself, 
I  can  find  nothing  short  of  this  in  St.  Paul's  words, 
^^  He  died  for  all,  that  they  which  live  should  not 
henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  but  unto  him 
which  died  for  them,  and  rose  again."  (2  Cor. 
V.  15.)  And  I  draw  the  conclusion  that  if,  like 
the  rich  man,  we  live  only  to  ourselves,  we  shall 
ruin  our  souls. 

I  believe  further,  that  this  passage  is  meant  to 
teach  us  the  damnable  nature  of  the  sins  of  omission. 
It  does  not  seem  that  it  was  so  much  the  things 
the  rich  man  did,  but  the  things  he  left  undone, 
which  made  him  miss  heaven.  Lazarus  was  at 
his  gate  and  he  let  him  alone.  But  is  not  this 
exactly  in  keeping  with  the  history  of  the  judg- 
ment in  the  twenty-fifth  of  St.  Matthew?  Nothing 
is  said  there  of  the  sins  of  commission,  of  which 
the  lost  are  guilty.  How  runs  the  charge  ? — ^'  I 
was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat :  I 
was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink  :  I  was  a 
stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in  :  naked,  and  ye 
clothed  me  not :  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited 
me  not."  (Matt.  xxv.  42,  43.)  The  charge  against 
them  is  simply  that  they  did  not  do  certain  things. 
On  this  their  sentence  turns.    And  I  draw  the  con- 


20 

elusion  again,  that  except  we  take  heed,  sins  of 
omission  may  ruin  our  souls.  Truly  it  was  a 
solemn  saying  of  good  Archbishop  Usher  on  his 
death-bed,  ''Lord,  forgive  me  all  my  sins,  but 
specially  my  sins  of  omission." 

I  believe  further  that  the  passage  is  meant  to 
teach  us  that  riches  bring  special  danger  with 
them.  Yes!  riches,  which  the  vast  majority  of 
men  are  always  seeking  after, — riches  for  which 
they  spend  their  lives,  and  of  which  they  make  an 
idol, — riches  entail  on  their  possessor  immense 
spiritual  peril.  The  possession  of  them  has  a  very 
hardening  effect  on  the  soul.  They  chill.  They 
freeze.  They  petrify  the  inward  man.  They  close 
the  eye  to  the  things  of  faith.  They  insensibly  pro- 
duce a  tendency  to  forget  God.  And  does  not  this 
stand  in  perfect  harmony  with  all  the  language  of 
Scripture  on  the  same  subject?  What  says  our  Lord? 
'^How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God !  It  is  easier  for  a  camel 
to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich 
man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God ! "  (Mark  x.  23, 
25.)  What  says  St.  Paul?  ''The  love  of  money 
is  the  root  of  all  evil ;  which  while  some  coveted 
after,  they  have  erred  from  the  faith,  and  pierced 
themselves  through  with  many  sorrows.''  (1  Tim. 
vi.  10.)  What  can  be  more  striking  than  the  fact 
that  the  Bible  has  frequently  spoken  of  money  as 
a  most  fruitful  cause  of  sin  and  evil  ?  For  money 
Achan  brought  defeat  on  the  armies  of  Israel,  and 
death  on  himself.  For  money  Balaam  sinned 
against  light,  and  tried  to  curse  God's  people. 
For  money  Delilah  betrayed  Samson  to  the  Phi- 
listines. For  money  Gehazi  lied  to  Naaman  and 
Elisha,  and  became  a  leper.     For  money  Ananias 


21 

and  Sapphira  became  the  first  hypocrites  in  the 
early  church,  and  lost  their  lives.  For  money 
Judas  Iscariot  sold  Christ,  and  was  ruined  eter- 
nally.    Surely  these  facts  speak  loudly. 

Money,  in  truth,  is  one  of  the  most  unsatisfying 
of  possessions.  It  takes  away  some  cares,  no 
doubt.  But  it  brings  with  it  quite  as  many  cares 
as  it  takes  away.  There  is  trouble  in  the  getting 
of  it.  There  is  anxiety  in  the  keeping  of  it. 
There  are  temptations  in  the  use  of  it.  There  is 
guilt  in  the  abuse  of  it.  There  is  sorrow  in  the 
losing  of  it.  There  is  perplexity  in  the  disposing 
of  it.  Two-thirds  of  all  the  strifes,  quarrels,  and 
lawsuits  in  the  world,  arise  from  one  simple  cause, 
— money. 

Money  most  certainly  is  one  of  the  most  en- 
snaring and  heart-changing  of  possessions.  It 
seems  desirable  at  a  distance.  It  often  proves  a 
poison  when  in  our  hand.  No  man  can  possibly 
tell  the  effect  of  money  on  his  soul,  if  it  suddenly 
falls  to  his  lot  to  possess  it.  Many  an  one  did  run 
well  as  a  poor  man,  who  forgets  God  when  he  is  rich. 

Reader,  I  draw  the  conclusion,  that  those  who 
have  money,  like  the  rich  man  in  the  parable, 
ought  to  take  double  pains  about  their  souls.  They 
live  in  a  most  unhealthy  atmosphere.  They  have 
double  need  to  be  on  their  guard. 

I  believe,  not  least,  that  the  passage  is  meant  to 
stir  up  special  carefulness  about  selfishness  in  these 
last  days.  You  have  a  special  warning  in  2  Tim. 
iii.  1,  2.  '^  In  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall 
come:  For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves, 
covetous."  I  believe  we  have  come  to  the  last 
days,  and  that  we  ought  to  beware  of  the  sins 
here  mentioned,  if  we  love  our  souls. 


22 

Perhaps  we  are  poor  judges  of  our  own  times. 
We  are  apt  to  exaggerate  and  magnify  their  evils, 
just  because  we  see  and  feel  them.  Bat  after 
every  allowance,  I  doubt  whether  there  ever  was 
more  need  of  warnings  against  selfishness  than  in 
the  present  day.  I  am  sure  there  never  was  a 
time  when  all  classes  in  England  had  so  many 
comforts  and  so  many  temporal  good  things.  And 
yet  I  believe  there  is  an  utter  disproportion  be- 
tween men's  expenditure  on  themselves  and  their 
outlay  on  works  of  charity  and  works  of  mercy. 
I  see  this  in  the  miserable  one  guinea  subscrip- 
tions to  which  many  rich  men  confine  their  charity. 
I  see  it  in  the  languishing  condition  of  many  of 
our  best  religious  societies,  and  the  painfully  slow 
growth  of  their  annual  incomes.  I  see  it  in  the 
small  number  of  names  which  appear  in  the  list 
of  contributions  to  any  good  work.  There  are,  I 
believe,  thousands  of  rich  people  in  this  country, 
who  literally  give  away  nothing  at  all.  I  see  it 
in  the  notorious  fact  that  few,  even  of  those  who 
give,  give  anything  proportioned  to  their  means. 
I  see  all  this,  and  mourn  over  it.  I  regard  it  as 
the  selfishness  and  covetousness  predicted  as  likely 
to  arise  in  the  last  days. 

Reader,  I  know  that  this  is  a  painful  and  deli- 
cate subject.  But  it  must  not  on  that  account  be 
avoided  by  the  minister  of  Christ.  It  is  a  subject 
for  the  times,  and  it  needs  pressing  home.  I 
desire  to  speak  to  mj^^self,  and  to  all  who  make 
any  profession  of  religion.  Of  course  I  cannot 
expect  worldly  and  utterly  ungodly  persons  to 
view  this  subject  in  Bible  light.  To  them  the 
Bible  is  no  rule  of  faith  and  practice.  To  quote 
texts  to  them  would  be  of  little  use. 


23 

But  I  do  ask  all  ])roressing  Christians  to  con- 
sider well  what  Scripture  says  against  covetousness 
and  selfishness,  and  on  behalf  of  liberality  in  giv-^ 
ing  money.  Is  it  for  nothing  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
spoke  the  parable  of  the  rich  fool,  and  blamed 
him  because  he  was  not  '^rich  towards  God?"  Is 
it  for  nothing  that  in  the  parable  of  the  sower  He 
mentions  the  deceitfulness  of  riches  as  one  reason 
why  the  seed  of  the  Word  bears  no  fruit?  Is 
it  for  nothing  that  He  says,  '^Make  to  yourselves 
friends  of  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness?"  Is 
it  for  nothing  that  He  says,  ^*  When  thou  makest 
a  dinner  or  a  supper,  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy 
brethren,  neither  thy  kinsmen,  nor  thy  rich 
neighbours ;  lest  they  also  bid  thee  again,  and  a 
recompense  be  made  thee.  But  when  thou  makest 
a  feast,  call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the 
blind  :  and  thou  shalt  be  blessed ;  for  they  cannot 
recompense  thee :  for  thou  shalt  be  recompensed 
at  the  resurrection  of  the  just? "  Is  it  for  nothing 
that  He  says,  ^^  Sell  that  ye  have,  and  give  alms ; 
provide  yourselves  bags  which  wax  not  old,  a 
treasure  in  the  heavens  that  faileth  not,  where  no 
thief  approacheth,  neither  moth  corrupteth  ?  "  Is 
it  for  nothing  that  He  says,  ^^  Jt  is  more  blessed 
to  give  than  to  receive?"  Is  it  for  nothing  that 
He  warns  us  against  the  example  of  the  priest  and 
Levite,  who  saw  the  wounded  traveller,  but  passed 
by  on  the  other  side?  Is  it  for  nothing  that  He 
praises  the  good  Samaritan,  who  denied  himself  to 
shew  kindness  to  a  stranger?  Is  it  for  nothing 
that  St.  Paul  classes  covetousness  with  sins  of  the 
grossest  description,  and  denounces  it  as  idolatry? 
And  is  there  not  a  striking  and  painful  difference 
between  this  language  and  the  habits  and  feelings 


24 

of  society  about  money?     I  appeal  to  any  one 
who  knows  the  world.    Let  him  judge  what  I  say. 

Keader,  I  only  ask  you  to  consider  calmly  the 
passages  of  Scripture  to  which  I  have  referred.  I 
cannot  think  they  were  meant  to  teach  nothing  at 
all.  That  the  habits  of  the  East  and  our  own  are 
different,  I  freely  allow.  That  some  of  the  ex- 
pressions I  have  quoted  are  figurative,  I  freely 
admit.  But  still  after  all,  a  principle  lies  at  the 
bottom  of  all  these  expressions.  Let  us  take  heed 
that  this  principle  is  not  neglected.  I  wish  that 
many  a  professing  Christian  in  this  day,  who 
perhaps  dislikes  what  I  am  saying,  would  try 
to  write  a  commentary  on  these  expressions,  and 
try  to  explain  to  himself  what  they  mean. 

To  know  that  alms-giving  cannot  atone  for  sin 
is  well.  To  know  that  our  good  works  cannot 
justify  us  is  excellent.  To  know  that  we  may 
give  all  our  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  build 
hospitals  and  cathedrals,  without  any  real  charity, 
is  most  important.  But  let  us  beware  lest  we 
go  into  the  other  extreme,  and  because  our  money 
cannot  save  us,  give  no  money  away  at  all. 

Has  any  one  money  who  reads  these  pages? 
Then  take  heed  and  beware  of  covetousness.  Re- 
member you  carry  weight  in  the  race  towards 
heaven.  All  men  are  naturally  in  danger  of  being 
lost  for  ever,  but  you  are  doubly  so  because  of 
your  possessions.  Nothing  is  said  to  put  out  fire 
so  soon  as  earth  thrown  upon  it.  Nothing,  I  am 
sure,  has  such  a  tendency  to  quench  the  fire  of 
religion  as  the  possession  of  money.  It  was  a 
solemn  message  which  Buchanan,  on  his  death- 
bed, sent  to  his  old  pupil,  James  L,  '^He  was 
going  to  a  place  where  few  kings  and  great  men 


25 

could  come/'  It  is  possible,  no  doubt,  for  you  to 
be  saved  as  well  as  others.  With  God  nothing  is 
impossible.  Abraham,  Job,  and  David  were  all 
rich  and  yet  saved.  But  Oh !  take  heed  to  your- 
self. Money  is  a  good  servant,  but  a  bad  master. 
Let  that  saying  of  our  Lord's  sink  down  into  your 
heart,  ^'  How  hardly  shall  a  rich  man  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God."  Well  said  an  old  divine, 
^*  The  surface  above  gold  mines  is  generally  very 
barren."  Well  might  old  Latimer  begin  one  of 
his  sermons  before  Edward  the  VL  by  quoting 
three  times  over  our  Lord's  words,  '^  Take  heed 
and  beware  of  covetousness,"  and  then  saying, 
''What  if  I  should  say  nothing  else  these  three  or 
four  hours?"  There  are  few  prayers  in  our 
Litany  more  wise  and  more  necessary  than  that 
petition,  *'  In  all  time  of  our  wealthy  good  Lord 
deliver  us." 

Has  any  one  little  or  no  money  who  reads  this 
paper  ?  Then  do  not  envy  those  who  are  richer 
than  yourself.  Pray  for  them.  Pity  them.  Be 
charitable  to  their  faults.  Remember  that  high 
places  are  giddy  places,  and  be  not  too  hasty  in 
your  condemnation  of  their  conduct.  Perhaps  if 
you  had  their  difficulties  you  would  do  no  better 
yourself.  Beware  of  the  love  of  money.  A  man 
may  love  it  and  not  have  it.  Beware  of  the  love 
of  self.  It  may  be  found  in  a  cottage  as  well  as 
in  a  palace.  And  beware  of  thinking  that  poverty 
alone  will  save  you.  If  you  would  sit  with 
Lazarus  in  glory,  you  must  not  only  have  fellow- 
ship with  him  in  suffering  but  in  grace. 

Does  any  reader  desire  to  know  the  remedy 
against  that  love  of  self,  which  ruined  the  rich 
man's  soul,  and  cleaves  to  us  all  by  nature  like 


26 

our  skin  ?  I  tell  him  plainly  there  is  only 
one  remedy,  and  I  ask  him  to  mark  well  what 
that  remedy  is.  It  is  not  the  fear  of  hell.  It 
is  not  the  hope  of  heaven.  It  is  not  any  sense 
of  duty.  Oh  !  no  !  The  disease  of  selfishness 
is  far  too  deeply  rooted  to  yield  to  such 
secondary  motives  as  these.  Nothing  will  ever 
cure  it  but  an  experimental  knowledge  of  Christ's 
redeeming  love.  You  must  know  the  misery  and 
guilt  of  j'-our  own  estate  by  nature.  You  must 
experience  the  power  of  Christ's  atoning  blood 
sprinkled  upon  your  conscience,  and  making  you 
whole.  You  must  taste  the  sweetness  of  peace 
with  God  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus,  and 
feel  the  love  of  a  reconciled  Father  shed  abroad  in 
your  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Then,  and  not  till  then,  the  mainspring  of 
selfishness  will  be  broken.  Then,  knowing  the 
immensity  of  your  debt  to  Christ,  you  will  feel 
that  nothing  is  too  great  and  too  costly  to  give  to 
him.  Feeling  that  you  have  been  loved  much 
when  you  deserved  nothing,  you  will  heartily  love 
in  return,  and  cry,  '^  What  shall  I  render  unto  the 
Lord  for  all  his  benefits  ?  "  Feeling  that  you  have 
freely  received  countless  mercies,  you  will  think 
it  a  privilege  to  do  anything  to  please  Him  to 
whom  you  owe  all.  Feeling  that  you  have  been 
bought  with  a  price,  and  are  no  longer  your  own, 
you  will  labour  to  glorify  God  with  body  and 
spirit,  which  are  His. 

Yes !  reader,  I  repeat  it  this  day.  I  know  no 
effectual  remedy  for  the  love  of  self,  but  a  believ- 
ing apprehension  of  the  love  of  Christ.  Other 
remedies  may  palliate  the  disease  :  this  alone  will 
heal  it.     Other  antidotes  may  hide  its  deformity : 


27 

this  alone  will  work  a  perfect  cure.  An  easy, 
good-natured  temper  may  cover  over  selfishness  in 
one  man.  A  love  of  praise  may  conceal  it  in  a 
second.  A  self-righteous  asceticism  and  an  affected 
spirit  of  self-denial  may  keep  it  out  of  sight  in  a 
third.  But  nothing  will  ever  cut  up  selfishness  by 
the  roots  but  the  love  of  Christ  revealed  to  the 
mind  hj  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  felt  in  the  heart  by 
simple  faith.  Once  let  a  man  see  the  full  meaning 
of  the  words,  '^  Christ  loved  me  and  gave  himself 
for  me,"  and  then  he  will  delight  to  give  himself 
to  Christ,  and  all  that  he  has  to  His  service.  He 
will  live  to  Him,  not  in  order  that  he  may  be 
secure,  but  because  he  is  secure  already.  He  will 
work  for  Him,  not  that  he  may  have  life  and 
peace,  but  because  life  and  peace  are  his  already. 

Go  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  all  you  that  want  to 
be  delivered  from  the  power  of  selfishness.  Go 
and  see  what  a  price  was  paid  there  to  provide  a 
ransom  for  your  soul.  Go  and  see  what  an  as- 
tounding sacrifice  was  there  made  that  a  door  to 
eternal  life  might  be  provided  for  poor  sinners 
like  you.  Go  and  see  how  the  Son  of  God  gave 
Himself  for  vou,  and  learn  to  think  it  a  small 
thing  to  give  yourself  to  Him. 

Reader,  the  disease  which  ruined  the  rich 
man  in  the  parable  may  be  cured.  But  oh  ! 
remember,  there  is  only  one  real  remedy.  If 
you  would  not  live  to  yourself,  you  must  live  to 
Christ.  See  to  it  that  this  remedy  is  not  only 
known,  but  applied, — not  only  heard  of,  but  used. 

1.  And  now  let  me  conclude  all  by  urging  on 
emry  reader  of  this  tract,  the  great  duty  of  self 
inquiry,  A  passage  of  Scripture  like  this  parable 
ought  surely  to  raise  in  many  an  one  great  search- 


28 

ings  of  heart. — '^  What  am  I  ?  Where  am  I  going? 
What  am  I  doing  ?  What  is  likely  to  be  my  con- 
dition after  death  ?  Am  I  prepared  to  leave  the 
world  ?  Have  I  any  home  to  look  forward  to  in 
the  world  to  come  ?  Have  I  put  off  the  old  man 
and  put  on  the  new  ?  Am  I  really  one  with  Christ, 
and  a  pardoned  soul  ? "  Surely  such  questions  as 
these  may  well  be  asked  when  the  story  of  the 
rich  man  and  Lazarus  has  been  heard.  Oh !  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  may  incline  many  a  reader's  heart 
to  ask  them ! 

2.  In  the  next  place,  /  invite  all  readers  who 
desire  to  have  their  souls  saved,  and  have  no  good 
account  to  give  of  themselves  at  present,  to  seek 
salvation  while  it  can  be  found.  I  do  entreat  you  to 
apply  to  Him,  by  whom  alone  men  can  enter 
heaven,  and  be  saved, — even  Jesus  Christ  the  Lord. 
He  has  the  keys  of  heaven.  He  is  sealed  and 
appointed  by  God  the  Father  to  be  the  Saviour 
of  all  that  will  come  to  Him.  Go  to  Him  in 
earnest  and  hearty  prayer  and  tell  Him  your  case. 
Tell  Him  that  you  have  heard  that  He  receiveth 
sinners,  and  that  you  come  to  Him  as  such.  Tell 
Him  that  you  desire  to  be  saved  by  Him  in  His 
own  way,  and  ask  Him  to  save  you.  Oh !  that 
you  may  take  this  course  without  delay.  Re- 
member the  hopeless  end  of  the  rich  man.  Once 
dead  there  is  no  more  change. 

3.  Last  of  all,  J  entreat  all  professing  Christians 
to  encourage  themselves  in  habits  of  liberality 
towards  all  causes  of  charity  and  mercy.  Re- 
member that  you  are  God's  stewards,  and  give 
money  liberally,  freely,  and  without  grudging, 
whenever  you  have  an  opportunity.  You  cannot 
keep   your   money  for  ever.      You   must  give 


29 

account  one  day  of  the  manner  in  which  it  has 
been  expended.  Oh !  lay  it  out  with  an  eye  to 
eternity,  while  you  can. 

I  do  not  ask  rich  men  to  leave  their  situations  in 
life  and  go  into  the  work-house.  I  ask  no  man 
to  neglect  his  worldly  calling,  and  to  omit  to 
provide  for  his  family.  Diligence  in  business  is  a 
positive  Christian  duty.  Provision  for  those  de- 
pendent on  us,  is  proper  Christian  prudence.  But 
I  ask  all  to  look  around  continually^,  as  they 
journey  on,  and  to  remember  the  poor, — the  poor 
in  body,  and  the  poor  in  soul.  Here  we  are  for  a 
few  short  years.  How  can  we  do  most  good  with 
our  money,  while  we  are  here  ?  How  can  we  so 
spend  it  as  to  leave  the  world  somewhat  happier 
and  somewhat  holier  when  we  are  removed? 
Might  we  not  abridge  some  of  our  luxuries? 
Might  we  not  lay  out  less  upon  ourselves,  and 
give  more  to  Christ's  cause  and  Christ's  poor?  Is 
there  none  we  can  do  good  to  ?  Are  there  no 
sick,  no  poor,  no  needy  whose  sorrows  we  might 
lessen,  and  whose  comforts  we  might  increase  ? 
Such  questions  will  never  fail  to  elicit  an  answer 
from  some  quarter.  I  am  thoroughlj^'  persuaded 
that  the  income  of  every  religious  and  charitable 
society  in  England  might  easily  be  multiplied  ten- 
fold, if  English  Christians  would  give  in  proportion 
to  their  means. 

There  are  none  surely  to  whom  such  appeals 
ought  to  come  home  with  such  power  as  professing 
believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  parable  of  the 
text  illustrates  our  position  by  nature,  and  our 
debt  to  Christ.  We  all  lay,  like  Lazarus,  at  heaven's 
gate,  sick  unto  the  death,  helpless,  and  starving. 
Jesus  came  forth  to  relieve  us.  Jesus  gave  Himself 


30 

for  us,  that  we  might'have  hope  and  live.  For  a 
poor  Lazarus-like  world  He  came  down  from 
heaven,  and  humbled  Himself  to  become  a  man. 
For  a  poor  Lazarus-like  world  He  went  up  and 
down  doing  good,  caring  for  men's  bodies  as  well 
as  souls,  until  He  died  for  us  on  the  cross. 

I  believe  that  in  giving  to  support  works  of 
charity  and  mercy,  we  are  doing  that  which  is 
according  to  Christ's  mind, — and  I  ask  readers 
of  this  tract  to  begin  the  habit  of  giving,  if  they 
never  began  it  before ;  and  to  go  on  with  it  increas- 
ingly, if  they  have  begun. 

I  believe  that  in  offering  a  warning  against 
covetousness,  I  have  done  no  more  than  bring 
forward  a  warning  called  for  b}^  the  times,  and  I 
ask  God  to  bless  the  considei'ation  of  this  tract  to 
many  souls. 

I    REMAIN 

Your  afeectionate  Friend, 

J.  C.  RYLE. 

Helmingham,  Stoneham, 
November^  1853. 


HUNT   AND    SON,    STEAM     PRESS,    IPSWICH. 


WORKS  BY  THE  REV.  J.  C.  RYLE,  B.  A., 

Published  by  Hunt  &  Son,  Ipswich. 


3rd   Edition,  15th  Thousand 
4th  edition,   20th 


11. 


6th  edition, 


12th 


A  Word  to  the  Churches 

Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 
All  in   All.     A  Tract  on  Coloss.  iii 
!         thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Are  You  an  Heir  ?   A  Question  for  Everybody 

30th  thousand.    Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Are  You  Forgiven  ?      A  Question    for    Everybody. 

Edition.   60th  Thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 

An  Important  Question.     Are  You  Forgiven  }     Small  paper 

edition,  48  pages,  with  notes.     Fancy  cover,  gilt  edges,  6d 
Are  You  Holy?      A  Question  for  Everybody.     12th edition, 

60th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
Are  You  Hegenerate  ?     A  Question  for  the  times.     Being  a 

portion  of  a  larger  work  on  Regeneration.     Price  2s.  per  doz 

5th  Edition,  25th  Thousand. 
Assurance.    2  Tim.  iv.  6,  7,  8.     With  Notes  and  Extracts  from 

Writers   of  the  seventeenth  century.     18mo.  cloth  limp.     3rd 

edition,  revised,  price  Is. 

Baxter  and  his  Times ;  A  Lecture  delivered  February  1st, 
i853.     Neat  Wrapper,  price  3d. 

Be  not  Slothful,  but  Followers.  A  Funeral  Sermon,  preached 
on  Sunday,  July  29th,   1846,  in   Helmingham  Church.     3rd 
thousand,  price  Is. 
Be  Zealous.     Thoughts  on  Galatians  iv.  18.     6th  edition,  30th 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Bishop  Latimer.     A  Lecture  delivered  February  2Sth,  1853 
Neat  wrapper,  price  4d. 

Christ  and  the  Two  Thieves.    Being  thoughts  on  Luke 

xxiii.  39 — 43.     10th  edition,  50th  thousand.     Is.  6d.  per  doz. 
Consider  Your  Ways  !     a  Pastor's  Address  to  his  flock.  9th 

edition,  45th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
Cross    (the)       A   Tract  for   the   Times.     6th   edition,    30th 

Thousand.     2s.  per  dozen. 
Do  You  Pray?      A  Question  for  1852.     20th  edition,  lOOth 

thousand.     Price  2s.  per  doz. 

Faith's  Choice.      A  Sermon  on  Hebrews  xi.  24 — 26.     Fourth 

Edition,  Price  6d. 
Home  Truths.      Being  Miscellaneous  Addresses  and   Tracts, 

arranged,  revised,  and  corrected  for  this  edition.     Illustrated 

with  an  Engraving  of  Helmingham  Church,  and  Vignette  Title. 

4th  edition,  foolscap  8vo,  cloth  extra,  price  3s.  6d. 

Home  Truths,  Second  Series,  illustrated  with  an  engraving 
of  Helmingham  Rectory  and  Emblematical  Vignette.  Uniform 
with  the  above,  price  3s.  6d.     Second  Edition,  enlarged. 


Tracts  and  other  Works,  by  Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle. 


How  Readest  Thoul      A  Question  for  1853.     10th  edition, 

50th  thousand,  48pp.,  price  3s.  per  dozen. 
How  should  a  Child  be  Trained?    Thoughts  on  Proverbs 

xxii.  6.     4th  edition.     Price  3d.  each,  or  2s.  6d.  per  dozen. 

I  Have  Somewhat  to  Say  unto  Thee.    A  word  for  every 

body.     lOth  edition,  50th  thousand.    Price  6d.  per  dozen. 
Little  and  Wise.     An  Address  to  Children.     Small  8vo,  neat 

wrapper,  Illustrated  with  appropriate  Engravings.  5th  thousand 

Price  4d. 
LivinST  or  Dead?     A  Question  for  Everybody.     17th  edition, 

85th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 
Occupy  till  I  come.     A  Tract  for  the  Times.    Being  Thoughts 

on  Luke  xix.  11 — 13.    15th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen 
Only  One  Way.     A  Tract  for  the  Times.     Being  Thoughts  on 

Acts  iv.  12.     8th  edition,  40th  thousand.    Is.  6d.  per  doz. 
Peace  !  be  Still !     A  Page  from  our  Lord's  History.     Fourth 

edition,  Twentieth  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 
Prove  all    Things.      A  Tract   on   Private   Judgment.      6th 

edition,  30th  thousand.     Is.  6d.  per  doz. 
Regeneration.      A  Tract  for  the  Times.      104  pp.  foolscap 

8vo,  4th  edition,  12th  thousand.  Price  6d.  sewed;  limp  cloth  Is 
Remember  Lot !  12th  edition,  65tti  thousand.  Is.  6d.  per  doz 
Sermons  to  Children.     A  6th  and  revised  edition  of  **  Seeking 

the  Lord  Early,"  and  "Children  Walking  in  Truth."     In  fancy 

cover,  price  6d. 

Shall  You  be  Saved?  A  Question  for  Everybody.  lOth 
edition,  50th  thousand.     Price  2s.  per  dozen. 

Spiritual  Songs.  Coloss.  iii.  16.  Being  62  Hymns  not  to  be 
found  in  the  Hymn  Books  most  commonly  used.  Selected  by 
the  Rev.  J.  C.  Ryle.  In  glazed  wrapper,  price  6d.  each ;  or  in 
fancy  cloth,  gilt  edges,  price  8d. 

Watch !  A  Word  in  Season.  Being  thoughts  on  the  Parable 
of  the  Ten  Virgins.  (Matt.  xxv.  1—13.)  9th  edition,  45th 
thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 

What  is  the  Church  ?  A  Question  for  the  Times.  5th  edition, 
25th  thousand.     Price  3d.  each,  or  2s.  6d.  per  dozen. 

Wheat  or  Chaflf?  A  Question  for  Everybody.  12th  Edition, 
60th  thousand.     2s.  per  doz. 

Where  Art  Thou  ?  A  Question  for  Everybody.  8th  edition, 
40th  thousand.     Price  Is.  6d.  per  dozen. 

Whitefield,  George— A  Sketch  of  his  Times,  his  Life,  his 
Religion,  his  Preaching,  and  his  actual  Work  on  Earth. 
Foolscap  8vo.,  neat  wrapper,  price  3d. 

Young  Men  Exhorted.  A  Sermon  to  young  men,  preached 
in  Helmingham  Church.  5th  edition,  20th  thousand,  in  f 'cap 
8vo,  68  pp,  cloth  extra.  Is. ;  neat  wrapper,  6d.  each. 


