Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




60002401 8L 




OUUU24018L 



OP 

i 9 3 L g L A a D '$» 

or 

T]3lJillI.'D FU'OPHltl. 

BY THE REV, J. A. WYLIE. L.L.O. 




RUINS 



OF 



BIBLE LANDS. 



A JOURNEY OVER THE 
REGION OE FULFILLED PROPHECY. 



BT THE 

REV. J. A. WYLIE, LL.D., 

AUTHOS Of "THK papacy," "THE MODEBV JITDEA." 

KTa ETa 




GLASGOW: W. 



BOOKSELLER TO H.B.H. THE PRINCB ALBBBT. 

1857. 



^0>i. ol. -^/^. 



edinburgh : 

pbiktkd by ballantyne and company, 

Paul's work. 



CONTENTS. 



PAOB 

PREFACE, V f 

INTRODUCTION, 1 I 

CHAPTER I. ASSYRIA— NINEVEH, .... 9 

„ II. NINEVEH— THE CUNEIFORM WRITING, 87 

„ III. NINEVEH— NEW DISCOVERIES, . . 53 

„ IV. MESOPOTAMIA — ^BABYLON, . . 73 

„ V. BABYLON— NEW FACTS, . . .101 

„ VI. ARABIA— THE ISHMAELITES, . .119 

„ VII. EGYPT, 129 

„ VIII. EDOM, 149 

„ DC. MOAB, 165 

„ X. AMMON, 173 

„ XI. GILEAD AND BASHAN, . . .179 

„ XII. TYRE, 187 

„ Xni. JUDEA, 197 

„ XIV. FROM CANA TO BETHEL, . . .217 

„ XV. FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM, . . 243 

CONCLUSION, .267 



PREFACE TO NEW EDITION. 



In this Work the Author aims mainly at in- 
teresting the young. That he has in some 
degree succeeded appears from the numerous 
editions through which it has passed, both in 
this country and in America. The work has 
also been translated into Welsh. 

What the Author now presents is in some 
respects a new work rather than a new edition. 
When the former editions were issued, the ex- 
plorations on the sites of Nineveh and Baby- 
lon were only in their beginnings. The first 
trench had just been dug, and the first tablets 
exhumed. Since that time whole palaces 
have beea laid open, and some thousands of 



VI PREFACE TO NEW EDITION. 

slabs, inscribed with the history of times which 
reach back to weUnigh the Mood, have been 
disinterred. The key, too, which unlocks the 
ancient cuneiform character has been disco- 
vered, and, as the consequence, complete lists 
of Assyrian dynasties have been obtained, and 
the annals of entire reigns have been read. A 
multitude of facts have thus been brought to 
light, which are not only in themselves curious 
and interesting, but which are of the very 
highest value, as corroborations of Sacred 
Writ. The events recorded on these exhumed 
tablets belong to an era of Assyrian history 
contemporaneous with that of the kings and 
prophets of the Old Testament. As was to 
be expected, the writings on the slabs touch 
the Bible history in many points; but, in 
every case, with the most perfect and exact 
agreement The stones have spoken ; and 
their testimony is as precise as its veracity is 
imquestionable. Most incontrovertibly do they 
attest the Bible as God's Word. 

All the more important of these recent dis- 



PREFACE TO NEW EDITION. Tli 

coveries the Author has introduced in this 
edition. The chapter on Judea he has all but 
entirely rewritten. In short, the amount of 
original matter now inserted is such as to 
double the volume in point of size, and more 
than double it, the Author flatters himself, in 
point of information. 



BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 



INTRODUCTION. 

It may be thought by some a very bootless under- 
taking, to attempt the discussion of so extensive a 
subject within the limits we hare prescribed to 
ourselves. The region of fulfilled prophecy in- 
cludes so many countries, once fair and flourishing, 
and so many cities, once great and populous, that 
to visit them all, and to tell how they have been 
broken down, as the Word of the Lord foretold, 
may appear an impossible task in so short a treatise. 
Materials might be found here to fill many volumes; 
and how is it possible, in the few^ pages that follow, 
to arrange and illustrate these materials so as to 
give, we do not say a complete view — for that is 
not at all times either necessary or possible^ — ^but a 
satisfactory view of so important a subject ? It is 
in the details that much of the interest and beauty 

A 



RUINS OP BIBLE LANDS. 



of fulfilled prophecy Kes; and our present limits 
do not allow us to enter much into details. But 
while this is true, still it will be our own fault if 
our present journey, rapid though it be, be wanting 
either in interest or profit. By carefully husband- 
ing our time and resources — by taking the most 
direct road to the country, or city, or locality we 
are in quest of — ^by entering into no useless contro- 
versies, and no profitless speculations by the way — 
by laying down the resolution at starting, and 
rigidly adhering to it, not to go out of our way a 
foot-breadth to see anything of meregeneral interest, 
and which does not bear on the great subject of 
prophecy — we shall see much in a short time, and 
far more than may suffice to satisfy us that there 
is the most complete and perfect accordance, in all 
respects, between the aspect of these regions and 
the prophetic pages of the Bible. Here it may be 
truly affirmed, that he who runs may read. But if 
any one, from the glimpses we are now to affi>rd 
him of these countries, seen under the light which 
the Bible sheds upon them, shall be desirous of 
going over the ground again more leisurely, we 
have to remind him that there are other guides to 
be had on this now much-frequented road, who 
will take him to any spot which he wishes to visit, 
—who will remain with him there as long as he 
pleases, and will answer every question regarding 



INTRODUCTION. 



any mountain, or yallej, or ruin in his path which 
he chooses to put. 

That our limits are narrow, then, is no valid ob- 
jection to the attempt we are now making to bring 
under the eye at once the whole region of fulfilled 
prophecy. Do we wish to haye our minds im- 
pressed with the circumstantiality of prophecy — 
the unerring precision with which it disclosed the 
future state of nations and countries in their most 
minute particulars ? In that case we must confine 
our attention to one branch of the subject — we 
must select one particular nation or country, and 
minutely and patiently compare its past and present 
condition with ancient predictions. But if we wish 
to be able to form some idea of the extent and yran- 
deur of prophecy, we must do as we are now doing 
— we must contrire to survey the whole region at 
once — we must take our stand so as that we shall be 
able to look from the hoary mounds which stud the 
banks of the Tigris and Euphrates on the east, to 
the gigantic ruins which rise beside the Nile on the 
west, with all the monuments of departed glory and 
present desolation that lie between. 

Suppose, now, that we were to meet one who 
had never seen the universe, and that we wished to 
convey to him some idea of the power, wisdom, 
and goodness of Him who made the universe, how 
should we proceed ? Whether should we take a 



RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 



plant, for instance, or an insect, and expatiate upon 
the skill and delicacy with which its structure has 
been arranged ? or, would it not be better to take 
the universe as a whole, and attempt to conyey to 
him some idea of its yastness and magnificence ? 
No doubt the preferable way would be to unite both 
plans, did circumstances allow ; but if this were im- 
possible, and if we were constrained to make our 
choice between the flowers of the field and the stars 
of the firmament — between those parts of creation 
whose short-lived beauty is only for a day, and those 
whose glory lasts through all ages — we would cer- 
tainly give the preference to the latter, as being, at 
first view, at least, the most impressive and eloquent 
preachers of the greatness and glory of Him who 
made all things. Now, we are so situated, in some 
respects, at present. We have it in our power either 
to confine our attention to one particular country — 
in which case we should be able to show that the 
most minute and incidental circumstances relating 
to its future state were fully foreseen, and clearly 
predicted — or we may survey the vast range which 
prophecy takes in, the numerous nations and coun- 
tries to which it relates, and the long cycles of time 
which it embraces; and this, we are satisfied, is the 
better way for estimating the force of that majestic 
proof which arises from prophecy to the divinity of 
the Holy Scriptures. 



INTRODUCTION. 



"We have further to remark, that our subject 
calls us to a quarter of the world which possesses 
an extraordinary interest, independently of its being 
the region of fulfilled prophecy. " The parts we 
speak of," to use the eloquent words of Sandys, the 
first English trayeller who surveyed the East with 
the eye of sober observation, — " the parts we speak 
of are the most renowned countries and kingdoms, 
once the seats of the most glorious and triumphant 
empires; the theatres of valour and heroical actions; 
the soils enriched with all earthly felicities ; the 
places where Nature hath produced her wonderful 
works ; where arts and sciences have been invented 
and perfected ; where wisdom, virtue, policy, and 
civility have been planted — have flourished; and 
lastly, where God himself did place his own Com- 
monwealth — gave laws and oracles — inspired his 
prophets — sent angels to converse with men; above 
all, where the Son of God descended to become 
man — where he honoured the earth with his beau- 
tiful steps — wrought the work of our redemption — 
triumphed over death, and ascended into- glory," 
So illustrious is the region we are now to visit. It 
is closely connected with all our recollections of the 
past, and scarcely less so with our hopes of the 
future. It is pregnant with lessons of wisdom to 
individuals and nations; but we mean at present to 
view it only in one light, namely, as the land in 



BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 



which the Bible was written, and which is covered, 
to this hour, with solemn monumental evidence of 
its truth. 

We shall begin our journey on the plains of 
Chaldea, the renowned site of Nineveh and Baby- 
lon. Having surveyed the monuments of ruin with 
which this region abounds, we shall pass westward 
across those deserts where the sons of Ishmael are 
still found dwelling. We shall next go down into 
Egypt, and survey those venerable monuments which 
lend an air of solemn grandeur to a country which 
otherwise would be accounted the most desolate 
and degraded on the face of the earth. Re-crossing 
the Nile, we shall traverse the deserts of Sinai, and 
journey eastwards to where the hoary mountains 
of Edom look over the sands of the wilderness. 
Thence, journeying north, we shall traverse the 
once rich, but now desolate, lands of Moab and 
Ammon. Then, skirting Judea on the north, we 
shall stretch across to the shore of the Great Sea, 
where the miserable remains of Tyre, the crowning 
city, are still to be seen, on a little island, with the 
Mediterranean chafing its strand, and sending the 
echoes of its hoarse murmur along the cliffs of 
Lebanon, by which the fallen city is overshadowed. 
And last of all, we shall sketch the outline of those 
prophecies which relate to that land and people 
which must ever be to us the most interesting of 



IKTllODUCTION. 



all the countries and nations of the earth — the land 
and people of Judea. There will he no time to 
tarry by the way — to turn out of the high road, and 
examine the vestiges of the cities which, in former 
daySj illustrated this region by their splendour, and 
now darken it by their ruins. We must be content 
to behold from afar, as we pass on, the dark mounds 
of the fallen Babylon — the desolate palaces of Am- 
mon and Moab — the fiowerless plains, the blasted 
hills, and the prostrate temples of Palestine ; and 
having gone round the territory of prophecy, and 
seen how vast it is, and how numerous the 
monuments of the Divine Word with which it is 
occupied, we shall return more deeply impressed 
than ever with the righteousness as well as 
prescience of the Great Euler among the nations. 



CHAPTER L 

" Ont of that land went forth Asshnr, and bnilded Nine- 
veh." — Gen. X. 11. 

"Nineveh, that great city."— Jonah i. 2. 

" Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city, of three days' 
journey."— Jonah iiL 3. 

" Nineveh is of old like a jkk)! of water ; yet they shall 
flee away. Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord of 
hosts, and I will born her chariots in the smoke, and the 
sword shall devour thy young lions ; and I will cut off thy 
prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no 
more be heard. And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, 
and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazingstock."^ 
Nahum ii. 8, 13 ; iii. 6. 

** I will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a wilder- 
ness. This is the rejoicing city, that dwelt carelessly, that 
said in her heart, I am, and there is none besides me : how 
is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down 
in ! Every one that passeth by her shall hisSj and wag his 
head." — Zbphaniah ii. 13, 15. 



Plain of Shinar — Mesopotamia — ^Ancient irrigation — Po- 
pnloasnesB and fertility — Nineveh — Its size and splendour — 
Prophecy of Nahum — Diodoros Siculus' account of its fall — 
Fire, flood, and the sword employed in its destruction — Utter 
disappearance of Nineveh — Present aspect of the site — ^Visited 
by Mr Rich — M. Botta — Explorations at Khorsabad— Disco- 
very of a palace — Inscribed tablets — Colossal bulls— Mr 
Layard — Explorations at Nimrod— Discoveiy of halls, gal- 
leries, sculptures, inscriptions, colossal statues, &c. — ^Assyrian 
art — Corroboration of Scripture. 



*:* 



ASSYRIA — NINBVEH. 11 



ASSYRIA— NINEVEH. 

Now, then, we begin our journey. We are on the 
Plain of Shinar — those rich level plains, of which 
the patriarchal family of Noah, descending from 
the mountains of Armenia, took possession soon 
after the flood. Here flourished the earliest of the 
postdiluvian races ; here were founded the first of 
the postdiluvian kingdoms ; and here, as might be 
expected, we meet with the most ancient and vener- 
able of those monuments which Providence has left 
standing on the earth to attest to all who live upon 
it the truth of his Word. But before speaking of 
the wrecks with which this plain is covered, let us 
look at the glory and power of which, in other days, 
it was the seat and home. 

Assyria Proper is bounded on the west by the 
Tigris. Mesopotamia is the country embraced by 
the Tigris and Euphrates. But in the mean time 
we may be allowed to overlook the geographical 



12 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

divisions of these countries, and to speak of Assyria 
and Mesopotamia as forming one continuous plain 
— which in reality is the case. On this plain flou- 
rished the early kingdoms of Nineveh and Babylon. 
The site was well chosen. Perhaps the earth does 
not contain another plain better adapted, in all re- 
spects, for being the seat of a mighty empire. It 
is defended on the north by a rampart of lofty 
mountains, whose snow-clad peaks are seen like a 
line of white clouds hanging in the blue sky, even 
when the plains which they overlook are languish- 
ing under the heats of summer. The upper part of 
this noble plain is watered by numerous streams, 
which haye their rise in the high grounds of Ar- 
menia. Its middle and southern portions are 
watered by the Tigris and Euphrates. These rivers 
have their period of annual overflow, somewhat like 
the Nile. At this day, their waters cover, for many 
leagues together, the contiguous part of the plain, 
converting it into swamps; but in former times 
their streams were confined by embankments; while 
side canals, with sluices, served at the period of 
flood to draw off^ the superfluous waters, and to 
irrigate the plain ; and thus its inhabitants had at 
their command the means of an almost unlimited 
fertility. A delicious sky, a fertile soil, and abun- 
dance of water covered the plain every where with 
such richness and beauty, that it looked like the 



ASSYRIA — NINEVEH. 13 

picture of that celebrated garden vhich was the 
crown of the young world, and which, there is 
eyery reason to believe, existed somewhere in this 
very region. The seats of a numerous and indus* 
trious population were thickly scattered over its 
surface, and more especially on the banks of its 
rivers. The Tigris and Euphrates were embellish- 
ed with cities whose size and splendour were in- 
ferior only to the two renowned capitals — Nineveh 
and Babylon. In addition to the productive 
powers of this plain, which were such as to leave 
its inhabitants nothing to wish for, its situation 
placed within the reach of its people the delights 
of the most distant and different regions. The two 
noble rivers by which this plain is traversed, open- 
ed for the inhabitants of Mesopotamia and Assyria 
a communication with the Indian seas on the one 
hand, and the mountains of Armenia on the other; 
so that one living in Babylon might attire his per- 
son in the stuffs of India, adorn his dwelling with 
its gems, or replenish his table with the products 
of the hilly region on the north. Indeed, a better 
proof cannot be had of the amazing productiveness 
and the vast resources of this region, than the 
power to which Nineveh and Babylon, and the 
empires of which they were respectively the head, 
attained, and the rapidity with which they rose to 
it. They were the first great empires the world 



14 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

saw; and as they were the greatest examples of 
power the world had yet seen, so were they also 
of profligacy. Against them were pointed the ear- 
liest denunciations of divine yengeance ; and now 
the pages of history, and the desolate site which they 
occupied, testify to all how fiilly and fearfully their 
doom has heen inflicted. 

Of Nineyeh we shall speak in the first place; be- 
cause of the two cities she was the first to rise to 
eminence. Ninereh, the capital of the Assyrian 
empire, stood on the eastern bank of the Tigris. 
Its foundations were laid by Asshur, the grandson of 
Noah. For many centuries afterwards it continued 
to be a place of small importance; and it was not 
till it was enlarged by its second founder, Ninus, that 
it became the first city of the world. The histo- 
rians of antiquity have transmitted several particu- 
lars regarding it, from which some idea may be 
formed of its greatness. Its figure was oblong. It 
extended southwards along the bank of the Tigris 
for about twenty miles, and backwards from the 
river's brink to the eastern hills. Its walls were a 
hundred feet in height, and so broad, it is said, that 
three chariots could run abreast. Fifteen hundred 
towers, each two hundred feet high, placed at re- 
gular intervals along the wall, still farther adorned 
and strengthened the ramparts of Nineveh. The 
walls are said to have enclosed a space of sixty miles 



ASSYRIA — NINEVEH. 15 

in circuit. We are not to suppose, howerer, that 
all this ground was covered with buildings ; exten- 
sive vacant spaces existed, doubtless, inside the 
walls — as was the case in Babylon, and as is the 
case in most Oriental towns at this day — occupied 
as parks, gardens, and pasture-grounds. The city 
is supposed to have contained about half a million of 
people. Fertile provinces lay extended on all sides 
of it, which supplied the inhabitants with every 
necessary and luxury. Such was Nineveh, the 
mistress of the early East. She had stood from 
almost the period of the flood, and her power was 
still on the increase, when her overthrow and utter 
desolation were foretold, contrary to all human pro- 
bability, by the prophets of Israel, and in particular 
bj the prophet Nahum. 

The prophecy of Nahum is, in fact, a poem of a 
regular form. In the opening of it, Jehovah is seen 
approaching to execute vengeance on Nineveh; and 
never was so awful an event described with more 
majestic and terrible imagery: "The Lord hath 
his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the 
clouds are the dust of his feet. The mountains 
quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is 
burnt at his presence ; yea, the world and all that 
dwell therein. "Who can stand before his indigna- 
tion? and who can abide in the fierceness of his 
anger? His fury is poured out like fire, and the 



16 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

rocks are thrown down by him." The hurry and 
jostle of the preparation for the defence ; the rattle 
of the chariot wheels, the clang of armour, and the 
shouts and cries of the warriors, as they hasten to 
the wall to repel the assault of the besiegers — ^how 
vividly does the prophet depict it all : " The shield 
of his mighty men is made red ; the valiant men 
are in scarlet ; the chariots shall be with flaming 
torches in the day of his preparation, and the fir 
trees shall be terribly shaken. The chariots shall 
rage in the streets ; they shall jostle one against 
another in the broad ways: they shall seem like 
torches; they shall run like the lightnings. He 
shall recount his worthies ; they shall stumble in 
their walk; they shall make haste to the wall." 
But in vain should they hasten to the wall — in 
vain should the warriors of Nineveh crowd her 
ramparts; their ready and resolute valour should 
not avert the fate of the city. Nineveh was to be 
assailed by more terrible agents of destruction than 
the weapons of her besiegers — an overflowing flood — 
a devouring fire. Such are the enemies with which 
the prophet threatens her ; and against such ene- 
mies, how little could the spear or shield of her de- 
fenders avail ! " AVith an overrunning flood he 
will make an utter end of the place thereof; the 
fire shall devour thy bars." The city is taken, 
^^ there is a multitude of slain, and a great number 



ASSTRIA — NINEVEH. 17 

of carcasses/' and from her smoking ruins the con- 
queror is seen leading away a long train of captires : 
^' And Huzzab shall be led away captive, she shall 
be brought up, and her maids shall lead her as with 
the voice of doves, tabering upon their breasts.** 
We are next shown the empty and desolate site 
which the city once occupied — the utterly darkened 
spot once irradiated with the glory of Nineveh : 
" She is empty, and void, and waste. I will cast 
abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, 
and will set thee as a gazing-stock. And it shall 
come to pass that all they that look upon thee shall 
flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste ; who 
will bemoan her ? whence shall I seek comforters 
for thee?" With what richness and splendour of 
imagery does Nahum mourn the departed glory of 
the capital of Assyria : '' Thou hast multiplied thy 
merchants above the stars of heaven ; the canker- 
worm spoileth and fleeth away. Thy crowned are 
as the locusts, and thy captains as the great grass- 
hoppers, which camp in the hedges in the cold day; 
but when the sun ariseth they flee away, and the 
place is not known where they are." And how 
noble the requiem sounded over the graves of her 
slain: "Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria; 
thy nobles shall dwell in the dust ; thy people is 
scattered upon the mountains, and no man gather- 
eth them." like a magnificent anthem ending on 



18 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

the same note on which it had begun, the prophet 
closes his sublime strains, as he had commenced 
them, with an acknowledgment of the justice of 
God in overthrowing so wicked a city : " There is 
no healing of th'j bruise ; thy wound is grievous ; 
all that hear the bruit of thee shall clap the hands 
over thee ; for upon whom hath not thy wickedness 
passed continually ?** Homer sang the fall of Troy 
after Troy had fallen. Nahum, with equal bold- 
ness and freedom of imagery, and with a much 
loftier moral sublimity, sang the fall of Nineveh 
while Nineveh yet stood. 

The meagre account of Assyrian affairs which 
ancient historians have transmitted to us, renders 
us unable to verify the prophecy of Nabum in some 
of its minor particulars. Herodotus promised to 
relate the manner in which Nineveh was taken, 
but this history either was never written, or is now 
lost. Diodorus Siculus is the only writer, among 
those whose works have come down to us, who has 
spoken particularly of the fall of this city. From 
him we learn not only that Nineveh was taken, 
but taken in the very manner that Nahum foretold. 
There is a little discrepancy among those who have 
spoken of the closing scene of the Assyrian capital, 
as to the names of the leading persons concerned 
in the siege, and the date of some of the transac- 
tions ; but there is no discrepancy among them as 



ASSYRIA — NINEVEH. 19 

regards the leading particulars of this event, in 
all of which there is a singular coincidence between 
them and the prophet. 

Nineveh was besieged bj the joint forces of the 
Medes and Babylonians. The combined host 
having sat down before the walls, the king of 
Nineveh, at the head of his army, came forth to 
fight with the besiegers. He routed them in three 
successive battles. Elated with his success, and 
hoping speedily to drive them away, the Assyrian 
king abandoned himself to sloth, and was intent 
only on preparing a feast for his army. The be- 
siegers were informed of the intemperance that 
reigned in the camp ; and falling suddenly on the 
Assyrian host, while in a helpless condition by 
darkness and drunkenness, they committed a pro- 
digious slaughter upon it. Those who survived 
were glad to escape with their king within the 
walls of Nineveh : " While they he folden together 
as thorns^ and while they are drunken as drunkards^ 
they shall he devoured as stuhhle fully dry,** 

Instead of trusting to the strong defences within 
which they had now retired, the besieged, Diodorus 
informs us, made every preparation for their de- 
fence which necessity demanded or prudence could 
dictate : " The defence shall be prepared. Draw 
thee toaters for the siege^ fortify thy strongholds : 
go into clay^ and tread the mortar; make strong 



20 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

the brick-kiln,*' But the prophet who had fore- 
told that these active measures should he taken, 
had also foretold that they should he taken to little 
purpose. The hour of Nineveh was come. The 
third year of the siege was now running. In this 
year heavy rains fell out; the Tigris was much 
swollen; its impetuous current undermined the 
walls, and the defences of the city fell for the space 
of twenty furlongs : " The gates of the rivers shall 
he opened" The king had trusted hitherto in an 
ancient oracle, which declared that Nineveh should 
not he taken till the river had hecome its enemy — 
an imperfect version, most probahly, of Nahum's 
prophecy which the king had happened to hear. 
Seeing the oracle fulfilled, the monarch now aban- 
doned himself to despair, and collecting together 
his wealth and furniture, he erected an immense 
funeral pile in his palace, and having placed upon 
it himself, his eunuchs, and his wives, he fired it 
with his own hand, and the whole was speedily 
consumed. These fires accomplished the predic- 
tion : " The palace shall be dissolved.** Meanwhile 
the troops of the besiegers entered by the wide 
breach which the river had made in the walls-— 
" The gates of thy land shall be set wide open unto 
thine enemies" — and while the palace was blazing, 
they attacked and put to the sword the soldiers and 
people whom they found in the city. These, being 



AS8TBIA — ^NINEVEH. 21 

already panic-struck by the terrors of the fire and 
flood, offered yery little resistance : ^^ The stDord 
shall cut thee off; it shall eat thee up like the 
canker'toorm," Immense quantities of silver and 
gold were found by the conquerors in the ashes of 
the palace, and in the rubbish of the city : ^^ Take 
ye the spoil of silver; take the spoil of gold*' The 
sack of the city was now oyer, and those of its 
people who suryiyed were led away into a distant 
captiyity. Thus did Nineyeh fall as the prophet 
had foretold. It was yery unlikely, indeed, that a 
city that had existed since the period of the flood, 
and which reigned oyer the cities of the earth, 
should be so speedily and completely destroyed; 
it was yery unlikely that the three agents of de- 
struction pointed out by the prophet — ^the sword, 
the fire, and the flood-— should combine all at the 
same time to lay low the Assyrian capital; yet so 
had Nahum foretold, and so, as Diodorus Siculus 
relates, did it &11 out. 

It is now a long time since the eyents we haye 
just detailed. It cannot be less than twenty-two 
centuries. During this period Nineveh has lain in 
ruins. Many a city, after having suffered as great 
disasters as the capital of Assyria, has risen again 
with new splendour; but Nahum had said re- 
garding Nineveh: ^^ He tcUl make an utter end: 
affliction shaU not rise up the second time," Baby- 



22 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Ion, thougli doomed to fall, was yet to fall by slow 
degrees. A long series of degradations was to 
separate her meridian splendour from her last and 
total obscuration. But the proud mistress of the 
Tigris was to fall at once from the summit of her 
dominion and glory into the grave of her ruin. 
Nineyeh passed away; and from that day to this 
she has never lifted up herself to grace with the 
image of her glory the broad bosom of the Tigris, 
or to adorn with the magnificence of her towers 
and battlements the rich plains of Assyria. When 
the light of history falls on the site of this city, 
which it sometimes does in the course of centuries, 
it always presents the very picture which the pro- 
phets drew of what it should become while Nineveh 
was yet " a rejoicing city ; dwelling carelessly, and 
saying in her heart, I am, and there is none besides 
me." Lucian, who flourished in the second cen- 
tury, says, that no vestige of Nineveh remained, 
nor could the spot it occupied be easily identified. 
In the seventh century, its vacant site was the scene 
of a great battle between Rome and Persia. Theve- 
not visited it in the very dawn of modem travel. 
" On the other side of the river," says he, " at the 
end of the bridge [[of boats], begins the place where 
in ancient times stood the famous city of Nineveh. 
There is nothing of it now to be seen, but some 
hillocks." And such to this day is its appearance. 



ASSYRIA — NINEVEH. 23 

The space once coyered by the palaces and gar- 
dens of the Assyrian capital, is now ^^ a desota-' 
tion^ and dry like a fdldemess." There is some 
uncertainty, however, regarding the precise spot 
which this city occupied, so utterly waste and de- 
solate has its site been made. The most probable 
place is that on the left bank of the Tigris, exactly 
opposite the modem town of Mosul. Let us visit 
the spot. 

Now we are on the margin of the swift-flowing 
Tigris. As we gaze on the desolate waters, we 
think of the splendour which this stream has seen 
flourish and fade on its banks. Gone are now the 
frowning battlements, the lofty towers, and the im- 
perial palaces, which in other days graced the river; 
and now we behold it winding its way amid the 
graves of cities and empires. Its channel is as full, 
its floods are as copious, as when they flowed to re- 
fresh the palaces of the Assyrian princes ; but no- 
thing is mirrored now on its placid wave save the 
blue vault, or the grassy hillocks which stud its 
banks, or the mean dwellings of the little town of 
Mosul, on the farther shore. And is this green and 
level expanse, which stretches along to the south as 
far as the eye can reach, and backwards from the 
river's brink to the eastern hills, which is diversified 
with innumerable swellings, green, too, like the plain 
over which they are sprinkled — is this the grave of 



24 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

the proud capital of Assyria ? Are these mounds 
the sepulchres of her temples and palaces ? Yes ! 
this grassj line was once a lofty rampart, from 
which the warriors of Ninereh looked forth with 
defiance upon their foes. How are their strong- 
holds fallen ! This heap of ruhhish, now covered 
with turf, was once a shrine of the gods of Assyria. 
How are their altars laid waste, and how are all 
they confounded who trust in graven images ! How 
low now is she that was once so high ! " Where 
is the dwelling of the lions, and the feeding-place 
of the young lions, where the lion, even the old 
lion, walked, and the lion s whelp, and none made 
them afraid?" 

The principal remains of Nineveh, which are 
found at a little distance from the bank of the 
Tigris, are comprised in an oblong enclosure which 
runs parallel with the river for about four miles by 
two in breadth. It is marked off from the general 
plain of the city by a grassy embankment. "Within 
this enclosure are two mounds of ruins, lying a 
little way apart; the one fifty feet, and the other 
about forty-three feet, above the level of the city's 
site. On digging into these mounds, they are found 
to be crossed with walls of masonry and narrow 
passages. Mr Rich found in them sun-dried bricks, 
and pieces of the finest kind of pottery covered with 
cuneiform writing, and other very curious anti<][ues.< 



ASSYRIA — NINEVBH. 25 

There is little doubt that this oblong space, with 
its two central mounds, is the remains of the palace 
of the Assyrian kings. The space, which is about 
eight miles square, is not too large to preclude such 
an idea. In the grassy mound that forms its con- 
fine, we behold the fallen rampart which enclosed 
the royal buildings and gardens. Let us ascend the 
ruined heap into which the monarch's palace has 
now been converted, and from its summit look over 
the site of Nineveh. Buckingham, who surveyed 
the ground from the same point, thus describes the 
prospect: "As far as I could perceive, from our 
elevated point of view, on the highest summit of 
Tel Ninoa, there were mounds of ruins, similar to 
those near us, but less distinctly marked, as far as 
the eye could reach to the northward; and the plain 
to the eastward of us, or between the river and the 
moimtains, had a mixture of large brown patches, 
like heaps of rubbish, seen at intervals, scattered over 
a cultivated soil." And the same, substantially, is 
the account of every traveller who has of late visited 
the spot. 

The labom-s of M. Botta on the site of Nineveh 
have been rewarded with the richest discoveries, 
and have tended to strengthen a belief previously 
entertained, that many new and surprising proofs 
of the truth of the Bible have yet to be drawn from 
the ruins of the scriptural cities of the East. M. 



26 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Botta was consul for the French at Mosul ; and 
having continually before his eyes the green mounds 
of the fallen Ninereh, became desirous — as who, 
in his circumstances, would not ? — of ascertaining, 
by actual inspection, whether these mounds con- 
tained any memorials of the grandeur or the arts 
of the lost city. He commenced operations on a 
large mass, to which tradition had assigned the 
honour of being the tomb of Ninus, the founder of 
the Assjrrian Empire. Here he found nought but 
insignificant fragments of bricks. He next opened 
a trench in the side of a mound, on the summit of 
which stands the village of Khorsabad. Before 
proceeding far, he discovered, to his unspeakable 
delight, that the mass on which he was engaged 
was the covering of an ancient Assyrian edifice. 
The French Government lent its aid, and the ex- 
cavations of M. Botta were continued, till at last 
the entire structure, which appears to form only a 
third of the original building, was laid open. This 
edifice is one of the most interesting of those that 
lie entombed on this celebrated site, being, as is 
supposed, the palace of the Assyrian kings. It is 
rich in sculptures and inscriptions ; and the marvel 
is, how so noble a monument, which still shone, 
even though ruined and deserted, with the embel- 
lishments of the most exquisite art, could have 
come to be so completely buried in the earth. 



ASSYRIA — NINEVEH. 27 

Howsoever it happened, we behold in this the 
fulfilment of the prophecy : " I will make thy 
grave." 

But Nineveh, in this instance, has returned from 
her grave ; and we may now survey the halls where 
princes dwelt, and the trophies of an art that was 
the pride of that age doubtless, as it is worthy of 
being the admiration of this. Of this palace, the 
front, the southern fa9ade, and fifteen halls, with 
their corresponding esplanades, have been cleared. 
Six bulls of colossal size, as well as figures of men, 
also colossal, strangling lions in their arms, adorn 
the front of the edifice. A gateway of vast dimen- 
sions admits into the interior ; and the two centra} 
bulls are so placed as to appear to form the pillars of 
the grand entrance. These sculptures are of great 
beauty, and as fresh as if executed yesterday. 

On entering the halls of the disinterred palace, 
we find that the walls are cased with alabaster slabs, 
and covered with sculptures and inscriptions. Two 
rows of bass-reliefs run round each chamber, and 
underneath each row are some twenty lines of 
writing in the arrow-headed character and Baby- 
Ionian language. The subjects of the bas-reliefs 
possess great variety as well as interest They are 
taken chiefly from the military art, and, as is sup- 
posed, are historical — sieges, naval manoeuvres, 
triumphs, single combats, — in short, whatever bril- 



28 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

liant exploit fell out to illustrate the annals of the 
reigning king, appears to hare been immediately 
transferred to the walls of his palace. The 
writing underneath, in all likelihood, is a de- 
scription of the scenes exhibited in the sculptures, 
and forms, in fact, a portion of the historical records 
of the kingdom. The inscriptions on the walls of 
this palace comprise a greater amoimt of writing in 
the arrow-headed character, than all the inscrip- 
tions of the sort previously discoyered, taken to- 
gether. 

Since the explorations of M. Botta at Khorsa- 
bad, similar works hare been commenced by Mr 
Xiayard, on the part of the British Goyernment, oh 
another mound on the same site. In the language 
of the country, this heap goes by the name of the 
Mound of Nimrod, and is ten times the size of 
that which was the scene of M. Botta's labours. 
It is about eighteen miles from Mosul, but this by 
no means removes it from the site of the city; and 
its superior size, and the greater magnificence of 
its interior decorations, may be regarded as giving 
it a better claim to be considered as having been a 
royal residence. Mr Layard opened his trenches 
on the north-western angle of the mound, and 
after penetrating to a depth of about fifteen feet, 
found that he was descending into the interior of 
a buried palace, built of slabs of marble, and con- 



ASSYRIA — ^NINEVEH. 29 



sisting of a labyrinth of chambers, halls, and gal- 
leries, the walls of which were coyered with bass- 
reliefs representing men, divinities, lions, military 
actions, scenes of peace, with explanations imder- 
neath in the Babylonian character — all in perfect 
preservation. The exterior arrangements of this 
palace are similar to those of the edifice laid open 
at Khorsabad. Its portals are guarded by winged 
lions of gigantic size, wearing human heads. In 
clearing away the rubbish, the enormous head was 
the first to emerge. The Arab workmen were 
confounded, believing that the mighty hunter him- 
self was rising firom his tomb. " Nimrood ! Nim- 
rood !" they shouted in terror; and, throwing away 
their implements, fled from the spot. Of the 
chambers which this edifice contains, the most re- 
markable is a hall one hundred and fifty feet in 
length, and thirty in breadth. It is not improbable 
that this was the audience chamber of the Assyrian 
kings. Its decorations are in a superb style, and 
most interesting in character. On its walls the 
effigies of its formal royal owners are still to be 
seen. Here they stand, much as the artist left 
them three thousand years ago, in all the Oriental 
magnificence of richly embroidered robes and 
quaintly artificial coiffure. Beside them are their 
steeds. Here, too, are portrayed the scenes in 
which they took part. We behold them giving 



32 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

tions. This can be satisfactorily accounted for only 
by supposing that the palace had on some occasion 
been taken possession of by a new dynasty, and 
finding it coyered with the grayen records of its 
predecessors, which it was natural the new race 
should wish to conceal, they reversed the tablets, 
and began to engrave them anew on the other side 
with the events of their own history. 

Underneath the bricks of which the floor is com- 
posed, stone repositories have been discovered, filled 
with small clay enamelled figures of men and ani- 
mals, but unaccompanied by any thing to explain 
them. In another place have been found great 
rows of earthen vases of a remarkable size, placed 
on a brick floor, and filled with human bones, 
similar to those found at Babylon. Both palaces 
have suffered from fire, for their materials are cal- 
cined in many places, and have been plundered be- 
fore being destroyed; for neither gems, nor any 
thing of value, not even the small cylinders so 
numerous in the neighbourhood, have been found 
in them — a verification, surely, of the prophet's 
words addressed to the conqueror of Nineveh: 
" Take ye the spoil of silver, take ye the spoil of 
gold." 

This discovery is of great importance in an 
archaeological point of view. It supplies a link 
which has hitherto been awanting, and the want of 



AS8TRIA — NINEYBH. 33 

which has long been felt, between the infancy and 
the perfection of the arts — ^between their dawn in 
Egypt and their noon in Greece. There occur a 
few brief and incidental allusions to this subject 
both in the Old Testament and in the writings of 
the Greek historians ; but these hints are too vague 
to allow us to draw any certain conclusion as to 
the state of the arts under the Babylonians and 
Persians. But this rare discovery, by which we 
hare been put most unexpectedly in possession of 
a vast number of beautiful specimens from the 
chisels of the Babylonian and Persian sculptors, 
promises to make us soon as intimately acquainted 
with the state of art in the countries in question as 
we already are with its condition in Egypt and 
Greece. The intelligent reader will observe how 
this again sheds light on the Bible. There are not 
a few points in the scriptural account of Babylon 
and Nineveh which the sculptures of this subter- 
ranean edifice authenticate and verify. Babylon 
is described in the Bible as a land of graven images 
—a statement which would lead us to infer, that 
in the country of Babylonia the arts were universally 
difiused^ and had attained some degree of perfec- 
tion. There is the most perfect accordance on 
this point between the pages of the Bible and the 
walls of this palace. We find mention made, too, 
of the ** pleasant furniture'' of Nineveh ; and we 





34 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

find articles of this description frequently intro* 
duced in the bass-reliefs we have described. More- 
over, the absence of every thing of value, and the 
marks of fire still visible on the edifice, make it 
apparent that it was first plundered and then burnt, 
as the prophet foretold. Little did the builders of 
this edifice imagine the singulai fortime that awaited 
it — that it should long outlast the Assyrian mon- 
archy itself; and after being buried for ages in dark- 
ness, should be brought forth to the light, to be 
the marvel of the last ages of the world, and to 
bear its testimony to matters of infinitely higher 
moment to man than the magnificence of the art 
with which it was so profusely decorated — even 
the supremacy and truth of that God who foretold 
by his prophets its destruction^ and that of the power 
that flourished in it, ere yet a stone of it had been 
overthrown. 

Such is the latter end of that city which re- 
pented in sackcloth and ashes at the preaching of 
Jonah — which Jehovah at that time spared — but 
which, returning to her former wickedness, was 
at last fearfully overthrown. Yet, as if the divine 
indignation against Nineveh had begim of late to 
be mitigated, the aspect of her ruins is now of a 
less gloomy character than that which belongs to 
the remains of some other large cities. The scene 
is almost a pleasant and pastoral one. The dust 



ASSYRIA — ^NINEVEH. S5 

of Nineyeh sleeps beneath a fresh and beautiful 
turf. On some portions of the plain the plough 
has been busy for ages; and the ground is covered 
with crops of grain and cotton, i?vhich the nig- 
gard soil produces only on the alternate years. 
The rest of the plain is corered with green sward, 
dotted here and there with patches of tamarisk 
bushes. Here there is nothing of the scathed 
and blasted look which the Plain of Chaldea 
presents, nor are there here those gigantic and 
hoary mounds, which give such unspeakable sub- 
limity to the site of Babylon. One has to reflect 
on the long line of monarchs and princes which 
flourished here — the stately palaces — the deli- 
cious gardens — the multitude of men — the wealth, 
the luxury, the wickedness of which this plain was 
once the abode, and to contrast it with its utter 
desertion now, and the deep and perpetual silence 
that reigns oyer it, before he can feel the truly 
sublime character of the scene on which he is 
gazing. 

Still, as we hare said, there is, to this hour, 
some doubt regarding the site of Nineveh ; which, 
however, it is probable will be speedily dispelled 
by the investigations going on there. If the re- 
mains we have described are the ruins of Nineveh, 
^^how is she become a desolation^ a place for beasts 
to lie doum in !" If these are not the ruins of 



86 



BOINB O? BIBLB LAMBS. 



Niaeveb, no man knows where it stood. la either 
case, how exact has been the fulfilment of the pro- 
pliecj: " Hemllmaka anuiler md ef&splaco 
thereof!" 




CHAPTER 11. 

''The light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark 
of his fire shall not shine. The light shall be dark in his 
tabernacle, and his oandle shall be pat out with him. .... 
Brimstone shall be scattered npon his habitation. His roots 
shall be dried up beneath, and aboTO shall his branch be cot 
ofL His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he 

shall have no name in the street They that oome 

after him shall be astonied at his day, as they that went 
before were affidghted."— Job zviiL 5-20* 



iftinefteli— 51^0 Cuneiform TOtiting. 

Sapposed appearance of Ancient Nineyeli— Desolation of 
the site now — Besorrection of NineTeh — Strangeness of the 
discovery — Its opportuneness — The Cuneiform Writing — 
History of its discorery — Professor Grotefend begins the 
investigation — Trilingual inscription at Persepolis — Professor 
Lassen frames an alphabet — Sir H. Rawlinson deciphers the 
inscription on Behistun rock — Frames an alphabet which 
agrees with that of Professor Lassen — Cuneiform Assi/rian 
translation mastered — Nineveh yields up her treasures when- 
ever the art of reading the cuneiform writing was found out 
—Finger of God in the timing of these discoveries. 



NINEVEH — THE CDNEUTOBM WRITING. 39 



NIKBYBH-THB C0NEIFORM WRITING. 

Since the foregoing chapter was committed to 
writing, new and marvelloxis discoveries have re- 
warded the explorer on the site of Nineveh. We 
say the " site of Nineveh," for no doubt can now 
be entertained that this is indeed the spot where 
stood that once proud and powerful capital. 
Verily an "utter end" has been made of *' the 
place thereof." The change is so great it trans- 
cends the imagination to realise it. Let us go 
back in fancy three thousand years, and take our 
stand on the bank of the Tigris. What princely 
magnificence 1 what imperial pride ! In the far 
north is the gleaming crest of the snowy Kurdis- 
tan : around us is the vast plain, drinking, by its 
thousand canals, of the waters of the Tigris, and 
covered throughout with boundless luxuriance, 
and a countless multitude of cities. This stream 
at our feet watered Paradise. This city on its 
further bank is the ca{>ital of Assyria. Socoessive 



40 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

dynasties and kings iiave built their palaces here, 
and now it has attained its utmost dimensions, 
and is '' an exceeding great city." Along the 
river's course^ as far as the eye can reach, runs 
the long line of its ramparts. The roofs of its 
edifices fill the vast space betwixt and the eastern 
hills. On the earth there is not its equal in 
size, or its riTal in splendour. Subjugated pro- 
vinces and conquered nations have enriched it 
with their spoils. Massy rampart and embattled 
tower rise to defend it. Glorious art has embel- 
lished it. Crowds throng its gates and high- 
ways. On its river are innumerable craft laden 
with the dainties of distant climes. All nature 
seems to exist but to nourish this haughty and 
luxurious city. For Nineveh the Tigris pours its 
bounteous floods: for Nineveh the plain yields 
unintermittingly its luxuriant crops. For Nine- 
veh the sun showers his light, and the distant 
Kurdistan erects his snowy crest. And mark 
what towers are these that rise so proudly and 
look so fair through the summer sky. The pile 
is white as snow, and the sun himself seems to 
borrow a new brightness as he strikes upon its 
alabaster fa9ade. Forms of colossal size and mys- 
terious import guard its entrance. Winged lions, 
sphinxes and human-headed bulls, look down 
with solemn mien on the awe-struck visitor as 



NINEVEH — THE 0TTNEI7OBM WRITING. 41 

he passes on betwixt their stately rows. This is 
the palace of the king of Nineveh. 

Three thousand years have passed, and what a 
change ! The once glorious Nineveh has vanished as 
completely as if she never had existed. Gone down 
to the tomb are tower and rampart and palace, and 
the whole multitude of her common dwellings; 
and the Arab^ as he wanders over the spot, would 
never dream that a city had once stood here. 
The plain is utterly solitary; and the spot which 
nature in other days seemed to cherish and de- 
fend is now utterly abandoned. Man neglects 
it, and the elements devastate it. The Tigris 
inundates it with its floods : the rains of winter 
furrow and seam the mounds with which its sur> 
&ce is roughened. Its canals are filled up, and 
the sun scorches and bums up the vegetation 
with which the spring clothes it. Silent, for- 
saken, and wrapt in funereal gloom, has lain this 
once gay and populous site through the long long 
centuries. It was suspected that Nineveh had 
once stood there : that was all. 

But three thousand years of darkness have 
passed away, and the grave gives up its dead. 
The curtain rises, and those verities, which were 
hidden so long, and which were believed to be lost 
for ever, are disclosed. The crusted earth bursts 
asunder, and Nineveh returns from her tomb. 



42 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

The knowledge we have already obtained, and 
the yet fuller and more accurate information that 
awaits us, regarding the Assyrian empire, is one 
of the strangest events of our times. Had we 
been told of this but a fow years ago, we would 
have asked, if a prophet would rise from the dead, 
if one of tho old Assyrian kings would leave 
his grav6, might this thing be? The Assyrian 
empire had flourished and passed away ages 
before the birth of history. Its times were 
accounted remote even in the days of Greece and 
Rome, and its history was looked upon as irre- 
coverably lost. Its language had ceased on the 
lips of men thousands of years ago. Of its his- 
tory not a line survived, save a few dim and 
doubtful notices in the works of the earliest his- 
torians, and a few incidental allusions to its affairs 
in the pages of the Bible. And even though so 
unlikely an event should happen as that some old 
Assyrian scroll should turn up, what wiser would 
we be ? There is not on earth a man who could 
read it. So we reasoned. There appeared to be 
an impassable gulf between us and all know- 
ledge of Assyrian affairs. And yet, however 
incredible it looks, here are tho annals of Assyria, 
not doubtfully transmitted through tradition and 
ill-informed historians, who were glad to supple- 
ment with conjecture or fable what was lacking 



NINEVEH — THE CUNEIFORM WBITINO. 43 

in fact, but of unquestionable truthfulness and 
authority^ because they have come direct from 
the Assyrians thein8elye& We can tell the names 
of their kings, the wars they waged, the coun- 
tries they overthrew, the works of peace they 
achieved, and that with a minuteness of detail 
and a precision of date which is beyond our 
reach in the case of nations which stand much 
nearer to us. How has this happened ) It is not 
a prophet that has risen from the dead, it is 
Nineveh herself that has returned. ^ Here," she 
says, ''have I slept these three thousand years, 
waiting the summons that was to bring me up. 
The hour is come at last. It is not to tell the 
story of my own greatness that I now appear. 
For higher ends have I been summoned from my 
grave. I come to testify to Jebovah*s truth, and 
bid the nations give heed to His Word. When 
in Germany men call the Bible a myth : when in 
France, and Italy, and other countries of Christen- 
dom, they deride it as a fable : when the time 
foretold of old has come, that faith there is not on 
the earth, I can be silent no longer. Here are the 
marble tablets of my history : I spread them out 
before the eyes of all : read, and compare them 
with the Bible, and see whether the prophets 
spake not truth." So speaks this witness from 
the dead. The providence that has brought 



44 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

about an event so marvellous in its own nature, 
and so fraught with importance to man, simply 
in the ordinary course, and by ordinary means, 
is even more remarkable than any miracle would 
have been. It is worth while spending a few 
moments on the inquiry how this thing came to 
pass. 

It was not enough that the long-hidden book 
of Nineveh's history should be exhumed ; it was 
equally necessary that there should be found those 
who were able to open and read it. Providence 
took care that this should be the case. Before a 
trench had been dug in the Assyrian mounds, or 
a single graven tablet exhumed, an interpreter 
was ready to decipher the characters with which 
these tablets are inscribed. Without this the 
treasure would have been worthless as the dust 
from which it was won. The discovery of the 
art of reading these inscriptions is even more 
astonishing than the discovery of the inscriptions 
themselves. The writing is like no other writing 
in the world : the language has been a dead one 
ever since the times of the Macedonian conquest. 
How was it possible to recover it ? It has been 
recovered; and it can be read with nearly as 
great ease as we can read the chronicles of our 
Anglo-Saxon kings. What a matchless triumph 
of human ingenuity and labour ! or rather, let us 



HINEYEH — THS CUNEIFORM WRITING. 45 

say, what a maryellous proof of an oYermling 
Fh>Tidenoe, whioh, bj a series of happy accidents, 
as it seemed, led man to the discovery of the key 
by which the treasure-house of the ancient world 
has been entered, and the story of Nineveh's 
glory and power made known to these last ages 
of the world! 

The first pioneer in this path was Professor 
Grotefend of Gottingen. In 1802 his attention 
was attracted by the trilingual inscription on the 
walls of Persepolis. Though that inscription is 
all in the cuneiform, or wedge-like character, it 
is written in three different languages, and Pro- 
fessor Grotefend rightly guessed the first kind to 
be Persian. After much ingenious labour, and a 
oomparison of all the authorities, ancient and 
modem, he succeeded in determining the three 
proper names that occur in the inscription to be 
those of Hystaspes, Darius, and Xerxes. This 
discovery was worth its cost, for it put the pro- 
fessor in possession of twelve letters of the cunei- 
form alphabet. Further Professor Grotefend pro- 
ceeded not. Much yet remained to be done. The 
work was next taken up by Professor Lassen of 
Bonn, and prosecuted with a zeal so great and a 
success so gratifying, that between the years 1836 
and 1844 he had framed an all but a complete al- 
phabet of the cuneiform or Babylonian character. 



46 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

It 80 happened that about the same time an- 
other Oriental scholar, Major (now Colonel Sir 
Henry) Rawlinson, became bent on unlocking the 
mystery of the enneiform inscriptions. Stationed 
in Kermanshah, in Persia, he was ignorant of the 
researches in progress in the west. But in 1 835 
he had copied and begun to interpret the cunei- 
form inscription at Hamadan, the ancient Ecba- 
tana. In two years thereafter he had given 
himself to the task of deciphering the most exten- 
sive cuneiform inscription in the world, that, 
namely, on the famous rock of Behistun. It rises 
almost perpendicularly, and some three hundred 
feet from the ground it displays an inscription in 
three different languages, but all in the cuneiform 
character. Five hundred years before the Chris- 
tian era this writing had been executed by Darius, 
who found it necessary, in giving a history of his 
conquests, to address the various nations over 
which he reigned in their several languages. 
Little did he suspect the important end his in- 
scription was destined to serve. It furnished 
Kawlinson with more than eighty proper names ; 
and these enabled him to form an alphabet of 
the cuneiform character. His researches were 
prosecuted independently. Communication with 
Professor Lassen he had none : yet when his 
alphabet came to be compared with the profes- 



KIin&VKH — THE CUNEIFORM WRITING. 47 

Bor'i^ it differed only in one singlo character. 
How plain was it that the art of reading the 
oaneiform letters had been tmly discovered. 

This was the first and great step towards reading 
those tablets, not one of which, however, had yet 
been drawn forth from the mounds where they had 
been entombed for more than thirty centuries. 
The alphabet was known, but the translation had 
yet to be mastered. The ancient Persian is the 
root of the Zend : the Zend was had recourse to^ 
and employed as the medium of interpreting the 
Persian; and by its help, together with much 
patient and skilful labour, the translation of the 
cuneiform Persian inscription was at last accom- 
plished. But the cuneiform Assyrian inscription, 
which followed the Persian on the same tablet, 
but repeated the same short history. This now 
was within reach. A little more time, and a 
little more labour, and the Assyrian writing also 
stood revealed. Thus was accomplished one of 
the brightest triumphs of the kind on record. 
When achieved, man knew not half its value; 
nor could he anticipate the brilliant recompence 
that awaited his assiduity and skill. Patiently 
had be toiled that he might be able to read a 
few cuneiform inscriptions scattered throughout 
the East : but no sooner had he mastered the 
gift, than, lo! &llen empires and buried cities 



48 BUIKS OF BIBLE L^NDS. 



placed in his hands their long and carefully 
hoarded records. 

Mr Layard was but 22 years of age when, in 
1839, after having wandered through Asia Minor 
and Syria, ^'scarcely leaving untrod one spot 
hallowed by tradition, or unvisited one ruin con- 
secrated by history," he experienced the irre- 
sistible desire to penetrate to those regions be- 
yond the Euphrates which for all time ta come 
must be identified with his name. In his first 
published work he informed us how his wander- 
ings in Asia Minor had been conducted. One 
adventurous spirit only was his travelling com- 
panion. The pair rode unattended ; their arms 
were their sole protection ; a valise behind their 
saddles was their wardrobe ; they mixed freely 
among the people, acquired their language and 
their habits, and partook gratefully of their hos- 
pitality. " No experienced dragoman," he wrote 
at the time, "measured our distances and ap- 
pointed our stations. We were honoured with 
no conversations by pashas, nor did we seek any 
civilities from governors. We neither drew tears 
nor curses from villagers by seizing their horses 
or searching their houses for provisions. Their 
welcome was sincere ; their scanty fare was placed 
before us, we ate, and came, and went in peace.'* 

In the month of April, 1840, Layard first 



KINEVEH — ^THB OUNEIFOBM WRITING. 49 

caught sight of the ruinB of Nineveh, near the 
city of Mosul, — ^rude heaps, without form, de- 
posited in a scene as desolate as the remains 
themselves. He tells us that the huge mounds 
of Assyria then made a deeper impression upon 
him, and gave rise to more serious thoughts and 
more earnest reflection, than the temples of Bal- 
bec and the theatres of Ionia. His curiosity was 
excited, and from that time he formed the de« 
sign " of thoroughly examining, whenever it 
might be in his power, these singular remains.*' 

It is in the timing of these two things that the 
finger of God is seen. There is no necessary con- 
nection between them : they might have been 
separated by ages : yet both came together — in 
the same year almost. Thousands and thousands 
had seen the inscriptions on the walls of Perse- 
polis and the rock of Behistun, but beyond the 
look of idle wonder and fruitless curiosity with 
which they were regarded, they had elicited no 
farther concern. The Arab of the desert, and 
the traveller from Europe, century after cen- 
tury, had trodden the mounds of Assyria, but 
who had thought of exploring them, or dreamed 
of the rich treasures which they concealed? 
How strange the circumstance that at the same 
time an uncontrollable impulse should seize on 
Bawlinson to decipher these long-unheeded and 

D 



50 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

unread inscriptions, and on Layard to explore 
these long-neglected Ninevite mounds. Nor was 
the one conscious of the purpose of the other. 
Layard knew not that a scholar in the East 
was patiently toiling his way to a knowledge of 
the Babylonian writing : nor did Eawlinson know 
that a traveller in the West was unconquerably 
bent on examining the Assyrian mounds, if haply 
they might contain (a thing very incredible) some 
records of the long-lost Nineveh. It was the 
circumstance of these two discoveries meeting 
that made either of real value. The faculty of 
deciphering the cuneiform writing would have 
remained a brilliant but useless gift, without the 
Ninevite tablets on which to exercise it ; and the 
Ninevite tablets would have been drawn in vain 
from their hiding-place without the ability of 
reading them. 

As may readily be imagined, we have not yet 
obtained the perfect mastery of the Babylonian 
or cuneiform character ; and a few years more of 
patient labour must elapse before the old world 
story of these slabs can be fully read. But enough 
has been deciphered to show that we have the 
annals of the Assyrian empire in our hands, and 
that we only wait a more familiar knowledge 
of the cuneiform character to possess a more 
detailed history of that early people than we 



NINEVBH — THE CUNEIFORM WRITING. 51 

have of the Greeks and Romans. The facts 
already gleaned, most interesting and moment- 
ous as they are, constitute a history of Assyrian 
afiGurSy with some interruptions, from about two 
thousand years before Christ to the fall of that 
empire about five centuries before our era. The 
latter half of the line runs contemporaneously 
with the Scripture narrative. And as the As- 
syrian and Jewish affairs were in those ages much 
mixed up together, the points of contact be- 
tween the two, as might have been expected, are 
very numerous; and wherever such contact occurs, 
the coincidence between the Ninevite monuments 
and the Scripture record is very striking, and 
such as incontestably to prove the genuineness 
and authenticity of the latter. 



CHAPTER III. 

" Thon Blialt be hid."— Nahum iii. 11. 
" And the thing that is hid bringeth he forth to light. "- 
Job zxyiii. 11. 
''And will set thee as a gazing-stock."— Nahum iii. 6. 



General list of exhumed tablets, coininencing B.O. 2000 — 
Corroborations of the Bible furnished by the tablets in the 
following particoUurs, viz. : The distribution of the first 
races : the topography of the first cities : early mythology : 
predominance of Assyrian power, &c. — Eouynnjik monnd — 
Palace of Sennacherib— History of Sennacherib on the monu- 
ments — Agreement with the Bible account — Siege of Lachish 
— Payment of tribute by Hezekiah — Sargon, father of Sen- 
nacherib — Record of captivity of the Ten Tribes on the 
monuments — Esarhaddon, son of Sennacherib — Chamber of 
Records — The king's throne — Concluding reflections. 



nNEYBH — ^NEW DISOOYEBIES. 55 



NINBTEH— FEW DISC0VERIB3. 

Let qs first enumerate the more important of 
the ezoayated monuments, in a historic point of 
yiew^ and which are now, thanks to the indefatig- 
able zeal and the masterly skill of our country- 
man, Mr Austen Henrt Layard, safely deposited 
in the British Museum. Beginning with the 
oldest, we have a series of legends, thirty-five in 
number, from bricks, stone tablets, and cones of 
clay, pertaining to the primitive Chaldean em- 
pire, and dating from about b.o. 2000-1500. 
Second, we have three cylinders found at Kileh 
Shirgat, containing the annals of Tiglath Pileser 
I., dating b.o. 1120. Third, there are the annals 
of Sardanapalus, b.o. 850, from four independent 
texts at Nimrud. Next comes a short legend of 
Pul and Semiramis, b.o. 760, which is inscribed 
on a statue of the god Nebo. We are in posses- 
sion, too, of the annals of Sargon, inscribed on 
the cylinders found in the palace at Khorsabad, 



56 BUIKS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

■ 

and dating about b.o. 706. The most important 
of all the monuments hitherto discovered is per- 
haps that which follows, namely, the annals of 
Sennacherib, from the famous cylinder of Colonel 
Tayler, dating b.o. 694. To this cylinder we 
shall have occasion afterwards to refer. And 
lastly, among the other Assyrian treasures in the 
British Museum, there is a cylinder containing a 
tolerably perfect copy of the annals of Esar-Had- 
don, the son of Sennacherib, in which mention is 
made of a further deportation of Israelites by 
that monarch, and the settlement of Babylonian 
colonists in their room, explaining, as is believed, 
the incidental reference in Ezra iv. 2 to the 
" adversaries" who " came to Zerubbabel, and to 
the chief of the fathers, and said unto them, Let 
us build with you : for we seek your God, as ye 
do j and we do sacrifice unto him since the days 
of Esar-Haddon, king of Assur, who brought us 
up hither." The inscriptions extend over a pe- 
riod of fifteen hundred years, and form a history 
of the Assyrian empire, reaching, with some 
breaks, which may yet be supplied, from about 
the times of its rise to well-nigh its fall. 

The corroborations of Scripture on these mo- 
numents are numerous. The two strikingly 
agree, alike in the general outlines of what they 
record, and in the particular facts. The pio- 



tore of primitive times which the disinterred 
tablets from the Assyrian mounds bring before 
tiB is precisely that which the Bible had already 
made us familiar with. The monuments at- 
test, too, the accuracy of Scripture in the re- 
presentation it gives of the division of the 
earth, and the distribution of mankind over it. 
The inscriptions exhibit the early races inhabit- 
ing just where the Bible had placed them — the 
Assyrians on the great central plains, the Hittites 
and others by the sea. The very names by which 
their countries were designated in those early 
days are the same. Of this, the following in- 
stance may suffice. Babylonia is styled, on the 
monuments, the country of the four rivers, the 
allusion being doubtless to the Tigris and Eu- 
phrates, with their two principal branches. The 
same general feature does Moses employ to de- 
signate and describe the country of Eden, and 
the position there of the primeval garden. " As- 
sur" and "Nimrod" are names that we have 
met only in the inspired page ; they have a sort 
of mythological grandeur about them, and we 
scarce can think of them as men who have 
walked the earth. We dig up the first edifices 
built by man, and we find " Assur " and " Nim- 
rod " inscribed upon their foundations. Verily, 
we say, the Bible is no &ble. Scarce less vener- 



58 BUINS OF BIBLE LAin>& 

able are the names of the first cities^ Babel^ and 
Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, and Nineveh, and 
Rehoboth, and Calah, and Besen. Hitherto we 
have known nothing of these cities save what we 
read of them in the Bible, nor did we expect ever 
to meet their names in any other writing. It 
awakens strange feelings, then, on turning up 
the earliest graven monuments, to read these 
veritable names as names of cities then ex- 
isting. The inscriptions present a complete 
tableau of ancient Assyria, by which the name 
and situation of every town of note mentioned 
in the Bible can be identified. Most accurate, 
then, is the Bible in its topography ; not less 
accurate is it in the account it gives of the my- 
thology of those days. Statues of the god Nebo, 
and of Dagon, and of other "vanities of the 
Gentiles," have been dug up, all exactly corre- 
sponding with what is said of them in Scripture. 
The inscriptions agree, too, with the Bible in 
the account they give of the world's then political 
condition. They authenticate the predominance 
of the Assyrian power, and the general thraldom 
in which it held surrounding nations. The cruel 
expeditions it made into foreign teiiitories, and 
the frequent captivities, especially of the Jews, 
in which their wars resulted^ all are recorded on 
the monuments in striking agreement with what 



DISCOYSBnBL 59 



we read m Scriptare of the " great king of As- 
Bym^" and of his " yoke," so often borne by the 
other national and espectallj by the IsraeliteaL 

When from these more general matters we 
descend to individual events, we find the coin- 
ddences equally striking. We have already re- 
ferred to the fiimons mound of Eouyunjik, on 
the eastern bank of the Tigris, opposite MosuL 
Here M. Botta first began his excavations, but, 
not succeeding as he wished, be removed to 
Khorsabad, another mound on the same desolate 
plain, and at Ehorsabad he opened the first Assy- 
rian palace perhaps ever beheld by man since 
the &11 of the Assyrian empire. But to Kouy- 
unjik Mr Layard directed his attention, and this 
mound has since proved the great store-house of 
Assyrian antiquities. Its monuments are of great 
and singular interest — ^rich in the light which 
they throw on Assyrian history, and in the cor- 
roborations which they yield of the Bible's truth. 
The palace of Kouyunjik is proved to have been 
built by Sennacherib. His name is cut on the 
front of the colossal bulls that guarded its en- 
trance. The annals of his reign, occupying eight 
hundred lines, are written on the walls of the 
place. The exploits of Sennacherib figure in Scrip- 
ture more, perhaps, than those of any other 
Assyrian king. What agreement is there betwixt 



60 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

the inscriptions at Kouyurjik and the statements 
of the Bible under this head 1 The most perfect 
agreement. Sennacherib began his reign, according 
to the monuments, by subjugating the Babylo- 
nians under their king Merodach Baladan. In 
his second year he turned his arms against 
Northern Media, which he subdued and plun- 
dered. But it is to the events of his third year 
that we invite special attention. The inscriptions 
of Kouyuujik record that now he overran the 
whole of Syria. Crossing the Euphrates, pro- 
bably at Carchemish, and, subjugating in his vic- 
torious progress the Syrians, which are called by 
their Biblical name the Hittites, he descended on 
the sea -coast by the northern spur of Lebanon, 
and defeated in battle Luliya, king of Sidon. The 
victory was instantly followed by the submission 
of all the kings on the coast south to Ascalon. 
At this point of his progress he sent his general 
to demand of Hezekiah of Jerusalem the tribute 
which he had withheld. 

While his general was absent on this errand, 
Sennacherib, as we learn from statements in 
2 Kings xviii. and xix., and Isaiah xxxvi. and 
xxxvii., sat down before Lachish, and began to 
besiege it. What do the monuments say of this 
event ] In a chamber of the palace of Kouyun- 
jik was discovered a fine series of bas-reliefs, on 



KINEYEH — KBW DISC0TERIE8. 61 

which 18 portrayed the siege of a city of great 
Bue and importance. Battering-rams, bowmen^ 
ladders for escalade, and the whole apparatus of 
war as then conducted, are represented in the 
picture. Before the city-gates sits the king of 
the besieging host on a gorgeous throne, while a 
row of captives is being led into his presence, 
who humbly crouch before him and sue for par- 
don. The inscriptions on the bas-reliefs leave no- 
ways doubtful the transaction represented in the 
sculptures. '' Sennacherib," so runs the writing, 
*• the mighty king, king of the country of Assyria, 
sitting on the throne of judgment before the city 
of Lachish (Lakhisba). I give permission for its 
slaughter." Here, therefore, is the actual picture 
of the siege of Lachish, against which Sennacherib 
had turned his arms, as we know from the Bible, 
when he sent his general to threaten Hezekiah 
with his vengeance for withholding the tribute. 

But to resume. The narrative of the expedi- 
tion against Hezekiah is recorded with graphic 
detail in the inspired page; it has been recorded 
also by Sennacherib himself on the marbles at 
Kouyunjik, and here occurs one of the finest veri- 
fications of the Scripture history which the excava- 
ted slabs have yet furnished us with. In 2 Kings 
xviii. 13, 14, we read, " Now in the fourteenth 
year of king Hezekiah did Sennacherib king of 



62 BUINS OF filBLE LANDS. 

Assyria come up against all the fenced cities of 
Judah, and took them. And Hezekiah king of 
Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, 
saying, I have offended: return from me: that 
which thou puttest on me will I bear. And the 
king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekiah king 
of Judah three hundred talents of silver, and 
thirty talents of gold." So far the Bible : turn- 
ing next to the Kouyunjik tablets we read, " Be- 
cause Hezekiah, king of Judsaa, did not submit 
to my yoke, forty-six of his strong fenced cities, 
and innumerable smaller towns which depended 
on them, I took and plundered; but I left him 
Jerusalem, his capital city, and some of the inferior 
towns around it. . . . And because Hezekiah 
still continued to r3fu8e to pay me homage, I at- 
tacked and carried off the whole population, fixed 
and nomade, which dwelled around Jerusalem, 
with thirty talents of gold, and eight hundred 
talents of silver, the accumulated wealth of the 
nobles of Hezekiah's court, and of their daughters, 
with the ofl&cers of the palace, men slaves and 
women slaves. I returned to Nineveh." The 
agreement between these two independent ac- 
counts is very striking. Even to the number of 
the talents of gold paid by Hezekiah as tribute 
they are the same ; and this we must regard as a 
proof both of the fidelity of Scripture and the strict 



NINEVEH — ^NEW DISCOVERIES. 63 

accuracy of the Assyrian inscriptiona There is, 
it must however be noted, a discrepancy in the 
two accounts as to the amount of silver. Three 
hundred talents of silver, says the Bible, eight 
hundred, say the tablets, did Hezekiah give to 
Sennacherib. A fuller statement of facts would, 
we doubt not, enable us to see that both are true. 
It is not impossible that three hundred talents 
was the sum first " appointed" to Hezekiah, but 
that Sennacherib made a second demand, and that 
then Hezekiah, as the Bible informs us, " gave 
him all the silver that was found in the house 
of the Lord, and in the treasures of the king^s 
house." " I left to him Jerusalem, his capital city," 
Bays Sennacherib. We know that the expedition 
ended more tragically, and that Sennacherib re- 
tired from Jerusalem, compelled to leave to 
Hezekiah his capital city by the supernatural 
destruction of his host. It was not to be ex- 
pected, however, that Sennacherib should record 
his own overthrow on the walls of his own palace. 
The impression is of a kind that noways shakes 
our belief in the inspired narrative. 

Let us glance a moment at the father and son 
of Sennacherib (Scripture personages likewise) as 
they come into view on the tablets. Sargon, 
named in the monuments Sargina, was the father 
of Sennacherib^ and the builder of the palace of 



64 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Ehorsabad, the first, as we have said, to be laid 
open. In some of the inscriptions, as Bawlinson 
affirms, he bears the name of Shalmaneser, the 
title by which he was best known to the Jews. 
He it was who carried captive the ten tribes, and, 
if we do not mistake, we find the record of that 
event on the monuments. On a tablet which 
unhappily is a good deal mutilated, we read, that 
in the first year of his reign, Sargon came up 
against the city of Samaria (styled on the monu- 
ments Samarina), and the tribes of Beth Khumri 
(House of Omri), and carried captive into Assyria 
27,280 families, settling in their place colonists 
brought from Babylon, and appointing prefects 
to administer the country. In a tablet set up by 
him, towards the close of his reign, in the palace 
of the first Sardauapalus at Nimrud, he styles 
himself the " conqueror of the remote Judea." 
It can scarce be doubted, therefore, that we have 
here the authentication of the fact of the capti- 
vity of Israel under the hand of the man whom 
God employed to accomplish it. In the monu- 
ments of this king, it is thought we can trace the 
record of his conquest of Ashdod, alluded to by 
Isaiah (chap, xx.), and the humiliation of Egypt 
foretold in the same chapter; for in his seventh 
year he is represented as receiving tribute from 
Pirhu (Pharaoh) king of Egypt. The most 



NINBVEH — ^NBW DISCOVERIES. 65 

andent known specimen of transparent glass, 
fbnnd in a room in the north-west palace of 
Nimrud, has the name of Saboon engraved upon 
it. 

Sargon was succeeded by his yet more famous 
son Sennacherib, of whose monuments at Kouy- 
nnjik we have already spoken. The merit of 
identifying his name belongs to Dr Hincks, and 
this important discovery furnished the first satis- 
&ctory clue to the parallelism which has since 
been traced between the Ninevite records and 
the Scripture history. He ascended the throne, 
according to Dr Hincks, in b.o. 703, and when 
he perished, as the Bible narrates, his son Esar- 
Haddon succeeded him. 

An inscription on the back of the halls in the 
south-west palace of !Nimrud tells us that Esar- 
Haddon was the builder of that edifice. A cylin- 
der in the British Museum contains a tolembly 
perfect copy of his annals. Like his father, he 
was a great warrior ; and the monuments speak 
of a deportation of Jews which took place under 
him, from which Mr Layard conjectures that he 
was the king of which we read in 2 Chron. xxxiii. 
2, " Wherefore the Lord brought upon them the 
captains of the host of the king of Assyria, which 
took Manasseh among the thorns, and bound 
him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon;'' 

E 



66 BUIKS or BIBLB LANDS. 

whence, bowever, on humbling himself, and 
making supplication before the Lord, he was libe- 
rated, and returned to Jerusalem. The son and 
successor of Esar-Haddon, Asshur-banipal, was the 
builder of the north palace of Kouyunjik. This 
palace excels all the others in the richness and 
beauty of its sciilptures. War and the chase are 
represented on its marbles. The design and 
treatment of the subjects are more artistic, and 
the execution is more finished than in any of the 
other excavated edifices, from which it has been 
concluded that under this king Assyrian art cul- 
minated. 

Besides these strictly historic discoveries, a 
number of miscellaneous objects have been dug 
up, all of which are interesting, as tending to 
shed light on Assyrian history and on incidental 
allusions in the Bible. For instance, at Kouy- 
unjik, Mr Layard penetrated into the " chamber 
of records," where the royal decrees and the na- 
tional archives were kept. It was the custom of 
the Assyrians to write their historical and public 
documents on tablets and cylinders of baked 
clay, and of these we have been fortunate to 
secure not a few specimens. " On a large hexa- 
gonal cylinder," says Mr Layard, in his "Dis- 
coveries in the Ruins of Nineveh and Babylon," 
<< presented by me to the British Museum, are the 



NINBVEH — ^NBW DISOOYEBIES. 67 

chronicles of Esar-Haddon : on a similar cylin- 
der discovered in the mound of Nebi Yunus 
opposite Mosul, and formerly in the possession of 
the late Colonel Tayler, are eight years of the 
annals of Sennacherib; and on a barrel-shaped 
cylinder, long since placed in the British Museum^ 
and known as Bellino*s> we have part of the 
records of the same king. The importance of 
such relics will be readily understood. The 
chambers I am describing appear to have been a 
depoiutory in the palace of Nineveh for such 
documents. To the height of a foot or more 
from the floor, it was entirely filled with them. 
The cuneiform characters on most of them were 
singularly sharp and well defined, but so minute, 
in some instances, as to be almost illegible with- 
out a magnifying glass." It was in such a cham- 
ber, doubtless, that the decree of Cyrus regard- 
ing the return of the captivity, for which Darius 
commanded that search should be made, was de- 
posited. These tablets and cylinders appear to 
be covered with records of wars, public docu- 
ments, lists of gods, sacred days in each month, 
calendars, and perhaps also astronomical obser- 
vationSy forming, perhaps, the most complete 
and valuable of all the historic treasures received 
from antiquity, though demanding years of pa- 
tient study, and more perfect knowledge than we 



68 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

yet possess of the cuneiform character, before 
their complete decipherment can be effected. 

Not the least interesting of the relics discovered 
at Nineveh is the "throne" of its king. Strange, 
that after so many thousands of years we should 
look on the very seat which was occupied by the 
then masters of the world ! This relic of an 
empire that has passed away was found by Mr 
Layard huddled into a corner of a chamber in 
the north-west palace of Nimrud. From its 
being found here, we may infer that it was the 
chair of state of one of the earlier Assyrian sove- 
reigns. In the chamber beside it lay a promis- 
cuous heap of culinary, or perhaps sacrificial ves- 
sels — bowls, cauldrons, cups, vases in bronze — 
mixed with piles of arms, shields, spears, pick- 
axes, and saws. The whole mass was green with 
rust, and the upper layers of dishes moulder into 
brown dust on the admission of the air. The 
throne was of wood, cased or overlaid with bronze, 
elaborately carved and embossed with symbolical 
figures, and closely resembling in its form and 
ornaments the throne of Sennacherib seen in the 
sculptures of the siege of Lachish. The wood 
had rotted, and was gone ; the metal casing fell 
in pieces at the touch ; but fragments have been 
preserved, and are now in the British Museum. 
Strange thoughts does the sight of this object 



KmEYEH — ^NEW DISGOYEBIES. 69 



I 



call ap. Here is the royal seat — where is the 
empire ? Does it not look like mockery, a throne 
without a kingdom ! Before a single fiieze of 
the Parthenon had been carved, or a stone of 
the eternal city laid, this chair existed, and now 
when the Parthenon has grown old, and the eter- 
nal city is in ruins, this chair is existing still ; and 
after the darkness of four thousand years it has 
been brought forth to be the gazing-stock of these 
later generations of men. Little did the cunuing 
workman who fashioned it, and the powerful king 
who occupied it, dream of the fate that awaited it. 
These palaces of the Assyrian nionarchs must 
have been of rare magnificence. Colossal in size, 
and grand and solemn rather than beautiful in 
Btyle, they were fit abodes of those proud and 
powerful men. Temples were they rather than 
palaces. The majestic symbols and images of 
their deities crowded their entrances, and must 
have struck the visitor with awe, and deepened 
the impression which the oriental sovereigns 
ever wished to make on the minds of all who 
sought their presence, that they were Heaven's 
vicegerents, and possessed the attributes of 
divinity. The sublime effect of these palaces 
may somewhat be conceived of from the account 
given by Mr Layard of a farewell visit paid to 
the north-west palace of Nimrud just before 



70 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

the removal of the bulls and sphinxes that 
guarded its portal. " We rode," says he, " one 
cloudless night to the mound to look on them 
for the last time before they were taken from 
their old resting-places. The moon was at her 
full, and as we drew nigh to the edge of the 
deep wall of earth rising around them, her soft 
light was creeping over the stern features of the 
human heads, and driving before it the dark 
shadows which still clothed the lion forms. One 
by one the limbs of the gigantic sphinxes emerged 
from the gloom, until the monstera were unveiled 
before us. I shall never forget that night, or the 
emotions which those venerable figures caused 
within me. A few hours more and they were to 
stand no longer where they had stood unscathed 
amidst the wreck of man and his works for ageSb 
It seemed almost sacrilege to tear them from 
their old haunts to make them a mere wonder- 
stock to the busy crowd of a new world. They 
were better suited to the desolation around them ; 
for they had guarded the place in its glory, and 
it was for them to watch over it in its ruin." 

These excavations bring us face to face with 
the departed empire. We had heard of the fame 
of Nineveh, but now our eye sees her. It was a 
true report that had reached us of her greatness, of 
her pride, of her glory, and no mere exaggeration 



NINEVEH — ^NEW DIS00VBBIB9. 71 

or glowing picture of the Orientals. Knowing 
her height, we can measure the greatness of her 
&11. How sure and strong the word of Him, 
who, while Nineveh was yet in her prime, said 
that He would dig her grave. Verily, her grave 
has heen dug; and how low and loathsome a 
grave I And long, very long, has Nineveh dwelt 
in it ! And now that she has been called forth 
from its deep shadows, it is for no purpose of 
hers, or to resume her old splendour, but, &om 
the dust and humiliation of her overthrow, to 
bear testimony to the truth of that God whose 
word she defied, and whose people she oppressed. 
Little did the world suspect that a double record 
of the occurrences narrated in the Bible existed. 
Little did the prophets themselves think that 
other pens were employed on these events, and 
that the rock-tablets of Nineveh were receiving 
them in trust for a far-distant posterity. But 
Providence took care that both records should be 
provided. The one Eecord was sent forth into 
the world. It was derided, denounced as a fable, 
treated as a myth, and believed in by only the 
few. The other was laid up in the bowels of the 
earth, there to remain in concealment till the 
time should come when it could speak with effect 
The hour came. The crust of earth cracked, 
opened, and the long-buried witness arose. 



CHAPTER IV. 
iWeaopotamia— Baftglon. 

" Come down, and sit in the dust, virgin daughter of 
Babylon ; sit on the ground : there is no throne, daughter 
of the Chaldeans ; for thou shalt no more be called tender 
and delicate. .... Sit thou ralent, and get thee into dark- 
ness, O daughter of the Chaldeans : for thou shalt no more 
be called. The lady of kingdoms. .... And thou saidst, I 
riiall be a lady for ev^ : so that thou didst not lay these things 
to thy heart, nether didst remember the latter end of it. 
Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, 
that dwellest carelessly ; tiiat sayest in thine heart, I am, and 
none else besides me ; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall 
I know the loss of children : but these two things shall come 
to thee in a moment in one day, the loss of children and 
widowhood : they shall come upon thee in their perfection, for 
the multitude of thy sorceries, and for the great abundance of 

thine enchantments Desolation shall come upon thee 

suddenly."— Isaiah xl?ii. 1-11. 



Memorials of past fertility — ^Vestiges of ancient dtieft* 
Ancient Babylon — Its size and splendour, according to his- 
torians—Isaiah's prediction of its fall— The siege, as described 
by Herodotus and Xenophon — Exact agreement of the his- 
torians with the prophet — Gradual demolition of its ruins — 
Disappearance from history after fourth century of Christian 
era— Present appearance of its ruins — Babylon "a dry land" 
— " Pools of water" — *' A possesion for the bittern" — " Ara- 
bian" does " not pitch tent there" — All these prophecies ful- 
filled — Supposed site of palace and hanging gardens — The 
Migelib6— Tower of Belua— Aspect of its rains — Lessons. 



MB80P0TAMIA — BABYLON. 75 



MESOPOTAMIA— BABYLON. 

Now we cross the Tigris, and enter on the patri- 
archal region of Mesopotamia. Our path lies south, 
with a just perceptible inclination to the east. 
Behind us, are the ruins of one great city; before 
us, those of a greater. The tract oyer which we 
are now passing was illustrated in other days by 
the footsteps of the '' mighty hunter," Nimrod, and 
the tower reaching to heaven, which the sons of 
men attempted to build. This plain was in early 
times the theatre of unriyalled glory — the scene of 
unexampled wickedness; and now it lies before us 
a wide-spread ruin. It stretches out and out as 
we go, with scarce a human habitation or a speck 
of green on its bosom, and with so few landmarks, 
that the Arab, in trayersing it, is often obliged, 
like the mariner on the deep, to guide himself by the 
stars. The heart of the stoutest traveller becomes 
oppressed, as he surveys the boundless extent of 
dreary and dark wilderness around him, diversified 



76 BUINd OF BIBLB LANDS. 

only by tufts of reedy grass, by dwarf acacia bushes, 
and heaps of ruins, which swarm with reptiles and 
ravenous animab. At every step we meet the 
piemorals of the past — the vestiges of the cities, 
the cultivation, and the men which once flourished 
here. These grassy mounds, which intersect the 
plain in long straight lines, are the remains of the 
ancient canals. By these the waters of the Euphrates 
were made to irrigate the country ; and this, together 
with its fat alluvial soil, made it in past ages the 
garden of the East. These black spots which occur 
ever and anon, and where the soil is evidently un- 
able to nourish a single pile of grass, and where the 
ground looks as if it had been scorched by fire, 
are the sites of ancient cities. We meet them at 
80 short distances, and the desert, right and left, is 
so thickly dotted with them, that we are forced to 
the conclusion, that the entire plain between the 
Tigris and Euphrates, was formerly one continuous 
town. As we go, and still the dark desolate plain 
spreads out before us, and still the monuments of 
ruin lie thick around us, the feeling of loneliness 
with which we are at first impressed, rises at last 
into awe and reverence, at the power and truth of 
Him who has so signally punished, so utterly over- 
thrown, this region. " Our ride," says Frazer, 
who was now traversing the country between Seleucia 
and Babylon, ^ so long as daylight lasted, served 



MESOPOTAMIA — ^BABYLON. 77 

— — ^— ' T - I - . __ ■ . _ I 

at least to convince us how populous the land must 
have been in times of old; for scarcely did we 
traverse a mile of it without passing over the site 
of some ancient city, or town, or village. Some- 
times we found a whole tract covered with frag- 
ments of bricks, pottery, and glass ; and it was 
remarkable, that all of these sites are utterly bare 
of vegetation ; so that, even independent of the 
appearance of debris, we could tell when we were 
crossing one. Mounds, also, of the same substances 
were numerous ; but low, and altogether shapeless. 
Sections of funereal vases and coffins, which we 
observed protruding from them, marked them as 
receptacles for the relics of the dead. We likewise 
crossed a number of old canals — all dry and useless 
now ; and, in short, no one who has had any expe- 
rience in these matters, could doubt, from the 
vestiges so thickly spread over this day's march, 
that either some immense city had once flourished 
here, or, what is more probable, that the whole 
country, from Seleucia to Babylon, had once been 
covered with the abodes of men, in every various 
shape and form of city, town, and village." 

Now we draw nigh the site of the mighty Baby* 
Ion. Our approach to this renowned spot is noti- 
fied to us by the signs of greater desolation visible 
around us. The earth begins to wear a more 
scathed and blackened look, the heaps of ruin are 



78 BUINS OF BIBLB LANDS, 

more numerous, and dark-looking and shapeless 
masses, which, in point of magnitude and height, 
resemhle hills, are seen rising hefore us at a great 
distance on the plain. A profound silence reigns 
throughout the region — not the silence of repose, 
but of awe and terror, as if nature were conscious 
that the frown of the Almighty still rests on the 
spot where his indignation in past ages was poured 
out to the uttermost. We begin to feel the spirit 
of the place — to feel as if we had entered the portals 
of some yast temple consecrated to the yengeance 
of the Holy One, and where no one eyer stood 
without being constrained to worship — a temple 
whose floor is the blasted earth on which we are 
treading; whose walls and roof are the heayens oyer 
us, which are as brass ; whose altars are the hoary 
mounds before us ; and whose songs are the^ cries 
of the doleful creatures by whom it is inhabited. 
Here is a mass of ruin, shapeless, and towering 
high aboye the leyel of the plain; let us ascend and 
rest us on its summit. This pile will afford us a 
prospect of the ruins of Babylon. Who can tell 
what this mass may haye been once ? Perhaps the 
monarch of Babylon dwelt here ; or it may be that 
the gods of Babylon were worshipped here; but 
whateyer it once was, it is now a heap oi^ ruin. 
Now we are on its summit Let us open the Pro- 
phecy of Isaiah and read. A Bible on the site of 



MESOPOTAMIA — ^BABTLON. 79 

Babylon r Who could deny its divinity here! But 
before comparing what Babylon now is, as exem- 
plified in the scene around us, with the predictiona 
of the prophet, let us^ look back on what Babylon 
once was, as described in the page both of inspired 
and prc^ane history. Before taking a surrey of the 
ghastly relics around us, let us recall the power and 
magnificence that once flourished on this site. 

Between Babylon and Nineveh there is a close 
resemblance in many particulars. Both were 
founded in the earliest ages of the world; both 
gradually rose to a great height of power and 
grandeur, thoi^h Babylon was some centuries later 
than Nineveh in reaching the summit of her glory; 
both practised enormous oppression on the sur- 
rounding nations, especially on the Jews; both 
were filled with lewdness, luxury, and idolatry; 
and both were doomed by Heaven to desolation. 

No sooner had Nineveh declined from the rank 
she long held as queen of the East, than the sove- 
reignty was transferred to Babylon. This city was 
the equal of Nineveh in size, and its superior in 
wealth and splendour. The descriptions which 
ancient historians — Herodotus, Gtesias, Strabo, 
Diodorus — have left us are so clear and minute, 
that there is no difficulty in forming a just idea of 
the glory of Babylon. This city was a perfect 
square; and each of its four sides being fifteen 



80 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

miles in length, the space included was fifty miles 
in circuit. Its broad walls were the wonder of the 
world while they stood, and have since often been 
the theme of praise. They were a hundred feet 
in height, according to the most moderate calcu- 
lation. They were defended outside by a broad 
ditch, filled with water ; were protected by nume- 
rous watch-towers ; and contained a hundred gates 
of solid brass. Each gate opened into a street which 
ran across, straight as a rule, to a gate in the oppo- 
site wall. Thus the area of Babylon was occupied 
by fifty streets, which crossed each other at right 
angles, the squares formed by their intersections 
being covered with gardens, plantations, and pasture- 
grounds. Through the middle of the mighty city 
flowed the noble stream of the Euphrates, and added 
much to the freshness and beauty of the capital. 
Nigh the river stood the royal palaces, one on this 
side, and the other on that. Both were worthy of 
being the residence of the monarch of Babylon ; 
but the western one was of surpassing size and 
splendour, and its triple rampart was of prodigious 
strength. Near to this last, and extending along 
by the river, were the hanging gardens built by 
Nebuchadnezzar for the delight of his queen. They 
were supported on arches, and rose tier above tier, 
till they resembled natural hills, formed into ter- 
races, and planted with the choicest firuits and the 



most precious trees. In the middle of one of the 
diyisions — Diodorus says the eastern— of the city 
rose the Tower of Belus, the under part of which 
was most probably the same structure which the 
sons of Noah erected soon after the flood. Who- 
ever ascended this tower saw at his feet the most 
gorgeous picture which the wealth and labour of 
man ever created. There, covering the plain in all 
directions as far as the eye could reach, and repos- 
ing proudly beneath the beautiful sky of Chaldea, 
were the streets and squares, and palaces and 
gardens, and temples and bulwarks of '' the golden 
city" — " the glory of kingdoms." Rennell is dis- 
posed to think that Babylon, at its height, may 
have contained one million two hundred thousand 
inhabitants. Within the city were provisions for 
twenty years; and if ever there existed on the 
earth a city warranted to bid defiance to the pre- 
diction of its overthrow, Babylon might presume, 
from the strength of her defences and the number 
of her defenders, that she was entitled to do so. 
But all these availed her little when her hour had 
come. 

A hundred and sixty years before an enemy 
entered her gates, the doom of Babylon was fore- 
told by Isaiah. The style of this prophet, sublime 
at all times, is peculiarly so when predicting the 

fate of this city. The same may be said of Jere* 

p 



82 Bums OF BIBLE LANDS. 

miah, who also foretold the desolation of Bahjlon. 
Even this is no mean evidence of the truth of their 
predictions. The impostor never attains to sublimity ; 
the consciousness of fraud is altogether incompatible 
with that expansion of the moral and intellectual 
nature which gives birth to sublimity. The would- 
be prophet is perpetually haunted by the dread of 
detection, and is constantly seeking to hide himself 
in vague generalities and misty ambiguities ; he can 
never irradiate his page with that moral splendour 
which comes only from truth. How different is it 
with the two prophets we have named! — how free, 
noble, and majestic are the strains in which they 
foretold, long before she fell, the overthrow of that 
greatest and proudest of cities! The noblest images 
and metaphors come at their call. Her fall they 
compare to that of the angels from heaven, seeing 
the history of nations had then furnished no event 
which could adequately represent its grandeur and 
terror : " How art thou fallen from heaven, O 
Lucifer, son of the morning ! " The obscuration of 
her glory they liken to the darkening of the lights 
of the firmament. The earth, which had groaned 
beneath her weight, they exhibit as rejoicing at her 
overthrow. They assemble the most doleful and 
terrible emblems around her grave; and having 
spread the worm under her power and glory, her 
princes and nobles, and having breathed a lament 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 83 

full of the deepest tenderness and pathos over her 
ruin, they retire, bowing reverently down before 
the holiness of Him who had overthrown her, leav- 
ing Babylon to the dragons of the wilderness, by 
whom she was henceforth to be inhabited. It is 
only a small part of the prophecy we can here 
quote. 

" Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of 
the Chaldees' excellency, shall be as when God 
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It shall never 
be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from 
generation to generation : neither shall the Arabian 
pitch tent there ; neither shall the shepherds make 
their fold there. But wild beasts of the desert 
shall lie there: and their houses shall be full of 
doleful creatures ; and owls shall dwell there, and 
satyrs shall dance there. Thou shalt take up this 
proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, 
How hath the oppressor ceased I the golden city 
ceased!" 

The conqueror of Babylon was foretold by name; 
a rare circumstance in prophecy : " Thus saith the 
Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus." The forces he 
was to lead against her were also named: " Go up, 
O Elam; besiege, O Media." The time when Baby- 
Ion was to be overthrown was also fixed : " It shall 
come to pass" said Jeremiah, " wheti seventy years 
are accomplished^ that I will punish the king of 



84 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Babylon and that nation^ saith the Lord." This 
prophecy was delivered in the fourth year of Jehoi- 
akim, and seventy years after that date the united 
hosts of Persia and Media, under Cyrus as their 
leader, appeared before the walls of Babylon. Cyrus 
soon became aware that famine would be his most 
effective weapon of assault; accordingly, he drew a 
trench around the city, fortified with towers, to pre- 
vent the flight of the inhabitants. The prophet had 
said : " Let none thereof escape." Weary of the de- 
lay which this method of strategy imposed, Cyrus em- 
ployed every art to draw forth the men of Babylon 
and join battle in the open plain; but, as the prophet 
had foretold, this they declined: " The mighty nien. 
of Babylon have forborne to fight^ they have re- 
mained in their strongholds^ they have become as 
tcom^n/* Two years had now been spent before 
the place, and no progress whatever made in the 
siege. In the perplexity occasioned by this waste 
of time, it was suggested that the course of the 
Euphrates, which flowed through the city, should 
be tm-ned, and thus the troops would be able, in the 
dry bed of the river, to march into the city under the 
walls. This was precisely what the prophet had 
foretold, although unknown to Cyrus: " That saith 
to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers^ 
A drought is upon her waters, atid they shall be 
dried up." The task was a Herculean, and almost an 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 85 



impossible one; for the riyer was a quarter of a mile 
broad, and twelve feet deep : yet no sooner was the 
proposal made, than Cyrus resolved on attempting 
it An immense trench was dug, and all was now 
ready for turning off the waters of the Euphrates 
from their accustomed channel which led under- 
neath the walls into the city. All was ready, we say, 
but Cyrus knew that an annual festival, the night of 
which the Babylonians were accustomed to spend 
in revelry and wine, was nigh, and he fixed on 
this night for the execution of his project. The 
night came — ^the revels of the feast began — ^the 
inhabitants of Babylon were speedily drowned in 
wine, and buried in sleep ; the waters of the Eu- 
phrates were turned off — ^the troops were marched 
along the dry bed of the river, and without a blow 
being struck to oppose their entrance, they passed 
on and stood within those walls which all their 
strength could never have battered to the ground. 
Thus the city at last fell an easy prey: ^^ J will 
make their feasts^' said Jehovah by his prophet; 
'^ and I will make them drunken^ that tlt^y may 
rejoice and sleep a perpettml sleep^ and not wake, 
saith the Lord. I will bring them down like 
lambs to the slaughter. I will make drunkefi her 
princes^ and her wise men^ her captains^ and her 
rulers^ and her mighty men^ and they shall sleep a 
perpetual sleep" 



S6 RUINS OP BIBLE LANDS. 

Can any one compare the prophecy "with the 
facts — and to the facts no suspicion can attach; 
they are given by Herodotus and Xenophon, men 
who perhaps never saw a copy of the Old Testa- 
ment — and doubt the inspiration of the prophet ? 
Though any one had been rash enough to hazard a 
prediction that this great city would be destroyed, 
who would have ventured to 1^'s. the year — to 
name the conqueror ? — who could have pointed to 
the lands from which the invading armies should 
come; and especially, who could havp hit upon the 
singular expedient by which the city was taken — 
an expedient which did not occur to Cyrus himself 
till after he had spent two years before the place, 
and tried every other stratagem in vain for taking 
the city ? Although Cyrus had sat down imme- 
diately on the capture of the city, and detailed the 
manner in which it had been taken, he could not 
have given the particulars more exactly; perhaps 
not so fully, and certainly not with so much beauty 
and sublimity, as they were given a century and a 
half before by Isaiah. 

The history of the city, from the time when it 
was taken by Cyrus, has been in exact accordance 
with the prophecy respecting it. The night was 
to overtake Babylon not all at once — it was to sink 
down by slow degrees. First she declined from the 
rank of an imperial to that of a subjugated city : 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 87 

"aSi/ in the dust; there is no throne, daughter 
of the Chaldeans" Next came Darius, who, pro- 
voked by her disposition to revolt, greatly reduced 
the height of her walls, and thus gave a presage of 
the complete fulfilment of the prophecy, now long 
since accomplished : " The broad walls of Babylon 
shall be utterly broken" The desecration of her 
shrines and the demolition in part of her famous 
temple by Xerxes, fulfilled the prediction : ^^ I will 
punish Bel in Babylon" Then came the attempt 
to heal her wound, as had been foretold ; w^hich, 
however, could not be healed. Alexander conceived 
the design of making Babylon the metropolis of his 
great empire. Ten thousand workmen were already 
employed in the task of its restoration, when the 
death of the monarch arrested the progress of the 
undertaking. After this, the rise of Seleucia on the 
Tigris, which led to the transportation of the mate- 
rials of Babylon to the new site, rapidly accelerated 
its decline. A Parthian general is said, about a 
century before Christ, to have demolished most of 
the fabrics which remained. At the beginning of 
the Christian era it was mostly deserted. In the 
fourth century, its vast area, which was still enclosed 
by the remains of its walls, was a hunting ground of 
wild beasts. Thus did her glories wane, as prophecy 
foretold ; shade gathered after shade, till at last the 
once mighty Babylon disappeared altogether from 



88 BUINB OF BIBLE LANDS. 

the eyes of men ; and now that modem discorery 
has lifted up the yeil, and allowed us to survey her 
blackened site and ghastly remains, where shall we 
find words to describe the scene around us half so 
forcible and true as those employed long since by 
the prophet? "Babylon shall become heaps, a 
dwelling place for dragons. Thy pomp is brought 
down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols : the 
worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover 
thee." 

On the summit of this ruined heap, the page of 
the prophet open before us, and the ruins of Babylon 
around us, let us proceed to compare the one with 
the other. What feature or circumstance of Baby- 
lon's desolation has the prophet omitted ? Every 
emblem of terror and devastation on the prophet's 
page is found to be realized on the gloomy plain 
around us. In the most minute particulars does the 
resemblance hold ; so that a painter who had never 
trodden the blasted wilds of Chaldea, and never 
climbed the hoary mounds of Babylon, could, 
simply by studying the prophet, produce a most 
impressive and truthful picture of Babylon's ruin. 
Did the prophets foretell that Chaldea should be 
" a dry land ? " Look over that plain. It is crossed, 
you perceive, by the embankments of its former 
canals, but these canals are dry — the waters of the 
Euphrates no longer irrigate its soil; it is a sterile 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 89 

expanse, here sown with nitre, there blackened bj 
the crumbled remains of the bituminous materials 
which composed its cities. ^^ This country is so 
dry and barren," says Rauwolf, " that it cannot be 
tilled." Did the prophet foretell that Babylon 
should become *' pools of water?" — a prediction 
apparently inconsistent with the preceding. Look 
here; the Euphrates at the season of flood oyerflows 
its banks, and forms lakes here and there amidst the 
ruins. These pools, Mignan informs us, are the re- 
sort of flocks of bitterns : '^ I will also make it a 
possession for the bittern." Was it foretold that 
the sower should be cut off from Babylon, and him 
that handleth the sickle in the time of harvest ? — 
a most improbable prediction I Herodotus testifies 
that this plain of Babylon excelled all the countries 
he had yisited, as a land of com ; the returns being 
two hundred, and sometimes three hundred-fold ; 
but now no attempt at cultivation is, or could be, 
made on the site of Babylon, or indeed any where 
almost on the plain. The ruins of Western Asia 
abound in flocks and shepherds' tents ; but in this 
particular there was to be a marked difference be- 
tween Mesopotamia and other ruined countries: 
" Neither shall the Arahian pitch tent there: 
neither shall the shepherds make thdrfold there!* 
The ruins by which the country is overspread con- 
tain an ingredient unfriendly to vegetation; and 



90 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

where there is no pasture, there will be no retreat 
of flocks. A passing caravan may at times be 
seen, their black tents may dot the desert for a 
night, and the tinkling bell of the browsing camel 
agreeably break the silence ; but here flocks never 
depasture; and especially does the Arab avoid, 
above all things, pitching his tent near the ruins of 
Babylon, or near any of the ruined sites in its neigh- 
bourhood, so great is his horror of the evil spirits 
by whom he believes these places are haunted. 
" The solitary habitation of the goatherd," says 
Mignan, " marks not the forsaken site." In fine, 
were the palaces of Babylon to become dens of veno- 
mous, doleful, and ravenous animals? Such, on the 
testimony of every traveller, they have now become. 
Not only is it true of Babylon, but of all the ruins 
on the Plain of Chaldea, that they abound in cavities 
and caverns, which are the receptacles of owls, bats, 
lizards, hyenas, jackals; and occasionally the foot- 
prints of lions have been seen. The mouths of these 
dens are strewed with the bones and other relics of 
sheep, goats, and other larger animals. Thus do 
the wild beasts of the desert lie there ; and their 
houses are full of doleful creatures; and owls dwell 
there, and satyrs dance there. 

Before taking our leave of Babylon, let us look 
around, and survey the general aspect of her ruins. 
Here, truly, is desolation on a great scale. No one 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 91 

can adequately realize the grandeur of the scene, un- 
less he has been present on the spot. Whole cities 
haye been built from the ruins of Babylon, and yet 
the mounds in which her glory is entombed look 
like hills. No one ever stood here without having 
his mind awed and subdued by the gloomy scenery 
of the region — so vast as to be sublime — so desolate 
as to be appalling. Our point of survey is on one 
of the central mounds, which adjoins the eastern 
bank of the Euphrates. The plain around is a per- 
fect flat, covered far and near with heaps of ruins. 
These are of all shapes and sizes. Some are masses 
of undefined form — others rim on in long lines or 
embankments; some terminate in pinnacles — others 
are rounded off. But we miss here the green turf 
which mantles the remains of Nineveh ; the ruins 
of Babylon are covered with the black bituminous 
debris of the materials which compose them, and 
have all a gloomy aspect Of these mounds a few, 
in different quarters of the plain, tower majestically 
above the rest, and attract the eye by their stupen- 
dous size. It is on one of these that we have taken 
up our position. It rises seventy feet above the level 
of the plain, and its huge bulk stretches along for 
upwards of eight hundred yards. It is a rugged 
mass of ruins ; its surface covered with fragments 
of bricks and pottery; its sides deeply furrowed by 
the rain; and cleft and torn, moreover, by the Arabs, 



92 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

who have dug into its bowels in search of antiquities. 
It is named the Kasr or palace. The current opi- 
nion among those who have yisited and examined 
it is, that of all the mounds on the site of Babylon, 
this has the best claim to be regarded as the ruins 
of the great palace of the Chaldean monarchs. It 
is composed, Mignan tells us, of the finest furnace- 
dried bricks, all inscribed with unknown characters; 
and so firmly do they adhere, that it is impossible 
to detach a single brick from the mass. We may 
state, on Beauchamp's authority, that alabaster 
vessels and engraved marbles hare been found in it; 
as also passages, and a chamber with representations 
of the sun and moon, and other figures, formed of 
varnished bricks, on its walls. How solemn the 
thought, that we are walking over the palace of the 
king of Babylon, and that beneath our feet, now 
crushed and buried, is the festive hall where the 
impious Belshazzar assembled his lords and concu- 
bines, and where the fingers of a man's hand came 
forth, and wrote his doom upon the wall ! 

From two to three hundred yards west of the 
fallen pile on which we stand is the Euphrates. 
Mighty changes have happened here since the night 
that the halls beneath us rung with the revelry of 
the king and his nobles; but that stream is still the 
same — ^the same as when it bore on its bosom the 
glorious image of the ^^ golden city "—the same as 



MESOPOTAMIA — ^BABYLON. 93 

when the captive Jews sat down and wept heside 
its waters. Commencing at the palace and running 
along to the south, hy the hrink of the river, is a 
lofty emhankment — the reputed site of the hanging 
gardens; all undecked now by flower, or shrub, or 
tree. The river has encroached on this mound, and 
its face slopes abruptly to the stream. Along the 
river's edge, covered by the water, and at either 
extremity of the embankment, slabs of granite are 
found of the exact dimensions with those which 
ancient authors tell us were employed in the con- 
struction of these gardens. At the top of the bank 
are some urns, which have been laid bare by the 
action of the water, and which contain human bones. 
May not some part of these gardens have been used 
as a place of royal sepulture ? From our point of 
survey two rectilinear mounds are seen traversing 
the plain. They form a triangle, having the river 
for their base, and their apex at a distance of up- 
wards of two miles on the plain to the east. They 
enclose an area of about five miles square, on which 
are the ruins we have just described, with others of 
less note. We may be allowed to conjecture, that 
this mound forms the remains of the triple rampart 
by which, as is well known^ the great western palace 
and hanging gardens were enclosed. 

There is one feature of Babylon's desolation 
which meets us here of a touching kind. On the 



94 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

northern front of the Kasr stands a solitary tree, 
the only one that is to be seen near these remains. 
It is a species of the tamarisk, and indubitably of 
great antiquity. Its trunk is strong and gnarled, 
and crowned with a tuft of thin leaves. These 
bend over the ruins gracefully, yet mournfully, as 
if they bewailed the desolation they strive most 
ineffectually to hide. 

Of the other memorials on the plain before us, 
the most distinguished are the two which we now 
proceed to notice. On the north, at the distance of 
two miles, rises an enormous mass of ruin. It is 
termed by the Arabs Mujelib6 — " the overturned.*' 
It is one hundred and thirty-nine feet in height ; 
its figure is oblong, and its four sides face exactly 
the cardinal points. Its sides are deeply furrowed, 
and its top is an uneven flat, covered with broken 
bricks, pottery, bitumen, and glass. This mound is 
composed of mud bricks, baked in the sun, and 
mixed with straw. They are cemented with clay- 
mortar, and between every course is a layer of reeds. 
Whatever this edifice was once, whether the abode 
of a monarch, or the shrine of an idol, or the 
dungeon of the captive — and all these several uses 
have been found for it by some — it is now a den of 
wild beasts. 

Turn we now to the south; here, at the distance 
of eight miles from where we stand, towering over 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 95 

the plain, and mamtaining a kind of majesty even 
in its overthrow, is by far the most stupendous and 
imposing of the ruins of Babylon. First in splen- 
dour, we may well believe, when the plain aroimd 
was a gay spectacle of gardens and palaces — now it 
is first in ruin. The crowning glory of the golden 
city — ^now it is the most awful feature of her deso- 
lation. The grandest of her piles — now the most 
terrific of her ruins. Its golden roof, in other days, 
was the first to proclaim to the traveller that he 
was approaching the metropolis of the Chaldean 
empire — now its dark, and torn, and ruin-stricken 
top, is the first to tell him that he draws nigh the 
scene of Babylon's desolation. To the eminence 
which this fallen pile enjoys, amid the innumerable 
fabrics which here share its overthrow, not altoge- 
ther inapplicable are the words of the great poet, 
descriptive of the " glory obscured" which shone 
around the form of the arch -apostate even after he 
had fallen, and the distinction this gave him amid 
his compeers : — 

" He, above the rest 
In shape and gesture proudly eminent, 
Stood like a tower." 

If, among the heaps of ruin on this plain, there be 
any representative of the tower which the builders 
erected after the flood, and which subsequently be- 
came renowned as the Tower of Belus, being dedi- 



96 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

cated by the Babjlonians to the worship of their 
god, Be], most will agree that this mountaiii has the 
best title to be regarded as such ; and this honour 
has, without almost a dissenting voice, been con- 
ceded to it by those who have visited and examined 
it. It is called by the natives the Birs Nimrood. 
In external aspect it does not differ from the other 
mounds, unless in its greater size. Like them, it 
is covered with black debris ; its sides, like theirs, 
are furrowed deeply by the weather. Mignan, in 
digging into its base, found it to be composed of 
coarse sun-dried bricks, fastened together by layers 
of mortar and reed. It appears, however, to have 
had a casing of fire-dried bricks, cemented by 
bitumen ; and ancient historians tell us, that of such 
materials was the Temple of Belus constructed. 

There is a surprising agreement between the 
dimensions of this enormous mound and those of 
the Tower of Belus, as given by Herodotus and 
others. Its elevation, which is nearly two hundred 
feet, is much below that of the tower ; but this we 
would look for in a fallen pile. The area of its 
base, however, which is seven hundred and sixty- 
two yards, is almost exactly the same with that of 
the tower, only a little larger, the materials ha^dng 
spread in falling. On the summit of this mound 
rises a tower, composed of the finest kiln-burnt 
bricks, thirty- seven feet high. Its top is broken 



MESOPOTAMIA — BABYLON. 97 

and cleft. The other parts of the summit of the 
mound are covered with huge masses of brick, 
tumbled together, and completely vitrified. These 
masses have evidently been exposed to the action 
of the fiercest fire ; and, in the opinion of those 
who have examined the site, that fire has acted 
from above, and been, most probably, lightning — a 
singular corroboration, as it would seem, of the 
common tradition that the Temple of Belus was de- 
stroyed by fire from heaven. At all events, it is 
impossible to survey the summit of this enormous 
pile, and to see it thus scathed by fire — whether 
kindled by the hand of man or shot against it from 
heaven it is now impossible with certainty to say — 
without being reminded of Jeremiah s prophecy : 
" / will stretch out my hand upon thee^ and roll 
thee dozen from the rocksy and will make thee a 
burnt mountain." 

But though we have said. Here stood the palace, 
there "^ere the hanging gardens, and yonder rose 
the Tower of Belus — we are to bear in mind, that 
all this is to a great degree conjectural. The 
appearance of the ruins themselves bears out our 
conclusions; but when we compare the position 
assigned by ancient historians to the fabrics of 
which we have supposed the heaps in question to 
be the remains, we are altogether at fault. The 
difficulty is removed only in part, by supposing 



98 RUINS OP BIBLE LANDS. 

that the Euphrates has changed its course. No 
man has succeeded in determining the limits which 
the city occcupied : no trace of its " broad walls * 
has been found. The precise site of the *' mighty 
Babylon" will, in all likelihood, remain for ever 
unknown. What stronger proof can we demand 
that God has swept her with the ''besom of destruc- 
tion?'' 

What a spot for meditation is this ! How solemn 
the lessons taught us here, did our time only allow 
of our pondering them at length! This plain, once 
so rich in men and in cities, and in all earthly feli- 
cities — ^how deserted is it now! This site, once 
irradiated with the glories of empire, the scene 
where War first accumulated her spoils, and Super- 
stition first erected her temples — how darkened 
is it ! This is the end of ambition. This is the 
punishment that awaits pride. Here sleeps the 
man who made the earth to tremble; and gone 
down with him into the grave are all his princes 
and his mighty men. Here sleeps the warrior. 
His sword, unused, now rusts by his side; and the 
trumpet's peal falls in vain upon his slumbering 
ear — he mingles in the battle no more. Here lies 
the astrologer ; and in vain do the same constel- 
lations which, in former days, gave splendour to the 
midnight sky of Chaldea, still shine down upon this 
plain. These orbs rise and set; but he who so reve- 



MESOPOTAMIA — ^BABYLON. 99 

rently watched them of old, comes not now to gaze 
on their glory, or to read what their motions por- 
tend. He slumbers here, overtaken by a more ter- 
rible doom than the worst augury of his horoscope 
ever foreshadowed. Silent now in the streets of 
the fallen metropolis are the sound of the chariot 
wheel, the noise of the viol, and the voice of the 
bridegroom. On this desolate site Sorrow weeps 
not, Mirth rejoices not — both are alike mute. Here 
is the festive hall, mantled by the dust of ruin — but 
where are the revellers? The wine cup is empty — 
the shouts have ceased — the lights are darkened. 
And here, too, is the temple, majestic even in its 
fall ; but no priest, no worshipper is here, and the 
fire on its altar is long since extinguished. Buried 
ii\. the same profound repose, to be broken only by 
the trump of the archangel, here rest, side by side, 
the monarch and his subjects — the conqueror and 
the conquered — the prisoner and the man who opened 
not the house of his prisoners. The dark surface 
of the plain, like a vast funeral pall, covers all. 
How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder 
and broken! How hath the oppressor ceased! the 
golden city ceased 1 



CHAPTER V. 
JSaiglon— i&etof jFacts. 

" How is Sheshach taken I and how is the praise of the 
whole earth surprised ! how is Babylon become an astonish- 
ment among the nations ! The sea is come up upon Babylon : 
she is coTered with the mnltitude of the wares thereof. Her 
cities are a desolation^ a dry land, and a wilderness, a land 
wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass 
thereby. And I will pnnish Bel in Babylon; and I will 
bring forth out of his month that which he hath swallowed 
np : and the nations shall not flow together any more nnto 
him ; yea, the wall of Babylon shall Ml." — Jsb. li. 41-ii, 

'* It shall neyer be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in 
from generation to generation; neither shall the Arabian 
pitch tent there ; neither shall the shepherds make their fold 
there. Bat wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and 
their houses shall be full of doleful creatures ; and owls shall 
dwell there, and satyrs shall dance there. And the wild 
beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate houses, and 
dragons in their pleasant palaces : and her time is near to 
come, and her days shall not be prolonged." — IsA. xiii. 20-22. 



Ruins as seen on the approacli to the site — Space covered 
by them — Mr Layard on the Birs Nimrood — Tunnels opened 
in "Babel" — New investigations at the Mujelib6 — No trace 
of her walls — Scarce a vestige of her idols— Discrepancy be- 
twixt Daniel and profane historians regarding the fall of 
Babylon — Discovery of cylinders in Ur of the Chaldees — 
These cylinders completely reconcile the discrepancy — Mr 
Loftus* " Travels and Researches " — Earliest building-ground 
of the human family— Calneh — Ur of the Chaldees — Cylin- 
ders — Chedorlaomer — Erech — Discovery of palace in earliest 
style of building — Uses served by Babylon. 



BABYLON — KEW FACTS. 103 



BABYLON— KEW FACTa 

SiNOB the foregoing was written^ the plain of 
Babylonia has been visited by other travellers, 
and the ruins of Babylon have been more exten- 
sively, though not yet thoroughly, explored. 
One fact of great interest has recently been 
brought to light, which clears up in the most 
satisfactory manner a difficulty growing out of 
the conflicting accounts given by sacred and pro- 
fane historians of the fall of Babylon, and serves 
to shew how a seeming error or discrepancy may 
eventually become the strongest confirmation of 
truth. 

Mr Layard has recently traversed this plain. 
His narrative is valuable chiefly as containing a 
more minute, and, in some respects, a more 
afiecting picture of its ruin than any heretofore 
presented. The predicted overthrow has not been 
restricted to the city of Babylon — the whole plain 
has shared in the ruin that overwhelmed the 



104 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

capital, and now lies a vast, hideous but sublime 
waste. Approaching Babylon from the north, 
the first indication of its site is a hill rising huge 
and dark on the southern edge of the plain. 
Drawing nearer, its flat table-like top and per- 
pendicular sides, rising abruptly from an alluvial 
plain, shew it to be the work of man — not a 
natural elevation. Nearer yet, great embank- 
ments, the remains of walls, are seen around it ; 
and growing at last into definite shape, it an- 
nounces itself as the *^ Mound of Babel" of tra- 
vellers. Beyond, lies the city's site, roughened 
with long undulating heaps, and mountain-like 
mounds. Long lines of palms hem in the Eu- 
phrates, which is seen winding through the midst 
of the ancient city. The distant prospect presents 
a withered flowerless expanse, perfectly flat, unless 
where fretted by the lofty embankments of an- 
cient canals, or broken by the dark mounds of 
the ancient ruins. " On all sides," says Mr 
Layard, " fragments of glass, marble, pottery, 
and inscribed brick, are mingled with that pecu- 
liar nitrous and blanched soil, which, bred from 
the remains of ancient habitations, checks or de- 
stroys vegetation, and renders the site of Babylon 
a naked and hideous waste. Owls start from the 
scanty thickets, and the foul jackall skulks 
through the furrows. Truly * the glory of king- 



BABYLON — NEW FACTS. 105 



doms and the beauty of the Chaldees' excellency 
is as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.* 
Their houses are full of doleful creatures. Owls 
dwell there, and satyrs dance there I" 

From the great ruin we have mentioned, called 
by the Arabs '' Babel," and the northernmost of 
the mounds, the yet traceable remains of the city 
cover a space of three miles to the south, and of 
two miles and a-half on the east. This area would 
have formed but a mere speck in the ancient 
Babylon. Many times this space must have been 
enclosed within her walls. The city must have 
extended from the point where we stand, if not 
from a more northern limit, onward to the Birs 
Nimrood, a distance of ten miles to the south- 
west, and perhaps beyond it. What, then, has 
become of the edifices ? Those that remain, in 
the shape of huge mounds, were evidently its 
great public buildings, and lie crowded together 
as if they had stood in the heart of the city. The 
Babylonians had no access to quarries of alabaster 
and limestone, which gave durability and splen- 
dour to the palaces of Nineveh : their only avail- 
able building materials were the clay and bitumen 
of their plain, formed into brick ; and the conse- 
quence has been, that their common structures, 
reared of such perishable matters, have perished, 
and left behind no trace of their former exist- 



106 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

ence, save the dire sterility which their bitumi- 
nous particles have inflicted on the plain. 

As we have said, Mr Layard attempted a 
renewed exploration of the ruins; but with no 
great result. The Birs Nimrood stands on the 
edge of the vast marsh formed by the waters of 
the Hindigah Canal and the annual inundations 
of the Euphrates. It is a vast heap of bricks, 
slug, and broken pottery. '^ The dry nitrous 
earth of the parched plain," says Mr Layard, 
" driven before the furious south wind, has thrown 
over the huge mass a thin covering of soil, in 
which no herb or green thing can find nourish- 
ment, or take root. The whole is 235 feet in 
perpendicular height. Innumerable are the 
guesses which have been formed of its original 
form and use. After all that has been written 
about it, the most probable conjecture still is, 
that it is the temple of Belus described by Hero- 
dotus; and that, as it originally stood, it was a 
solid tower, consisting of a series of huge steps 
or terraces. It may have had a temple a-top, 
for the double purpose of astrology and wor- 
ship. M. Von Gumpach, in his observations on 
2 Kings XX. 8-11, conjectures that the sun-dial 
of the passage may have been presented to Ahaz 
by Tiglath Pileser, and may have consisted of a 
series of steps or terraces, on which an upright 



BABYLON — ^NEW FAOTa 107 

pole cast its shadow. He observes, that the 
hours were marked by the coincidence of the 
shadow of the gnomon with the edge of the steps 
(degrees). Mr Layard gives the same form to 
the restored Birs Nimrood, and asks, "Could these 
great structures have been raised for any astro- 
nomical purpose ?" On all the bricks that have 
been taken from the Birs Nimrood, the name 
and titles of Nebuchadnezzar are legibly stamped. 
This only proves, however, that he may have 
repaired the edifice ; not that he was it original 
builder. 

Tunnels were opened by Mr Layard in " Babel," 
the most northerly mound, at the bottom of the 
heap, on a level with the plain. These trenches 
exposed to view the ancient building, consisting 
of solid piers, and walls of brick masonry, buried 
under an enormous mass of loose bricks, earth, 
and rubbish. He found no remains whatever of 
sculptured stone or painted alabaster. 

In the centre of the existing ruins, on the 
river's bank, and occupying a spot which must 
have been nearly in the midst of old Babylon, 
occurs one of the largest mounds on the site. 
The Arabs call it the MujelibI, or the "over- 
turned." A solid mass of masonry, consisting 
of bricks of a fine yellow colour, and fresh as if 
put there but yesterday, protrudes above the 



108 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

debris of brick, tile, and bits of stone, which form 
the mound. Many of the bricks have a thick 
coating of enamel or glaze, and retain their ori- 
ginal brilliant colouring of red, and yellow, and 
blue, as, we know, was the manner of the Baby- 
lonians to paint the walls of their chambers. 
Mr Layard tells us that he sought in vain for 
some clue to the general plan of the building. 
Almost every brick is stamped with the name of 
Nebuchadnezzar; and as this ruin is the general 
quarry of the district, there is scarce a house in 
Hillah which is not emblazoned over and over 
with the name of this monarch. If the traveller 
strikes his foot against a brick on the plain, he 
finds it has this name impressed upon it. Have 
we not here evidence of that overweening vanity 
which is imputed to that monarch in the Bible, 
and which found its chastisement in the madness 
in which it issued? Were Nebuchadnezzar to 
return, he might exclaim in astonishment, as 
once before in pride — Is this great Babylon that 
I have built for the house of the kingdom, by the 
might of my power and for the honour of my 
majesty ! Are these dark mounds, this black- 
ened waste, all that remains of the glorious city 
that occupied this plain ; which men came from 
afar to see ; and which was the crowning trophy 
of my power ! *' / will cause the arrogancy of 



BABYLON — NEW FACTS, 109 

the proud to ceased Mr Layard spent some time 
in a search — which almost eyery traveller has 
engaged in, though hitherto wholly without suc- 
cess — for the walls of Babylon. Not a trace of 
them could he find. Considering the enormous 
extent and size of these ramparts, if ancient his- 
tory may be trusted, it must surprise us that 
they have so completely disappeared. " Cast her 
up as heaps: destroy her utterly, ^^ ^^ Her foundor 
turns are fallen, her walls are thrown down,^ *^The 
broad walls of Babylon shall he utterly broken^ 

Babylon was the " land of graven images," and 
her inhabitants were " mad upon their idols," and 
yet scarce a statue or painting of any of their 
gods remains. A mutilated figure, evidently that 
of a Babylonian divinity, did Mr Layard dig up 
in the Mujelib6 ; but, with this exception, scarce 
a graven tablet or statue has turned up in all the 
vast heaps of ruins. *^ All the graven images of 
her gods he hath broken unto the groundj** 

We have alluded to a discrepancy betwixt 
inspired and profane writers on the subject of 
the fall of Babylon, which has long defied solu- 
tion. It is in connexion with this difficulty that 
the most important Chaldean discovery of recent 
times has taken place; and a solution having 
been obtained, the difficulty has now been trans- 
formed into a striking confirmation of the sacred 



110 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

narrative. According to Daniel, Belshazzar was 
king of Babylon when the city was taken ; and 
the prophet has described the revel which was 
held in the royal palace on the very night on 
which the besiegers entered and put the monarch 
to the sword. But Herodotus and Berosus give 
a totally different account of the matter. They 
tell us that Nabonidus was king at the time : that 
he was not in the city, but in the open country, 
advancing with an army to raise the siege; and 
that being met by a superior force he capitulated, 
and had an honou]:able retirement allowed him. 
There was no reconciling of these two state- 
ments ; one of them, it was said, must be wrong. 
If Nabonidus was king, how could Belshazzar be 
king 1 and if the monarch was without the walls, 
taking measures for the relief of his capital, how 
could he be within, rioting with his nobles 1 If 
the historian has spoken truth, the prophet must 
have spoken error. And here we have two 
against one; for both Herodotus and Berosus 
testify that Nabonidus was king of Babylon when 
the city was taken by Darius the Mede. But 
mark what happened. Three years ago two clay 
cylinders turned up in the ruins of Ur of the 
Chaldees, and the cuneiform inscription on these 
cylinders, as translated by Rawlinson, is to this 
effect — namely, that the eldest son of Nabonidus 



BABYLON — NEW PACTS. Ill 

was named Bel-sher-ezer, and that he was admitted 
by his father to a share in the government. The 
Bel-sher-ezer of the cylinders is undoubtedly the 
Belshazzar of Daniel. It thus appears that Bel- 
shazzar was joint king with his father; and being 
so, what arrangement so likely to be adopted, 
when the Medo-Persians advanced to besiege 
Babylon, as that the one king should remain in 
the city and conduct the defence, while the other 
should employ himself in raising an army in the 
provinces, and fall upon the rear of the Medo- 
Persians? Thus the discrepancy vanishes. Not 
only is the difficulty solved — it becomes a proof 
of a most satisfactory kind, that the Book of 
Daniel was written from original and independent 
sources. Had the author been an impostor, and 
had the book been written, as some have said it 
was, long after the events predicted in it took 
place, the author undoubtedly would have fol- 
lowed the most credible authorities within his 
reach, and so would just have repeated the story 
of Herodotus and Berosus, and we should have 
heard nothing of Belshazzar, or his impious feast 
and miserable end. But living at the time, and 
living in Babylon itself, and an eye-witness of the 
feast which ended so tragically, he describes what 
he saw; and more than two thousand years after- 
wards^ two cylinders of clay, with contemporary 



112 Bums OF BIBLE LANDS. 

writing upon them, are discovered in the ruins 
of an ancient Chaldean city, which verify his 
statement. 

The recent appearance of Mr Loftus' "Tra- 
vels and Besearches in Chaldea and Susiana," 
enables us to supplement this part of our sub- 
ject with notices of the most recent discoveries 
in the Lower Mesopotamia. Tliis unquestion- 
ably is the oldest region on the earth, having 
been the building ground of the human family 
in the age after the flood. Here their traces 
still remain uneffaced in debris-covered build- 
ings, and writings whose meaning has been wrapt 
up for ages in the mystery of the cuneiform cha- 
racter. These monuments are rather beyond our 
proper field, which is that of " Fulfilled Pro- 
phecy ;" but when we think of the high anti- 
quity with which they stand connected, and the 
evidence they afibrd of the truth of Scripture his- 
tory, we are unable to resist the temptation of 
turning aside to behold objects so august and 
venerable. 

Let us visit first the ruins of Niffar, about 
sixty miles to the south-east of Hillah. This, 
according to Sir Henry Eawlinson, is the Calneh 
of the Bible. The ruins are found on the line 
forming the northern boundary of the Chaldea 
of antiquity. It was the capital, according to 



BABYLON — NEW FACTS. 113 

Rawlinson, of the region, and bore the name of 
Belus, and was the true site of that tower which 
was begun by those who said, " Go to, let us 
build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach 
unto heaven." The ruins of the tower have not 
been identified. The existing remains on this 
site are those of the edifices erected by the ear- 
liest king of whom the cuneiform inscriptions 
give us any notice. His name has not yet been 
deciphered, but his era appears to have been 
as early as b.o. 2300. The city was called Tel 
Anu, from the god Ann, the name under which 
Noah was worshipped by his idolatrous descend- 
ants. The Babylon that afterwards arose on the 
banks of the Euphrates borrowed its name, Raw- 
linson thinks, from this earlier Babel, and origi- 
nal head of the kingdom of Nimrod. The only 
objection to the theory that makes Babel and 
Calneh identical, is, that they are mentioned as 
two separate and distinct places in the list, in 
Genesis, of the earliest cities built by man. 

We next transport ourselves to a group of 
ruins on the right bank of the Euphrates, near 
where it is joined by the Shat-el-Hie, a branch 
of the Tigris. The ruins are about half-a-mile in 
diameter. They include, as the most remarkable 
object, an erection seventy feet high, which is the 
only example of a Babylonian temple, in tolerable 



114 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

preservation, not wholly covered up. In form it 
is a parallelogram, and, like all edifices of true 
Chaldean origin, one of its comers points due 
north. It consists of two massive storeys, the 
lower one twenty-seven feet high, and the upper 
fourteen. It was in this ruin that the cylinders 
were found that solved the famous difficulty to 
which we have referred above, for this site is the 
** Ur of the Chaldees." The cylinders were found 
about six feet below the rubbish which covers the 
top of the edifice, standing one in each comer of 
the building. Their inscriptions, as read by Sir 
Henry Rawlinson, disclose to us an antiquity far 
more remote than any other writing, save the 
Bible, has yet brought before us. Here are traces 
of the first migrations of mankind. A branch of 
the Cuthito family settled here, either in the way 
of invasion or colonisation, led probably, as the 
Bible hints, by Nimrod. These cylinders, more- 
over, have put us in possession of a series of 
kings from Urukh, B.C. 2230, to Nabonidus, 
under whom Babylon fell, B.C. 540, and in this 
list occurs the name of Kudurmapula, the " ra- 
vager of Syria," whom Sir Henry identifies with 
the Chedorlaomer of Scripture. The name Hur 
occurs on the cylinders, identifying the site with 
that " Ur of the Chaldees " where the « Lord of 
glory" appeared unto Abraham, and called him 



BABYLON — NEW PACTS. 115 

to leave the *' land of his fathers." Proofs are 
found in these ruins of the idolatry into which 
the Chaldeans had already sunk, and which ne- 
cessitated the separation of the chosen seed; for 
this very building, and similar ones on surround- 
ing sites, were temples dedicated by king Urukh 
to the moon. 

An hundred and twenty miles south-east of 
Babylon is Warka, which Sir Henry Rawlinson 
takes to be the Erech of Scripture. The ruins 
are next in magnitude and importance to those 
of Babylon. On the summit of the principal 
edifice the spectator can trace the ancient walls, 
which appear to have been a huge embankment 
of earth, some six miles in circumference, and 
still forty feet high in some places. Far beyond the 
line of walls extended the city, for the traces of 
the suburbs are to be seen outside. The enclosed 
area is occupied with undulating mounds, brown 
and scorched by the sun, and cleft by innumer- 
able channels and ravines. Mr Loftus laid bare 
on this site the fa9ade of an ancient building, 
which was the more interesting, that it gave us 
for the first time a full view of the exterior of a 
Babylonian palace, and a correct idea of the style 
of the earliest builders. It was simple to rude- 
ness. Ornament there was none, save the column, 
and it appeared in the most primitive form, 



116 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

without cornice, or capital, or diminution of 
shaft, and not hewn, but brick-built. On this 
site, too, traces have been found of that idolatry 
into which mankind so early and unhappily 
lapsed. 

How impressive to mark how all beings and 
all societies on earth are wielded by God for his 
own ends ! Babylon, when a flourishing power, 
was made by God the instrument of chastising 
the chosen people j and now, when she lies in 
ruins, she becomes the means of confuting and 
silencing the gainsayer. Even she is made a 
labourer in the great work of elevating the 
species : that mighty void where the earliest 
kingdoms stood — that vast physical ruin in the 
midst of the earth has its moral uses. It authen- 
ticates on a great scale the Bible's truth: and 
that is an end a thousand times more important 
to the ultimate and general good of the world 
than would the occupancy meanwhile of this fair 
region with cities and men. 

Her ruins are more than classic — they are 
sacred; and Layard has well described the emo- 
tions which cannot but be awakened in the mind 
of every traveller by a visit to the scene of so 
many great and solemn eventa " Here," says 
he, " Nebuchadnezzar boasted of the glories of 
his city, and was punished for his pride. To 



BABYLON — NEW FACTS. 117 

these deserted halls were brought the captives of 
Judea. In them, Daniel, undazzled by the glories 
around him, remained steadfast to his faith, rose 
to be a governor among his rulers, and prophe- 
sied the downfall of the kingdom. There was 
held Belshazzar's feast, and was seen the writing 
upon the wall. Between those crumbling mounds, 
Cyrus entered the neglected gates. Those mas- 
sive ruins cover the spot where Alexander died." 



CHAPTER VI. 

araftia— aCIjt EalimaelitM. 

"And also of the son of tbe bond-ircimaa will I make it 

DatioD, because he is tfa; seed And Qod was with 

the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderoeaa, and be- 
came an archer. And he dwelt la the wildemeaa of Faran." 
—G»H. Ill 13, 20, 21. 

" And the angel of the Lord said ante ber, I will mnltiplj 
thy seed exceedingly, that it ahall mil; ii<.'uuiiili!:i'i''K(irnm1- 
titnde. .... And he nill be a wild man his hand will be 
Rgainet erer; man, and every man's huid against hi m and 
he Bball dwell in the preBCDce of all his bretbien." — Gstl. 
iri. 10, 12. 



arafiia — 3Efte Igiftnaeliteg. 

The great wilderness — Arabia the Stony— Arabia the 
Happy — Arabia the Sandy — Prophecy regarding Ishmael — 
Numerous ancient nations extinct : the Ishmaelites still 
exist — " A great nation " — " A wild man "-^Still dwells " in 
the presence of all his brethren " — Day-spring awaiting these 
children of the desert. 









fit 






« 



ARABIA— THE ISHMAELITES. 

Now we shall leave the land of Chaldea, with all 
the glory which its flowerless turf covers, and turn 
our steps into the desert. We are now on the bosom 
of the mightj wilderness, which interposes an ex- 
panse of naked sands eight hundred miles in breadth, 
between Babylon and the green banks of the Nile. 
Here there is no scenery to detain us by its beauty, 
and no ruins to divert us from the straight course. 
The country contains only one monument of pro- 
phecy, and of that only shall we speak. We mean 
its people. 

Arabia, which we are now traversing, extends 
from the Euphrates on the east, to the shores of the 
Red Sea on the west. Its southern boundary, 
which is about a thousand miles in extent, is washed 
by the waters of the Indian Ocean. This vast 
peninsula is commonly divided into three regions : 
Araby the Stony, which adjoins on the south the 
lands of Judea and Moab, and consists, as its name 



122 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

imports, of naked mountains and plains, coyered 
with flints. Araby the Happy, which is a breadth 
of hilly territory, extending along the shores of the 
Bed Sea and the Indian Ocean, its fertile soil 
covered with plantations, pasture-grounds, and 
corn-fields. It is also rich in yarious gums and 
spices; and this has obtained for it the name of the 
Land of Frankincense. Araby the Sandy, which 
includes the extensive tract which stretches from 
the mountains of Edom to the shores of the Persian 
Gulf. This is a boimdless expanse of sand, with- 
out shade or verdure, broken at long intervals by a 
solitary foimtain, which creates a little patch of 
green in the midst of the desert, and nourishes, it 
may be, a few palm trees, whose shade is not less 
grateful to the traveller in these burning wastes than 
are the waters which flow beside them. Such is the 
land which, from the days of their progenitor, has 
been the dwelling of the Ishmaelites. 

Now, as we pass on, we shall open the Volume 
of Prophecy, and test the truth of what is fore- 
told in it concerning the venerable people among 
whom our path lies. Here we find it predicted of 
Ishmael : " I will make him a great nation. He 
will be a wild man; his hand will be against every 
man, and every man's hand against him." — " He 
shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren." It 
is admitted that the prophecy regards not so much 



ARABIA — THE ISHMAELITES. 123 

Ishmael^ as the posterity of Ishmael ; and in them 
are we to look for its accomplishment. 

It is now four thousand years since the predic- 
tions we have just quoted were given. Since that 
time how many great changes have come to pass ! 
The world has been turned upside down.- Many 
nations not then in existence have come into being, 
have flourished, and gone to their graves. Vio- 
lence and War have gone round the earth, breaking 
its kingdoms in pieces, and making an utter end of 
their inhabitants. Many nations we now search for 
in vain ; they were flourishing once, but their place 
at this day is nowhere to be foimd ; and as we pass 
over the borders of Arabia, we tremble lest its peo- 
ple also should have passed away. The once rich 
Plain of Babylon, from which we have just come, 
is now a desert, without an inhabitant ; and after 
the depopulation of so rich a coimtry, can we ex- 
pect to find this wilderness peopled ? The warlike 
nation of the Chaldeans is now extinct ; and surely 
it is too much to hope that the simple children of 
the desert shall have maintained their existence ? 
Yet so did the Word of the Lord foretell ; and his 
word cannot fall to the ground. Here, on the 
bosom of the same sands which were trodden by 
their father Ishmael, are the black tents of the 
roving tribes of his descendants. How astonishing 
is this ! Those who were once 'the masters of the 



124 Bums OF BIBLE LANDS. 

world have perished ; yet the Islimaelites are still 
numerous, and powerful, and independent. What 
a monument are they of the truth of prophecy ! 

"I will make him a great nation." — The de- 
scendants of Ishmael speedily became numerous and 
powerful. They were not the first, it is true, to 
people the Arabian peninsula — its original inhabi- 
tants were the descendants of Joktan, the son of 
Heber ; but Ishmael having settled in this part of 
the world, his posterity soon became, and have ever 
since continued to be, the most powerful and dis- 
tinguished branch of the Arabian nation. Their 
importance as a people may be judged of from the 
fact that, when the rest of the nations fell before 
the four great monarchies as they successively arose, 
the Ishmaelites alone stood erect. And when the 
last of these monarchies had fallen, the posterity of 
Ishmael took their turn in founding an empire, 
which, in point of greatness, rivalled that of Rome. 
In little more than a hundred years did this re- 
markable people carry their arms and their reli- 
gion, their literature and their science, from the 
banks of the Euphrates to the shores of the Atlan- 
tic — from the borders of India to the confines of 
France. And even at this day, though they have 
now retired within their native deserts, indelible 
traces of their former power and influence are 
found in many of the nations of Europe. 



ARABIA THE ISHMAELITBS. 125 

" He will be a wild man." — There is no other 
single term which could depict the whole character 
of the Arab — " a wild man/* A fact so notorious 
as this stands in need neither of illustration nor 
proof. The desert, to this day, is his dwelling. 
He still spurns the restraints of society, and still 
prefers the sweets of a roving independence, and 
the precarious supply which plunder or his flocks 
may yield, to the order, security, and plenty of a 
settled mode of life. Time has mellowed and 
greatly altered the character of other nations — ^has 
induced on them a gravity and sobriety ; but it has 
not tamed the Ishmaelite ; his temper is still as 
fiery, his habits are as lawless, and his manners as 
patriarchal, as they were four thousand years ago. 
There is not a single encampment on the face of the 
desert we are now traversing, the interior of which 
does not exhibit, at this day, the same domestic 
scenes which are so beautifully depicted on the first 
pages of the Bible. His hand is against every man, 
and every man's hand is against him. Even to this 
day he is not reconciled to his brethren of mankind. 
They regard him as an outlaw : he holds them in 
defiance. Where is the traveller who would venture 
into his deserts without an escort? where is the peo- 
ple with whom he is in alliance ? and where is the 
nation which has not smarted from his violence, and 
attempted, but failed, to chastise him ? 



126 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

"He sliall dwell in the presence of all his 
brethren/ —The precise import of this part of the 
prophecy is somewhat doubtful. It has commonly 
been understood as intimating that the Ishmaelitish 
nation should never be conquered. Granting that 
this is the sense of the prediction— of which, how- 
ever we are by no means certain — there can be no 
doubt as to its fulfilment. The tide of Persian, of 
Macedonian, of Roman conquest, each in its turn, 
approached these deserts, but was rolled back from 
their border. All attempts — and many have been 
made — to impose upon the free necks of the sons of 
Ishmael the yoke of foreign dominion, have signally 
failed. Nothing can be more explicit on this head 
than the testimony of one whom all will acknow- 
ledge to be an unexceptionable witness : " The 
body of the nation," says Gibbon, " has escaped 
the yoke of the most powerful monarchies : the 
arms of Sesostris and Cyrus, of Pompey and Trajan, 
could never achieve the conquest of Arabia." But 
to us it is not clear that the prophecy refers to the 
national independence of the Ishmaelites : we are 
rather disposed to view it — as indeed appears to be 
most agreeable to the obvious meaning of its terms 
— as intimating that the inheritance of this people 
should immediately adjoin, or lie before that of 
their brethren. In this sense Ishmael himself 
dwelt in the presence of all his brethren ; so did his 



ARABIA — THE ISHMAELITES. 127 

immediate descendants ; and so do his posterity at 
this day. Arabia is occupied by two races — the 
descendants of Joktan, and the descendants of 
Ishmael. These tribes are related to each other, 
being sprung from the same venerable stock — 
Heber. In the presence of the Khatan tribe, their 
brethren, do the Ishmaelites still dwell. But doubt- 
less the prophecy implies, if it does not bear as its 
first meaning, the continued national existence and 
independence of the posterity of Ishmael. At war 
with the world, they yet have defied all attempts to 
root them out of their patrimony. Of the nations 
in existence when the prophecy was given, we can 
find only one in addition to the Ishmaelites in 
existence now, and not one inhabiting the country 
it then occupied. But after the lapse of four thou- 
sand years, we behold the descendants of Ishmael 
pitching their tents in the same desert, and dwell- 
ing in the presence of all their brethren ! 

But now we draw nigh the border of Egypt, and 
we leave the wilderness behind us, with its black 
tents and its patriarchal tribes. Alas ! they who 
never submitted to the arms of the conqueror have 
long borne the yoke of superstition. Soon may 
that yoke be broken ! We have seen the fulfilment 
of one prophecy: may we soon behold the fulfilment 
of another : " They that dwell in the wilderness 
shall bow before Him. The multitude of camels 



138 RUINS or BIBLE LASDB. 

shall cover thee, the dromedariea of Midian and 
Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come : they shall 
bring gold and incense ; and they shall show forth 
the praisee of the Lord. All the flocks of Kedar 
shall he gathered t<^ether unto thee ; the rams of 
Kebaioth shall minister unto thee ; they shall come 
up with acceptance on mine altar, audi will glorify 
the house of my glory ! " Bidding adieu, tbeo, to 
these sands and their benighted children, on whom 
a blessed day-spring is yet to shine, we go forward 
to the banks of the Nile — the land from which Ood 
brought his Vine, whoae boughs shall jet fill the 
earth. 




CHAPTER VII. 



(tl 



The burden of Egypt. Behold, the Lord rideth upon a 
swift cloud, and shall come into Egypt : and the idols of 
Egypt shall be moved at his presence, and the heart of Egypt 

shall melt in the midst of it And the Egyptians will 

I give over into the hand of a cruel lord ; and a fierce king 
shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the Lord of hosts. And 
the waters shall fail from the sea, and the rivers shall be 

wasted and dried up Surely the princes of Zoan are 

fools, the counsel of the wise counsellors of Pharaoh is be- 
come brutish : how say ye unto Pharaoh, I am the son of 
the wise, the son of ancient kings 1 Where are they ? where 
are thy wise men ? and let them tell thee now, and let them 
know what the Lord of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt. 
.... And the Lord shall smite Egypt : he shall smite and 

heal it In that day shall Israel be the third with 

Egypt and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the 
land : Whom the Lord of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed 
be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and 
Israel mine inheritance.'* — Isa. xix. 1-25. 



Enter Egypt— Egypt by moonlight — Day reveals Egypt's 
desolation— Early eminence of the Egyptians in mathematics, 
&o. — in architectnre — in the useful arts — Their mode of 
writing history — Prophecy of Egypt's fall — Buins of Thebes, 
the No of Scripture— Temple of Earnac — Palace of Sesostris 
—The Nile — Ruins of Memphis, Joseph's city — Revolutions 
Egypt has undergone — Ruled over by strangers — Inhabited 
by a " base " people — Egypt a witness for the Bible. 



EGTFT. 131 



EGYPT. 

We enter Egjrpt by the great highway of the 
open desert. On our left are the blue waters of the 
Arabian Gulf, and before us is a flat expanse of 
dreary country. We pass hastily over it, and soon 
the Nile, with its stripe of verdure on either bank, 
rises before us. We stand beside its waters, and 
then do we feel that we are indeed in Egypt — in 
that land oyer which the angel spread his dark 
wings, when the first-born were destroyed. Solemn 
remembrances come back on the mind. The mi- 
racles of Zoan's field reyiye before us. Ages are 
forgotten — and we seem to be moving amid the 
men and the scenes of which, in ages long gone 
past, this country was the stage. 

We arrive, perhaps, a little after noon. The sky 
is exquisitely clear, and suffused with a glow of 
rose-coloured light; a gorgeous sun-set succeeds; 
and next comes a brief but delicious twilight — ^it 
is night. The vault above us is bespangled with 



132 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

stars, which to us appear unusually large and hril- 
liant. The moon comes from hehind the Arabian 
mountains ; and as she holds her course through 
the serene firmament, sheds such a flood of rich and 
soft radiance on this fallen land as veils its desola- 
tion. The bosom of the Nile, its edgings of deep 
emerald, the groves of date and palm trees, the 
minarets of the city, the columns and walls of tem- 
ples, the summits of the pyramids, all tinted and 
beautified by the moon's resplendent glory, are 
blended into one picture of soft and majestic love- 
liness. We imagine for the moment that Egypt 
has come down to us, her beauty and splendour un- 
impaired as in the days of the Pharaohs. But soon 
the illusion is dispelled. The day comes ; the sun 
emerges from the bosom of the desert, and under 
his faithful light, Egypt appears as it is — a gigantic 
and awe-inspiring picture of commingled grandeur 
and desolation, fertility and barrenness. The Nile 
is seen contending with the neighbouring desert for 
the possession of his ancient and lovely valley, which 
every year is obliged to retreat a little before the 
advancing sands ; the fields which were cultivated 
by the ancient Egyptians are overwhelmed by the 
wilderness ; the cities lie buried beneath a mass of 
rubbish and sand; the sepulchres of the dead are 
choked up ; and groves of broken columns and 
roofless walls, covered with paintings, and sculpture, 



I 



EGYPT. 133 

and hieroglyphics, mark the site of the temples and 
palaces. 

A very cursory survey of the monuments which 
yet remain in this land, is sufficient to convince us 
that the glowing descriptions which the historians 
of antiquity have left us of the power, grandeur, 
and refinement of the ancient Egyptians, are not in 
the least overcharged. If not the country in which 
the sciences and arts were invented, there can be no 
question that Egypt is the land where they were 
perfected, and where first they flourished. Many 
of the abstruser sciences were the object of the 
ardent study of the Egyptians ; and in these they 
had made great attainments. It was in the Egyptian 
schools that the sages of other countries gleaned 
their knowledge of mathematics, astronomy, and 
medicine. Their style of architecture they carried 
to the highest excellence of which it was capable ; 
and their public monuments were erected on a scale 
of size and magnificence which have never been 
equalled. The ruins of other coimtries may rival 
in beauty, or excel in justness and elegance of pro- 
portion, those of Egypt ; but none make the least 
approach to them in their stupendous bulk, and 
solemn grandeur. And as regards its cities, it may 
be doubted whether Babylon itself greatly exceeded 
the splendours of Thebes with her " hundred gates." 
The progress the Egyptians had made in the arts 



134 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

which tend to embellish life, is testified at this day 
bj the paintings still risible in the " Tombs of the 
Kings," which are distinguished by their spirit, if 
not their accuracy, and the brilliancy of their 
colouring, and by the inimitable grace and beauty 
which they hare given to some of their statues, and 
the air of majesty commimicated to others. In 
the useful arts they appear to have been very little, 
if at all, inferior to ourselves. Their chambers 
were filled with as elegant and luxurious furniture 
as our own saloons at this day; and their tables 
testified also to their great knowledge of the culi- 
nary art. Moreover, this singular people were the 
first to compose what we cannot but regard as 
great literary works. They had produced volumes 
of history before Herodotus lived, and works of 
poetry before the age of Homer. These still sur- 
vive. Where ? it may be asked, in astonishment. 
Their public monuments were inscribed with the 
reigns of their kings — the history of their country 
in symbolical writing ; and their temples were 
covered with the most life-like representations of 
the most celebrated exploits of some of the most 
distinguished of their princes. The one we cannot 
but regard as a volume of history, and the other 
as a poem ; and no pages are so graphic as these, 
and none can be more durable. Here, on the walls 
of this temple, represented in sculpture, are the 



EGTFT. 135 

more brilliant of the warlike achieyements of Seso- 
stris. Here is the marshalling — the march — the 
fight— the agony of the dying — the triumph of the 
return — all told in marble, with a truth, and fire, and 
splendour worthy of the great father of bards him- 
self. In fine, nowhere else did power, and science, 
and art, accumulate so many trophies within the 
same space ; and here, accordingly, their memorials 
are met with in a profusion which oyerwhelms the 
imagination of the trareller, and fatigues the powers 
of the narrator. 

Let us muse an hour amid the solemn splendours 
of Luxor and Camac. But we must not allow the 
magnificence of these ruins to so engross us as that 
we shall forget the object of our visit. "What evi- 
dence have we here of the truth of prophecy? Let 
us read and compare. 

*' Son of man, prophesy and say. Thus saith the 
Lord God, Howl ye, "Woe worth the day ! For the 
day is near, a cloudy day; it shall be the time of 
the heathen. And the sword shall come upon 
Egypt, and great pain shall be in Ethiopia, when 
the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take 
away her multitude, and her foundation shall be 
broken down. Thus saith the Lord God, I will 
also destroy the idols, and I will cause their images 
to cease out of Noph ; and there shall be no more 
a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a 



_ i 



136 



RUINS OF BIBLE LANDa 



fear in the land of Egypt. And I will make Path- 
ros desolate, and I will set fire in Zoan, and will 
execute judgments in No. And I will pour my 
fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt ; and I will 
cut off the multitude of No. And I will set fire in 
Egypt : Sin shall hare great pain, and No shall be 
rent asunder, and Noph shall hare distresses daily. 
The young men of Aven, and of Phi-beseth shall 
fall by the sword : and these cities shall go into 
captiyity. At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be 
darkened, when I shall break there the yokes of 
Egypt ; and the pomp of her strength shall cease 
in her : as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her 
daughters shall go into captivity. Thus will I 
execute judgment in Egypt, and they shall know 
that I am the Lord." 

The ruins amid which we are at present seated 
are those of Thebes — the No of the Scriptures, and 
the earliest capital of Egypt. Its origin is lost in 
the obscurity of ages. Memphis superseded it as 
the metropolis of the country, though it never 
rivalled it in splendour; and even of Memphis, the 
foundations were laid at a period prior to the dawn 
of authentic history. So great is the magnificence 
of these ruins, that every one who has seen them 
declares that language is utterly unable to convey 
any adequate idea of them. The ground here is 
covered with groves of columns of a colossal size, 



EGYPT. 137 

sphinxes by hundreds, fragments of statues, obelisks, 
gateways, porticoes, and halls. Here are the re- 
mains of four large temples; one of these — the 
Temple of Camac — appears to hare excelled all the 
others in point of magnitude and splendour. This 
temple is universally pronounced to be the greatest 
ever made by hands. Noble avenues, miles in 
length, and guarded on both sides by a row of 
sphinxes, lead up to it from almost every point of 
the compass. Traversing this approach, we come 
to the grand entrance, which is formed by two 
pyramidal moles which ascend to a height of up- 
wards of a hundred feet. Some of these moles 
(for the edifice has twelve principal entrances) 
are constructed of granite, and richly covered with 
beautiful hieroglyphics and sculpture. Passing 
through the colossal gateway, we find ourselves 
in a spacious court, once adorned with himdreds of 
columns, which are now fallen. All round this 
court runs a pillared portico. In the interior is the 
main sanctuary. It is an immense hall, one him- 
dred and seventy feet by three hundred and twenty- 
nine. Its roof is composed of large blocks of gra- 
nite laid across. It is adorned with clusters of stars, 
on a green ground. The walls are covered with 
painted sculpture of a kind suited to the mysterious 
purposes to which this chamber was devoted. A 
hundred and thirty- four columns support the roof 



138 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Every column is sculptured and painted. The 
exterior walls exhibit, in sculpture, the wars of 
Barneses. Around this inner fane rise manj in- 
ferior temples. Any where else these would be 
accounted magnificent structures; but here thej are 
orershadowed bj the enormous bulk of the principal 
temple. The field of ruins formed by this single 
temple is about a mile in diameter. The other 
three temples, whose remains adjoin those of Camac, 
appear to have been of extraordinary dimensions, 
though inferior to the one we have just described. 
All agree that they must be seen, before their mag- 
nitude can be conceived of, or even credited. It 
may help to convey to the mind some idea of their 
size, to state that an Arab village is built on the 
roof of one of them — the Temple at Edfou. 

Egypt was a land of idols ; but this appears to 
have been the high place of her idolatry. How is 
the prophecy now accomplished upon this land: 
" Behoidy the Lord rideth upon a swift cloudy and 
shall come into Egypt; and the idols of Egypt 
shall he moved at his presence !" — " / will also de- 
stroy the idolsy and I will cause their images to 
cease" 

Thebes — populous No — was watered by the Nile, 
somewhat in the manner that Babylon was by 
the Euphrates ; accordiDgly, the ruins of the city 
are seen on the west of the river, as well as here 



EGYPT. 139 

on the east. Let us pass oyer the stream and spend 
a few moments in surveying them. Here, too,*are 
the remains of temples. Here is the famous statue 
of Memnon, which is said to have emitted, at sun- 
rise, melodious sounds, which, from a low and 
scarcely perceptible murmur, grew by degrees into 
the loud and clear tones of the trumpet. Here 
are colossal statues and sphinxes innumerable, half- 
buried in the soil, which ages hare accumulated 
around them. These have beheld generations rise 
and fade on the plains of Egypt ; they have seen 
dynasties sink at their feet; on them the day of 
glory has shone, and now the night of ruin darkens 
around them; still they wait here, to welcome, with 
the same look of austere majesty, the stranger 
who comes irom a far land to gaze on them ; and 
here they will remain, no doubt, till the end of time, 
shedding a dim glory on these plains — the twilight 
of a day of splendour which has passed away, never 
more to return. Here, too, separated irom the ruins 
of the city by a range of naked hills, in a low, 
winding, gloomy valley, shut in by iron rocks, are 
the " Tombs of the Kings." They are gorgeous 
halls, hewn in the heart of the mountain, richly 
adorned with painting and sculpture, and in point 
of size and brilliancy, rivalling the halls of living 
monarchs. In this, the ^^ house of his glory," lie 
Pharaoh and his princes. 



140 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Betracing our steps oyer the hills, and returning 
again to the ruins of the city, one other edifice onlj 
shall we direct particular attention to — the Memon- 
nium, or Palace of Sesostris. This is the temple we 
have already alluded to as exhibiting on its walls 
the battle- scenes of this great king. The portals 
stand wide open ; the royal guards are gone ; and 
we may pass on without challenge into the very 
presence-chamber of the monarch. But though 
living guards there are none, we pass between 
gigantic statues, which Hne the entrance, with 
folded arms, and a serene and tranquil look. We 
enter the halls of the monarch, and beauty and 
mystery beam upon us from walls and roof. Both 
are blazoned with symbolical representations — the 
signs of the zodiac, globes, stars, and other celes- 
tial representations. On the northern wall is a 
representation of Sesostris himself. He is over- 
shadowed by the boughs of the tree of life, and the 
deities are seen writing his name upon its leaves. 

Not only have the Egyptians, by the durable 
materials which they used in building, and the scale 
on which their public edifices were constructed, 
transmitted their temples to us — ^their very bodies 
themselves have come down to our day. The art 
of embalming, as is well known, was universally 
practised amongst them ; and the consequence is, 
that we may see, at this day, the forms and features 



EGYPT. 141 

of the very men by whom these mighty fabrics were 
erected — men who lived four thousand years ago — 
the kings, the warriors, the sages, and the citizens of 
Egypt. After a slumber of many ages, their remains 
are as perfect as when they were newly laid in what 
were designed to be their last resting-places. But, 
alas ! their bodies have been preserved only to be 
desecrated. Their tombs have been violated, and 
now their bones literally " lie scattered about the 
grave's mouth ;" while by some, the mummies have 
been carried into lands far distant, and which, 
when these men lived, and for ages after, were alto- 
gether imknown. But the many attractions on this 
part of our journey make us forget the resolution 
we made at starting. We return. 

The common dwellings of Thebes, formed pro- 
bably of brick, have utterly perished ages ago. 
They have left not a vestige, unless the mounds of 
earth around us can be regarded as such — a dis- 
tinction to which we think they may lay claim. 
On these mounds, and especially adjoining the walls 
of the temples — ^looking all the meaner from their 
close proximity to the memorials of such unrivalled 
magnificence — are the mud huts of the few poor 
and miserable Arabs who inhabit the site, and who 
live mainly by digging into mummy pits, and selling 
the antiquities they discover to strangers. To such 
a base end has the mighty Thebes — ^^ populous 



142 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

No" — come : ^^ I will execute jtidgmenU in No" — 
*^ I will cut of the multitude of No"—'' No shall 
he rent asunder" 

We cannot visit all the places referred to in the 
prophecy we hare quoted — all of which are now 
destroyed; hut there is one other celebrated site 
which we must visit — Memphis, the Noph of Scrip- 
ture, and the scene of Joseph's glory. 

We embark on the Nile. The noble river, ad- 
vancing with a slow and majestic pace towards the 
ocean, carries us on its bosom. The papyrus — a 
celebrated plant — still fringes the stream; the broad 
leaf of the lotus, so inseparably connected with all 
the architecture of this land, swims on the surface 
— ^its large, lovely, white blossom finely contrasted 
with the dark waters of the river. As the current 
bears us along, we pass, at intervals, mud villages, 
inhabited by Arabs ; groves of dates ; and not un- 
frequently a sycamore, whose deep shadow is wel- 
come indeed under the burning sun of Egypt. AVe 
perceive also crops of cotton, and fields of Indian 
com, with little canals running off to irrigate the 
surface ; for here the husbandman still waters the 
ground with his foot. One thing strikes us, and 
that is the deep rich verdure of the great valley 
through which the Nile flows — made lovelier, 
doubtless, by the naked sands on either side of it. 
But, lo ! the pyramids rise before us — those moun- 



EGYPT. 143 

tains of stone which hare excited the astonishment 
and wonder of all ages. They rise before us veiled 
in the same mysterj as erer — from their sides the 
clouds seem destined nerer to break up. Here, 
adjoining the pyramids, flourished Memphis — Noph 
— which, after Thebes, became the capital of Egypt 
Let us ascend one of the pyramids, and from its 
summit look oyer the site of the former metropolis. 
The ascent is toilsome enough; but the summit 
once gained, we look far and wide over the sur- 
rounding region. On the one side is the desert, 
arranged in vast steps or wares, and stretching away 
into Lybia; on the other is the valley of the Nile; 
itself a river of verdure, as Lindsay terms it, flowing 
through a vast wilderness. Immediately beneath 
us is the space once occupied by Memphis. Here 
were spread forth the dwellings, the palaces, the 
temples of Noph, interpersed with the groves 
where her sages taught; here was the prison where 
Joseph languished, the hall where he interpreted 
the monarch's dream, and the streets through which 
he rode in triumph, while they cried before him, 
^'Bow the knee!" But what remains are there 
here now of the great metropolis that once occupied 
this site? Thebes, though desolate, can still boast 
the imperishable remains of her stupendous temples; 
but here there is nothing but bare sands. Scarce 
even does a broken column remain to tell that here 



144 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

stood Memphis: ^^ Noph shall he waste and des(h 
late without an inhabitant," 

Pharaoh was "the son of ancient kings;" but 
it was foretold that his sceptre should pass into the 
hands of strangers. The Babylonians, the Persians, 
the Greeks, the Romans, the Saracens, each in their 
turn hare inraded, conquered, and governed this 
land. It is now more than two thousand years 
since Egypt was ruled by a native prince: ** There 
shall be no more a prince of the land of ^^ypt" — 
" The sceptre of Egypt shall (Upart away." 

In the seventh century, the Saracens took pos- 
session of Egypt. This people have, in every age, 
shown themselves more fit to conquer than to 
govern. Their rule oppressed the inhabitants and 
impoverished the country. To aid them in the 
task of governing, or rather occupying Egvpt, they 
imported a multitude of slaves from Circassia — the 
Mamelukes — trained them in military tactics, and 
formed them into bands, for the purpose of keeping 
the natives in subjection. These soldiers soon 
found out their importance ; and, rebelling against 
their masters, usurped the government. This hap- 
pened in the thirteenth century ; and, during the 
three hundred years following, Egypt was governed 
by this race of strangers and slaves. The country 
was next taken possession of by the Turks — stran- 
gers, too, like those who preceded them. The 



EGYPT. 145 

sultan goyems Egypt by means of a pacha. The 
person selected for this office is always one who has 
made his first appearance in Egypt either as an ad- 
venturer or a slave. The late pacha, Mehemet 
Ali, was a native of Iconium, in Asia Minor. He was 
a tobacco merchant in his youth ; and having been 
sent into Egypt by the governor of his native town, 
to assist his son, who was captain of a small troop 
which he had raised for the service of the sultan, 
Mehemet raised himself by his services to the dis- 
tinguished post he ultimately held. Thus has the 
throne of the Pharaohs, if such it can be called, 
been occupied for centuries by strangers and slaves. 
The end these rulers have steadily kept in view has 
been precisely what might have been expected — to 
get rich, and that by the most direct means; and 
these they have found to be extortion and op- 
pression. The capabilities of the country are to a 
great degree destroyed; agriculture languishes; the 
arts and sciences are extinct; and the land is now 
empty, as the prophecy foretold, of aU whereof it 
was once full — a night of sevenfold ignorance and 
barbarism has overtaken it : '^ I will sell the land 
into the hand of the wicked; and I will maJce 
the land waste^ and all that is therein^ hy the hand 
of strangers," 

This illustrious land is now the basest of king- 
doms. In Egypt there are only two classes — the 

K 



146 Bums OF BIBLE LANDS. 

conquerors and the yanquished. The former in- 
dulge in every crime which can disgrace the cha- 
racter of rulers — selfishness, rapacity, injustice. 
The latter are sunk into the most deplorahle con- 
dition. Brutalized by the wars and revolutions 
which have for centuries surrounded them, exas- 
perated by the injuries to which they are daily 
subject, stained by every vice, and groaning under 
every evil, the people of Egypt have fallen to an 
ineffable depth of wretchedness and meanness. 
Every traveller who speaks of them, loads them 
with a profusion of the vilest terms which language 
supplies. Thevenot terms them " exceedingly 
wicked, great rogues, cowardly, lazy, hypocrites." 
Of the Mamelukes, the military body whom the 
Turks long employed in the government of the 
country, Volney says : " Educated in ignorance and 
superstition, tbey become ferocious, from habitual 
murder; perfidious, from cabals; seditious, from riot; 
base, deceitful, and corrupted by every species of 
debauchery." Of the people, Volney says : " We 
may easily conceive that, in such a country, every 
thing is correspondent with its wretched govern- 
ment. The peasants are hired labourers, who only 
get what is barely sufficient to sustain life. Their 
habitations are mud-walled huts, where they are 
suffocated with heat and smoke, and often attacked 
with distempers, arising from uncleanness, damp- 



EGYPT, 147 

ness, and unwHolesome food; and to these physical 
evils are added continual alarms, the dread of the 
robberies of the Arabs, and the extortions of the 
Mamelukes, family quarrels, and all the miseries of 
constant civil wars. 

''This is a faithful picture of all the villages, and 
no less so of the towns. Even at Cairo, the stranger, 
on his arrival, is struck with the appearance of 
universal wretchedness and misery. The crowds 
thronging the streets, present nothing but filthy rags. 
Every thing he sees or hears reminds him that he 
is in the abode of slavery and t3n:anny. Nothing is 
spoken of but intestine broils, public misery, pecu- 
niary extortions, bastinadoes, and murders. There 
is no protection for life or property. Human blood 
is shed like that of the vilest animals. Justice her- 
self condemns to death without form." '* It shall he 
the basest of the Idngdoms; neither shall it exalt itself 
anymore above the nations; for I will diminish theniy 
and they shall no more rule over the nations," 

Can we not in this discern the righteous retribu- 
tion of Providence? Egypt was the first to impose 
a yoke upon the nations; not a yoke of dominion, 
but of a kind more degrading — a yoke of polytheism 
and gross idolatry. From her, as from a fountain, 
flowed all the superstition by which the earth was 
corrupted ; and now, for ages, every people which 
have become the masters of the world have oppressed 



148 BtJINB OP BIBLE LA.KDS. 

and despised her. Bat how amazing and inscrutable 
are the ways of God ! As if to atone for the mis- 
chief she inflicted on the world in early times, Egypt 
is now conferring incalculable benefits upon it. Her 
monuments, inscribed with the history of the most 
early ages, are beginning to be deciphered ; her tem- 
ples and tombs to be explored; and the first-fruits 
of a glorious harvest have been reaped, which, when 
thewholehasbeengatheredin, will make one of the 
most magnificent offerings ever laid on the altar of 
Serelation. It was only in the end of the last cen- 
tury that Yolt^re affirmed that the Egypt of the 
Bible was a mistake ; since that time, Egypt herself 
has been disinterred — the Egypt of four thousand 
years ago- — and before this awful preacher from the 
dead the Infidel stands silent and confounded. 




CHAPTER VIII. 

** I have heard a rumour from the Lord^ and an ambassa- 
dor is sent unto the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and 
come against her, and rise up to the battle. For, lo, I will 
make thee small among the heathen, and despised among 
men. Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, and the pride of 
thine heart, thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, 
that boldest the height of the hill : though thou shouldest 
make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down 
from thence, saith the Lord. Also Edom shall be a desola- 
tion : every one that goeth by it shall be astonished, and 
shall hiss at all the plagues thereof. As in the overthrow of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the neighbour cities thereof, saith 
the Lord, no man shall abide there, neither shall a son of 
man dwell in it." — Jbr. xlix. 14-18. 

** But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it ; the 
owl also and the raven shall dwell in it : and he shall stretch 
out upon it the line of confusion, and. the stones of empti- 
ness. They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but 
none shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing. 
And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles 
in the fortresses thereof; and it shall be an habitation of 
dragODS, and a court for owls. .... There shall the great 
owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her 
shadow : there shall the vultures also be gathered, every one 
with her mate." — IsA. xxxiv. 11, 12, 13, 15. 



(Strata. 

Marali — Elim — Wilderness of Sin — Horeb and Sinai — 
Mount Seir — Inheritance of Esan — Early prosperity of 
Edomites — Their capital, Petra — Greatness of their com- 
merce — Its doom — Land ot Edom as seen from top of 
Mount Seir — Its mountains naked flint — Its plains covered 
with sand — Its cities ruins — Its commerce extinct — Ruins of 
Petra — Anticipated resurrection of dead cities— Petra the 
first to rise — Reflections. 



EDOM. 151 



EDOM. 

"We recross the Nile, and, bidding adieu to tliat 
land of mystery and wonders in which we have 
made so brief a sojourn, we strike into the great 
wilderness that lies on the east of it. We are now 
treading on the path of the mighty host which God, 
with an outstretched hand, led out of Egypt. We 
have gone round the head of the Red Sea, and are 
journeying south, over a tract alternately sandy and 
stony. On our left is a chain of naked heights, 
and on our right are the blue waters of the gulf 
on the shore of which the Israelites halted and sang 
their magnificent triumphal ode, over the destruc- 
tion of Pharaoh and his army. Our path is not 
all desert ; we alight, at long stages, in some quiet 
valley, with its springs and palm trees, and its rich 
verdure, so refreshing to the eyes afler the blinding 
glare of the sands. Even here we meet with me* 
meiiUm of scenes which, though long past, are 



152 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

never to be forgotten. Here is Howara, the bitter 
fountain where the Israelites murmured, encom- 
passed with its sand mounds and its date trees ; 
and here, a little farther to the south, is Wady 
Gharendel — the Valley of Elim — where the peo- 
ple encamped, still yerdant with waters and palm 
trees. 

We go forward, and now, at a great distance, 
just peering above the sands of the desert, is a little 
point of rock. It grows taller and bigger at every 
step, till at length, what but a little before was 
only a small dark protuberance on the bosom of 
the plain, towers before us a stupendous mountain 
of granite. The mass before us, whose surface is 
of naked rock or bare sands, forms a cluster of 
peaks or mountains, which rise to a great height 
above the level of the plain. These are the moun- 
tains of Horeb and Sinai. We begin to tread 
reverently, for the desert around these illustrious 
piles has the profound calm, and we persuade our- 
selves something also of the holiness, of a magnifi- 
cent temple. The poor monks have set down their 
convent on the back-side of one of these mountains 
with a little hollow beneath, in which there is scarce 
standing-room for a few hundred persons. On this 
summit, they tell us, was the law given, and in the 
little ravine at its bottom stood the hosts of Israel. 
It is refreshiDg to turn from man's narrow concep- 



EDOM. 153 

tions to the free majesty of nature. Of the cluster 
of summits which here tower with such sublimity 
into the serene firmament oyer them, we know that 
Sinai and Horeb are of the number, though we 
cannot tell to which of these eminences that distinc- 
tion belongs. But should we select one of these 
peaks, and say. This is Sinai, we should be disposed 
to £x on Jebel Musa. It is a tall, majestic moun- 
tain, of deep red granite, with broken and furrowed 
sides. It rises almost perpendicularly about fif- 
teen hundred feet above the plain, and terminates 
in a conical- shaped top of white granite. In front 
of the mountain is the plain Er-Bahah ("Valley 
of Rest'*), on which, doubtless, the people as- 
sembled. This plain is three miles long, having 
an average breadth of from six hundred to seven 
hundred yards. Connected with it are lateral 
valleys, from which the top of Jebel Musa is visible, 
and where the people could assemble, provided 
the accommodation aiSbrded by the plain in front 
was not sufficient. Still, though we should not be 
able to fix on the particular mountain, it is some- 
thing to know that we are now gazing on the 
scenery of Sinai — on the summits and the valleys 
which then lay veiled in the darkness, or glowed 
beneath the lightnings, which attended that awfril 
event — on the plains which rang to the trumpet 
which waxed louder and louder, and quaked be* 



154 BUINS OF BIBIiE LANDS. 

neath the still more awful Voice which proclaimed 
the law. 

But our present destination is not yet reached. 
We leave the hottom of these mountains, and as 
their yenerahle peaks sink hehind us, an intermin- 
able ocean of sand spreads out in our front. Our 
course lies to the north-east ; and after traversing 
many a league of wilderness, we hail with joy the 
rugged peaks of Mount Seir, which now begin to 
be seen above the desert. Seir, to which we are 
now approaching, is a chain of mountains, terminat- 
ing in a crest of romantic peaks, which runs in a 
straight line across the desert, from a point a little 
south of the Dead Sea to the head of the Gulf of 
Akaba, the eastern arm of the Red Sea. This 
magnificent chain — for though stripped of its an- 
cient fertility, Mount Seir retains to this day a 
desolate grandeur which well entitles it to be re- 
garded as magnificent — comprises the ancient realm 
of Edom. His devotion to the chase often led 
Esau thither in his youth, and there did he ulti- 
mately settle ; his posterity, in course of time, ex- 
pelling the Horites — the first inhabitants of these 
mountains. The Edomites greatly enlarged their 
domain in after ages ; but the mountainous region 
before us, which is about thirty- six miles in 
breadth, with part of the eastern plain immediately 
adjoining, must be viewed as forming strictly their 



EDOM. 155 

patrimonial inheritance. In ancient times, the 
climate of these hills was most salubrious — their 
dews were abundant ; the mountains, up to their 
spiky pinnacles, were clothed with the olive and 
the vine; the valleys and the rocky clefts were 
covered with the richest mould; the moimtain- 
torrents were numerous ; and the sun being warm, 
the produce of these hills was very great. " Be- 
hold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, 
and of the dew of heaven from above." Such were 
the words in which Isaac, by the Spirit of pro- 
phecy, described the future inheritance of Esau 
and his posterity. The mingled grandeur, beauty, 
and fertility, which the region of Seir exhibited, 
while occupied by the Edomites, amply verified the 
words of Isaac. 

Established in this mountainous region — a fit 
home for a hardy, brave, and industrious people— 
the posterity of Esau rapidly outstripped in their 
progress to distinction, their brethren, the descen- 
dants of Jacob. While the Israelites, enthralled 
in Egypt, had neither a country nor a national 
existence, the Edomites, under the sway of their 
own princes, and enjoying in their mountain fast- 
nesses the sweets of freedom and peace, were busily 
engaged in laying the foundations of that greatness 
as a nation to which they were destined to attain. 
Their father Esau had been distinguished as a ^'cun- 



156 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

niDg hunter;" but his posterity were not slow to 
acquire the knowledge of other pursuits than those 
in which their ancestor had excelled. They rapidly 
achieved no mean eminence in arts and in arms, in 
science and in commerce, and in the wealth, refine- 
ment, luxury, and wickedness which extensive and 
prosperous commerce brings along with it. It was 
at this era of their nation that numerous and mag- 
nificent cities began to rise amid those mountains 
on whose sides, in early times, their simple proge- 
nitors had chased the prey. Of these cities, the 
most distinguished was Petra, the capital of the 
nation. This city was the centre of a commerce 
that ramified as far as India on the east, and Spain 
on the west ; and the importance and splendour of 
this city were such as befitted the gigantic traffic of 
which it was the emporium. Its romantic position, 
and the singular character and beauty of its build- 
ings, excited the admiration, and received the praise, 
both of Greek and Roman writers. It stood in a 
little hollow in the very heart of the mountains. 
To it there was only one way of approach — a fright- 
ful chasm of some two miles long, narrow, and 
overhung by gloomy precipices. Traversing this 
defile, the visitor emerged on a plain of about two 
miles in circuit, occupied by dwellings, temples, 
triumphal arches, a theatre, and numerous tombs. 
These last added not a little to the beauty of the 



city. They were hewn in l^e mountains which 
enclosed Petra, they were ornamented with elegant 
facades, and resembled, though on a much smaller 
scale, those princely halls which the kings of Egypt 
prepared for the reception of their bodies. The 
city, moreover, being much exposed to the reflec- 
tion of the sun's rays from the mountains that 
encompassed it, was cooled by artificial fountains 
and beautified by gardens. Such was Petra — it 
was the abode of royalty — the home of wisdom — 
the mart of the world — to replenish which all the 
climes of the earth sent their treasures : India, her 
gems ; Arabia, her frankincense; Kedar, her lambs ; 
Persia, her robes; Armenia, her horses; Lebanon, 
her cedars; Tyre, her purple; and Judea, her balm 
and honey. Against this region, occupied then by 
a warlike and enterprising people, and covered 
with towns — for though we have specified only 
Petra, almost every valley had its city, which shared 
in the importance and wealth of the capital — against 
this flourishing region did the prophets pronounce 
the doom of utter desolation ; and we are here to 
see whether that doom has been inflicted. 

We cannot tarry long here, therefore let us select 
a good point of view, and have the whole country 
under the eye at once. Here, in the middle of 
the chain, is a summit which overtops all the rest 
Let us ascend it. This is the very mountain on 



which Aaron died and was buried. Now we are 
on its top, and prepared to bring the prophets of 
Israel to the test of actual facts. But, first, let 
us think what it was which they foretold regarding 
this land. They foretold, Ist^ That its soil should 
be utterly wasted; 2dy That its cities should all 
perish ; 8dy That its commerce should be annihi- 
lated; 4^A, That its people should be cut off. 
Now, let us begin our survey : — If Edom be at this 
day a fertile and flourishing region — ^if her moun- 
tains be occupied by men and cities, as of old; then 
let it be acknowledged that the prophets did not 
speak by the Spirit of inspiration. But if Edom 
be a desolation, then let it be confessed that they 
were inspired. Now, look all around, you see the 
bare sides of the hills — you see how they offer to 
the winter s tempest and the summer's sun nothing 
but naked flint. Observe the rugged crests of the 
mountains, how they range around us like the 
waves of a tumultuous sea vexed by the winds. 
Turn now to the west — look immediately beneath ; 
you observe that broad valley which runs along 
the foot of the hills; you see how its bosom is 
entirely covered with sand and flints. Could that 
valley be cultivated? And yet that valley in former 
times was, in part at least, clothed with vineyards, 
and watered by streams from Mount Seir. Hath 
not Jehovah, as he said, " stretched out upon it the 



EDOM. 159 

line of confusion and the ston^ of emptiness f*' 
Turn now to the east. You perceive, looking over 
the summits of the mountains, that level plain on 
the east of them. You can still trace the enclo- 
sures of its ancient fields, and the heaps of its former 
cities. These are the fields to which the Edomite, 
in days gone hy, went forth to sow, and to which in 
autumn he returned to reap. The southern winds 
have buried them beneath the sands of the wilder- 
ness, and never more, to the end of time, shall they 
be either sown or reaped. Is not this what the 
prophets said, " From generation to generation it 
shall lie wasted** Look next, and look narrowly 
among the mountains, whether any of its cities re- 
main. You may search them all without finding 
one of them — ^scarcely will you find even ruins, 
so completely have they been destroyed : ** / will 
lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt he desolate.** 
Listen next, if perchance we may hear the hum of 
its busy people. All is silent. Nothing disturbs 
the stillness, imless, perchance, the eagle's scream, 
or the wild shout of the Arab as he urges his camel 
to quicken its pace, and pass on through this deso- 
late country. And in the awful solitude of these 
hills, it seems as if we still heard the echoes of that 
voice which cried of old : " There shall not he any 
remaining of the house of Esau,*' Of the two 
brothers who grew up together on the plain of 



160 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 



Beersheba, how different has been the fate of their 
posterity! yet that fate is in exact accordance with 
prophecy. We find the descendants of the younger 
son in every country under heaven ; but the de- 
scendants of the elder are nowhere to be found. 
None now claim descent from Esau : ^^Esau shall 
he cut off* for ever." And as to the trade of this 
coimtry : had we stood where we now stand eighteen 
centuries ago, we would have seen lines of camels 
innumerable, approaching Edom on the east — 
some with the stuffs of India, others with the spices 
of Arabia, and others with the ivory and other 
merchandise of Armenia; while, on the west of 
Edom, we would have seen them departing with 
their wares — some to Egypt, some to Greece, some 
to Italy, and some to more distant lands; but now, 
how completely has that traffic come to an end ! 
Throughout the whole extent of wilderness now 
under the eye, you cannot see a single merchant 
caravan either going or returning from Edom : " / 
will cut of from Edom him that passeth out^ and 
him that returneth" 

Now we shall descend. But stay — what ruins 
are these immediately beneath us ? Look directly 
down. You see a little plain, with a stream cross- 
ing it, and on the plain some heaps of rubbish, — a 
broken arch, a few prostrate columns; and all 
around the plain you see a perpendicular wall of 



EDOM. 161 

rock formed by the mountains; and you see, more- 
over, that the rock is hewn into dwellings and 
tombs — ^that it is covered with the most magnificent 
structures, not erected by the hand, but hewn in 
the mountains by the chisel. What ruins are these? 
Ahl these are the ruins of Petra, the capital of 
Edom. In the palaces that stood on that plain 
dwelt the Edomite while living; and in these 
tombs in the face of the cliff he reposed when dead. 
There is not now a single inhabitant on the spot. 

We are scarce near enough to see the brambles 
and creeping plants with which the ruins on the 
plain beneath us are mantled ; but the hootings of 
the owl come drearily up the mountain, and the 
eagle's scream is sounding fiercely among the hills. 
These are now the only tenants on the site of Petra. 
Every thing we see and hear testifies to the exact 
and fearful accomplishment of the doom pronounced 
on this city of old : *' Thy terribleness hath de- 
ceived thee, and the pride of thine heart, O thou 
that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that boldest 
the height of the hill! Though thou shouldest 
make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring 
thee down &om thence, saith the Lord. Also 
Edom shall be a desolation ; every one that goeth 
by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the 
plagues thereof. As in the overthrow of Sodom 
and Gomorrah, and the neighbour cities thereof, 

L 



162 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

eaith the Lord, no man shall abide there, neither 
shall a son of man dwell in it. And thorns shall 
come np in their palaces, nettles and brambles in 
the fortresses thereof; and it shall be an habitation 
of dragons, and a court for owls." 

Singular indeed is the history of this city, and 
solemn the lesson which it reads to the Infidel. It 
teaches him that, though no new miracles are now 
to be looked for, to attest the truth of rerelation, 
proofs marvellous and manifold are laid up in the 
earth around him, and are to be brought forth, 
each at its appointed hour, to shed a new beauty 
on the pages of the Bible, and to add to the eyi- 
dence by which its divinity is supported. May not 
a resurrection, not of dead prophets, but of dead 
cities, be awaiting the world ? Those who spoke 
these predictions can never return ; but may not 
those against whom they were spoken yet appear 
before us, to tender their evidence of the complete 
accomplishment of the predicted doom ? Here is 
Petra brought up from the grave, to preach to the 
nations of the earth. Here, on her ancient site, 
standing in sackcloth, is the metropolis of £dom, 
bearing her testimony to the truth of the prophets. 
That Petra, and not Isaiah — not the prophet who 
predicted the doom, but the city on which the 
doom has fallen — should be summoned from the 
grave, is surely the more satisfactory kind of evi- 



EDOH. 163 

dence, and the more consistent way of dealing with 
our understandings. It is only in our own day 
that this witness to the inspiration of the prophets 
has been raised up. Thirty-six years ago no man 
knew where Petra had stood. She had passed 
from, the earth more than a thousand years before, 
and left no trace of her existence, save the brief 
notices of her former grandeur which are to be 
found in the pages of Strabo and his contempo- 
raries. Her doom remained inscribed in the scroll 
of prophecy, but we wanted circumstantial evi- 
dence to yerify that doom in all its particulars. 
The Infidel was entitled to ask, Do owls dwell in 
her palaces? do brambles and nettles come up in 
her fortresses? But our knowledge did not extend 
beyond the general fact that Petra had disappeared. 
But Providence opened to Burckhardt the gates of 
Mount Seir, and brought Petra forth irom the grave 
in which she had been hid for upwards of a thou- 
sand years, with every particular of the predicted 
doom accomplished upon her. This is but the 
harbinger of many such discoveries. Already the 
progress of discovery has brought to light many a 
novel and surprising proof; but much yet remains 
to be done. The mounds of Nineveh and Babylon 
have yet to be explored; and we venture to predict, 
that, on being so, they shall be found to be vast re- 
positories of &cts, preserved by Providence for the 



lU 



SUINB OF BIBLE I.Ain>B. 



confinnatioD of those viho live in the last age. The 
ruina of Syria have yet to be more carefully exa- 
mined ; the graven monuments of Egypt to be de- 
ciphered — hei sculptured templesand painted tombs 
more closely inspected ; and, Trben this has been 
done, we shall find ourselves in possessioa of many 
a historic document, many a Toucher to the tnith 
of the prophets, which, meanwhile, we dream not 
of, and which will astoaish the world, and cover 
the gainsayer with confusion. 




CHAPTER IX. 

"We haye heard of the pride of Moab, (he is very proud,) 
eren of his haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath : but 
his lies shall not be so. Therefore shall Moab howl for 
Moab, every one shall howl: for the foundations of Eir- 
hareseth shall ye mourn ; surely they are stricken. For the 
fields of Heshbon languish, and the Tine of Sibmah : the 
lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants 
thereof; they are come eren unto Jaser, they wandered 
through the wilderness: her branches are stretched out, 
they are gone over the sea. Therefore I will bewail with the 
weeping of Jazer the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee with 
my tears, Heshbon, and Elealeh ; for the shouting for thy 
summer-fruits, and for thy harvest, is ^Eillen. And gladness 
is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field ; and in the 
vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be 
shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their 
presses ; I have made their vintage-shouting to oease."— IsA. 
xvi. e-10. 



Geographical position of Moab — Moab a land of TineyardB 
— ^A land of cities — Prophecy of MoaVs overthrow — Ctobb 
the Zered — Vintage of Moab ceased — Her soil nnplonghed^ 
Her cities ruins — Ruins of Ar^ the capital — Stream of Amon 
— Plains of Moab — Heshbon— Wanderers. 



MOAB. 

We shall now go to Moab; but how lies the 
country of Moab, as regards Edom ? Well, then, 
turn to the north. You perceive, at the distcmce 
of two days* journey — for here the skies are clear, 
and you can see far — the motionless surface of the 
Dead Sea, glowing like a molten mirror under the 
sun's rays, and encompassed all round by a margin 
of black mountains: that leyel country on the east 
of the Dead Sea is the country of Moab. Moab 
in ancient times was emphatically a land of vine- 
yards ; it was also a land of cities. What a goodly 
prospect did the little hill of Heshbon afford in 
former days ! The traveller who looked from thence 
counted the cities of the Moabities lying around him, 
not in scores simply, but in hundreds ; each sitting, 
queen-like, upon its little eminence, encompassed 
by vineyards and. fields of golden grain; while 
streams intersected the country, like threads of 
silver woven into the deep verdure of its plains. 



168 BUIN8 OF BIBLE LANDS. 

Let U8 hasten forward; perhaps the heaaty of Moab 
may make some amends for the frightful sterility 
of Edom. Now we are on the banks of the Brook 
Zered. Here ends the territory of Edom, and here 
he^na that of Moab. Let ns sit down on the banks 
of the stream, and read what the prophets spake 
concerning this land. 

** O yine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with 
the weeping of Jazer. The spoiler is fallen upon 
thy summer fruits and upon ihy yintage: and 
joy and gladness are taken from the plentifbl 
field, and from the land of Moab: and I hare 
caused wine to &il from the winepresses. None 
shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be 
no shouting. Woe unto Nebo! for it is spoiled. 
Kiriathaim is confounded and taken. Misgab is 
confounded and dismayed. There shall be no more 
praise of Moab. The spoiler shall come upon every 
city, and no city shall escape. Give wings unto 
Moab that it may flee and get away: for the cities 
thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell 
therein." 

Now we shall close the book, and go forward. 
We have crossed the stream, and are in the land 
of Moab. We are in the land of Moab, but where 
are the yineyards of Moab? where are her har- 
vests, her cities, her people? All are as completely 
vanished as if they had never been. How evident 



MOAB. 169 

is it that the turf beneath our feet has not been dis- 
turbed by the plough for ages! How eyident is it 
that in this land men neither sow nor reap — ^neither 
build houses nor plant vineyards ! The whole 
country is covered with sward which is green with 
luxuriant herbage during the winter rains, but 
brown and parched when the heats of summer set 
in : and beneath that turf slumbers a soil which, 
were it cultivated, would yield an hundredfold. 
We do not mean that this was its productive power 
of old — ^it is what it is able still to produce. Small 
patches are sometimes cultivated in the northern 
part of this plain; and Burckhardt was assured by 
an Arab husbandman that sometimes he reaped 
eightyfold, and sometimes even an hundred or an 
hundred-and-twent3rfold I Well, then, the harvests 
and the vintage of this land have come to an end. 
And what has been the fate of her cities? Let their 
ruins testify. Wherever we go we behold nothing 
but ruins. Every little eminence had its city of 
old; every little eminence has its heap of ruins 
now. Here, on this little mount on the left, you 
see the ruins of a temple; a gate, with the edifice 
into which it led gone; two Corinthian columns; 
and in a plain a little to the west, a stone altar, 
but without a worshipper. This was once Ar, 
the capital of Moab; and as the traveller passes it 
by he casts a glance on these memorials, and re* 



170 Bunra of biblb land& 



members the prediction: ^ Ar of Moab u laid 
watte and brought to tnUfneeT 

'Etqusl ihese mins to the banks of ihe Amon is a 
distance of twentj-fiiTe miles. The rich soil exhibits 
not a trace of cnltiyation, and is covered CTery 
where with ruins. The Bedonins and their flocks 
hare trodden these ruins nnder foot for ages, and 
now thej are mere heaps of rubbish. A prostrate 
column or the &9ade of a fidlen temple may yet 
grace some of these sites; but this is rare. The 
gloiy.of Moab is now trodden down as straw is 
trodden down for the dunghilL The palace is 
gone, and the Arab's tent is pitched where it stood. 
The citizens of Moab are cut off, and flocks are 
folded where they dwelt. Now are we on the banks 
of the Amon. We descend the steep decliyity, 
pass oyer the stripe of yerdure by which the bottom 
of the Tslley b inlaid, and climbing the Roman 
road which leads up the opposite slope, emerge on 
the northern bank. We proceed on our way, the 
path lying as before, oyer wasted fields and amid 
ruined cities. Here, on the edge of the precipice 
which OTerhangs the Amon yalley, are the ruins of 
Aroer. Before us are the plains of Moab, which 
once bore on their bosom the encampment of the 
Israelites, who rested amid its yineyards and beside 
its streams after their journey of forty years in the 
wilderness. We behold it now crossed with dry 



HOAB. 171 

torrent beds, and without a single shrub or tree to 
screen its soil from the rays of a scorching sun. 
We go forward, the path skirting the base of De- 
jebel Attarous, which rises on our left — ^the supposed 
Pisga of the Scriptures. We pass the ruins of 
Kiriathim, and Medeba, and Beth-meon, and 
Elealeh, and at last we ascend the little eminence 
on which stood, in former days, the beauteous Hesh- 
bon. Here, amid the few remaining memorials of 
Heshbon's splendour, we shall halt and take a last 
look of Moab. Under our eye is now a vast ex- 
tent of undulating country, extending to the Jordan 
on one side and the desert on the other ; its soil 
rivalling, nay, excelling, in fertility, the finest lands 
in Europe ; yet the country is a wilderness. The 
vines that covered it are perished from its soil ; the 
cities that beautified it have sunk into the earth ; 
its people, too, are extinct; and to complete its cala- 
mities, the desert has sent its children forth to 
perpetuate its desolation. These swarthy bands 
which you see roaming over it in every direction, 
and which, refusing to cultivate the soil themselves, 
will not allow others to do so, are now the only in- 
habitants of Moab : ^^ / have broken Moah like a 
vessel wherein is no pleasure^ saith the Lord, 
Moah is spoiled and gone up out of her cities ! 
They shall cry, saying^ How is it broken dotDnf* 



CHAPTER X. 

9tnmom 

'* Son of man^ set thy face agunst the Ammonites^ and 
prophesy against them ; and say unto the Ammonites, Hear 
the word of the Lord God ; Thus saith the Lord Qod, Be- 
canse thou saidst. Aha, against my sanctuary, when it was 
profiwed ; and against the land of Israel, when it was deso- 
late ; and against the house of Judah, when they went into 
captivity ; behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men 
of the east for a possession, and they shall set their palaces 
in thee, and make their dwellings in thee : they shall eat thy 
fruit, and they shall drink thy milk. And I will make 
Babbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a couching- 
place for flocks; and ye shall know that I am the Lord. 
For thus saith the Lord CK)d, Because thou hast clapped thine 
hands, and stamjted with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with 
all thy despite against the land of Israel ; behold, therefore 
I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee 
for a spoil to the heathen ; and I will cut thee off from the 
people, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries : 
I will destroy thee; and thou shalt know that I am the 
Lord.**— EzBK. XXV. 2-7. 



Enter Ammoa— Hatem of the ohmfn people — Hot doom— 
AppesnuteB of her lAndacape — Dep]iBtared bjBedauina — The 
desolation of Amman distiagulshcd from tbat of Clmldeit — 
8tat« of herruim — Bnlas of Babba.h, tfae capital, described. 



AHMON. 175 



AMMON. 

Now let UB pass on to Ammon. Our course is due 
north ; and as we go, we catch at times glimpses 
of the mountain-peaks of Judea, telling us that 
there, on the west of the Jordan, are scenes of still 
greater desolation than any on this side of that 
stream. Our course, we say, is due north; and now 
we are in Ammon. The Ammonites, like their 
neighbours, the Moabites, cherished an implacable 
hatred of the chosen people; and that exposed them 
to a doom not yery dissimilar. The sum of what 
the prophets foretold regarding this country was, 1st, 
That the land of Ammon should be a couching- place 
for flocks ; and, 2</, That the capital of Ammon 
(Babbah) should be a stable for camels. Well, we 
pass the boundary, and suryey the country. It looks 
as i^ at some former period, a gentle wind had put 
its soil in motion— somethinglike the sea ; and while 
it was rolling on in broad billows, it had been 
suddenly arrested. Buckingham pronounces it the 



176 BUINB OF BIBLB LANDS. 

best com land in the world ; but what avail the 
riches of its soil? — ^it lies untilled; and being coT&red 
with a rich spontaneous herbage, it has drawn hither 
countless swanns of Bedouins. Thus as you journey 
over Ammon, you behold only shepherds, with their 
flocks. The country has become one wide fold ; 
ererypart of it is thus occupied — its ruins, the banks 
of its streams, the open plain, all are a couching- 
place for flocks. And here you will note the nice 
distinction between the prophecy as it relates to 
Ammon and as it relates to tiie land of Chaldea. 
Both, at the time when the prophecy was given, were 
equally rich and flourishing; but it was foretold 
that there should be a distinction between the future 
desolation of each. Of Ammon, it was said that 
it should be a land of flocks ; of Chaldea, that the 
shepherd's tent should not be seen upon it ; — and 
so is it now. The plain of Babylon is so utterly 
wasted, that the shepherd's tent is never seen upon 
it; but the fields of Ammon are still depastured by 
flocks. 

The ruined sites of Ammon are not quite so nume- 
rous as those of Moab ; but they are in a better state 
of preservation. The cities of the latter coimtry 
are now mere heaps ; those of the former still ex- 
hibit considerable signs of their former importance 
— the walls of dwellings and temples, theatres, 
Roman arches, columns, sarcophagi — such are the 



AMMON. 177 



memorials still found on the sites of the country we 
are traversing. We call attention to its capital, 
because it was said: '^I will make Babbah a stable 
for camels/' Let us take its ruins in our way, and 
see whether the prophecy has been fulfilled. Tra- 
Tersing, then, the rolling plain, which has a down- 
ward slope all the way, we join the high way, or paved 
road, which leads to the ruins; this is one of those 
vestiges which Rome has left of her greatness on 
the countries which, like Ammon, became ultimately 
subject to her sway. Passing by many an Arabian 
flock, and not a few ruined sites, we come at length 
to the valley which contains the ruins of Rabbah. 
Descending over the brow of the rocky eminence 
that shuts in the valley on the east, we find our- 
selves in the Necropolis of Ammon. The valley 
runs off to the west, and is about two hundred 
yards in breadth; a stream of clear water runs 
through it, and it is enclosed all around by low flinty 
hills, on which stood the ancient fortifications of the 
city. The principal street ran along by the river; 
for here are the remains of the public buildings — 
temples, a large theatre, a portico, and other monu- 
ments, which, in point of size and architecture, give 
one no mean idea of the strength and magnificence 
of this metropolis. The rest of the valley is covered 
with the foundations of private dwellings— not one 
of which remains entire. But how are the ruins of 

M 



178 



:S OP BIBLX LANDS. 



Rabbahiion occupied? Exactly as the prophet fore- 
told. The hollow valley, the stream, and the shel- 
tering walla are strong attractions for the Bedouins, 
They drive their camels down hither by hundreds, 
not only to drink, but to be stabled in the ruins. 
The place, Lord Lindsay informs us, has an into- 
lerable stench, from the bones and carcasses of dead 
camels that lie rotting in it, and the valley is covered 
everywhere with their litter. Thus do oamels dwell 
where princes once dwelt; " I vsill make Babbak 
a itabkfor cameli," 



^jpl**^ 




CHAPTER XI. 
ffiileati anti Ba^f^an* 

'* So the Lord our GKkL delivered into our hands Og also, 
the king of Bashan, and all his people : and we smote him^ 
until none was left to him remaining. And we took all his 
cities at that time ; there was not a city which we took not 
from them, threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the 
kingdom of Og in Bashan. All these cities were fenced with 
high walls, gates, and bars ; besides tinwalled towns a great 

many All the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and 

all Bashan, unto Salchah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom 
of Og in Bashan. For only Og king of Bashan remained of 
the remnant of giants ; behold, his bedstead was a bedstead 
of iron : is it not in Babbath of the children of Ammon 1 
nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the 
breadth of it, after the cubit of a man. And this land, which 
we possessed at that time, from Aroer, which is by the river 
Amon, and half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I 
unto the Beubenites, and to the Gadites. And the rest of 
Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I 
nnto the half-tribe of Manasseh ; all the region of Argob, 
with all Bashan, which was called the land of giants." — 
Dbut. iu. 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13. 



ffitleati anti Basf^an* 

Magnificent view — Plains of Hanran — Mount Gilead — Oak 
forests — Open glades — Luxuriant pastures — Salubrity of 
climate — Basban — Conformation of country — The great Her- 
mon — Ruins of Hauran — Prophecy of reTival of hills and 
valleys of Israel. 



GILEAD AND BASHAN. 181 



GILEAD AND BASHAN. 

Now we bid adieu to the City of "Waters, and 
pursue our way over the fertile and level plain 
which lies on the north of it. The magnificence of 
^e yiew which here bursts on the sight almost 
baffles description. The eleyation of this tract is 
great, and beneath us are the vast plains of the 
Hauran, besprinkled with towns (not one of which, 
however, is inhabited), and walled in on the north 
by the snow^ peaks of Anti-Libanus. The country 
has now ceased to be a plain, and become mountain- 
ous. This region of wooded hills, and green slopes, 
and dells into which the mountain torrents descend, 
on which we now enter, is the ancient Mount 
Gilead. We are charmed by the variety and beauty 
of the scenery — ^these noble forests of oaks and pis- 
tachios — ^these open glades, covered with luxuriant 
herbage — these valleys, with their cascades and 
streams — ^these ruins, which bespeak this region in 



182 Bunro of biblb lands. 

former days the seat of opulent towns. We are 
OTidently in a land of amazing natural fertility; for, 
without the hand of man to deck or culture it, 
it is beautiful and rich. We feel it to be healthful, 
too, as well as beautiful. Orer head is a dear deep 
blue sky, and around us is a breezy atmosphere, 
which tempers the heat of noon. But we must go 
on our way. We leave this hilly region behind us, 
and descend on the plains of Bashan. These plains 
slope gradually down to the Jordan on the west; 
while on the east, by an easy ascent, they grow into 
the Tast level territory of the Hauran; in front, at 
the distance of some eighteen miles, they swell into 
a series of little heights, which rise gradually one 
above another, till at last they grow into those 
mighty and snow-clad masses which constitute the 
Anti-Lebanon moimtains. Immediately before us, 
ite top guttering with snow, and its foot murmuring 
with streams, is the mighty form of Hermon, which, 
of all the mountains of Palestine, has the best claim 
to be considered the scene of the Transfiguration. 
The plain we are now traversing was famous of 
old for its pastures. We cannot call it barren at 
this day; but it suffers by contrast with the well 
wooded and watered region which we have just 
leffc : ^^ Bctshan lan^fuishetk." As we pursue our 
way over these faded plains, and think of the 
solitude which reigns now where men and cities 



GILEAD AND BASHAN. 183 

were fonnerlj so abundant, we sigh for the day 

when 

The Tirgin^s Bong, 
The shepherd^s pipe, the bridegFoom^s erening harp, 
May yet be heard, in mingled consonance^ 
On Gilead*8 mountains, and on Bashan^s plains. 

On the east of Bashan are the great plains of the 
Hauran. One would think, to look at them, that 
of all the regions on the earth, this is the most po- 
pulous ; 80 numerous are the towns with which it 
is covered throughout. But it is rare, indeed, to 
find dwellers in these cities. Many of them are in 
ruins, no doubt; but not a few of them are entire 
as when their inhabitants left them — houses, con- 
structed of enormous blocks, so that no length of 
time almost would suffice to reduce them to decay—- 
churches with steeples on them — streets and gates. 
The trayeller feels as if it were an unreal or un- 
earthly scene on which he is gazing — ^this picture 
of a populous country, but without people. No- 
thing conyinoes us more that this region is groan- 
ing under the curse, and that this country is an 
interdicted one to all people on the earth save one. 
Are there not thousands pent up in the crowded 
dties of Britain, earning barely a miserable subsist- 
ence? and when forced to quit their native shores, 
they go to seek homes in the woods of the Western 
World, or on the wilds of the South Sea Islands; 



184 BUnro or BIBLI LANIMEL 

yet here^ at our reiy doon alrnott^ is a comifij 
widiout inliabitaiits — Sharing cities ready to.be ooca- 
pied — fields ready to be ploughed — soils that would 
yield a hundredfold, and a climate unriyalled, either 
in the west or in the south: yet no niation oeems 
willing or able to take possession of it Surely an 
inyisible barrier has been nused around this ooun- 
try, and till the period of the <nir8e shall expire, it 
cannot be possessed or cultirated; and even then, 
only by its andent people : ^Therefore, ye mountains 
of Israel, hear the word of the Lord Ood; Thus 
saith the Lord Qod to the mountains and to the 
hills, to the rivers and to the valleys, to the desolate 
wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken, which 
became a prey and derision to the residue of the 
heathen that are round about; therefore thus saith 
the Lord God; Surely in the fire of my jealousy hare 
I spoken against the residue of the heathen, and 
against all Idumea, which have appointed my land 
into their possession with the joy of all their heart, 
with despiteful minds, to cast it out for a prey. 
Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, 
and say unto the mountains, and to the hills, to the 
rivers, and to the valleys. Thus saith the Lord God; 
Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy, and in 
my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the 
heathen. Therefore thus saith the Lord God, I 
have lifited up mine hand, surely the heathen that 



OILEAD AND fiASHAN. 185 

are about jou, they shall beat their shame. But 
ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your 
branches, and yield your fruit to my people of 
Israel; for they are at hand to come. For, behold, 
I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye 
shall be tilled and sown: and I will multiply men 
upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it: and 
the cities shall be inhabited, and the wastes shall be 
builded: and I will multiply upon you man and 
beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and 
I will settle you after your old estates, and will do 
better unto you than at your beginnings : and yeshall 
know that I am the Lord." 



f 



^>i 



t 



\ 



t : 



< ,*■ 



CHAPTER XIL 

"The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for 
it is laid waste, so that there is no honse^ no entering in : 
from the hind of Ohittim it is revealed to them. Be still, ye 
inhabitants of the isle ; thou whom the merchants of Zidon, 
that pass over the sea, have replenished. And by great 
waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river, is her 
revenue ; and she is a mart of nations. Be thou ashamed, 
Zidon ; for the sea hath spoken, even the strength of the sea, 
saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children, neither do I 

nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins Is this 

your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days ? her own 
feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn. Who hath taken 
this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city, whose merchants 
are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of the 
earth] The Lord of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the 
pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honour- 
able of the earth. Pass through thy land as a river, 
daughter of Tarshish : there is no more strength." — Isa. 
xxiu. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10. 



Cross the Upper Galilee — Heights oTerlooking Tyre — For- 
mer and present view contrasted — Yolney's translation of 
Ezekiel's prophecy of her fall— Overthrow of old Tyre by 
Nebuchadnezzar — Bise of new Tyre — Flourishing state — 
Taken and destroyed by Alexander the Great — Miserable 
condition at this day — Fulfilment of prophecy — Prophet's 
hymn of lamentation. 



TYRE 

But we linger too long on the east of the Jor- 
dan. Now we cross tliat celebrated stream. Our 
course lies due west, haying on our right the cedar 
forests and the snowy peaks of Lebanon, and on 
our left the green swellings of the Upper Galilee. 
Now we have gained the brow of an eminence 
which overlooks the Mediterranean : we have been 
too late by several centuries in arriving here; other- 
wise we should have seen a sight, as the saying is, 
worth seeing. From this height we should have 
looked down upon the walls, the palace roofs, the 
warehouses, the workshops, and the spacious har- 
bours of Tjre. Here we should have b'een greeted 
by the city's hum, the rattle of the chariot wheel, 
and the anvil of the artisan ; and here we should 
have seen the seas, to their utmost verge, whitened 
by the sails of her ships — ?ome voyaging westward, 
others returning with the merchandise of distant 
lands. But no one who looks from hence at this 



190 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

day, and sunrejs the silent shore, and the solitary 
seas beneath him, could imagine that such a sight 
as we haye now described could ever haye been 
here beheld. 

With Ezekiel's magnificent prediction of the fall 
of Tyre we are all acquainted — we shall giye Vol- 
ney's yersion of the passage; not because he has 
succeeded in transfusing more of the spirit and sub- 
limity of the prophet into his translation than our 
translators haye done into theirs — he falls, we ap- 
prehend, far beneath them; but because he has 
substituted the modem names of places for the old 
Hebrew ones, and has thus thrown great light on 
the commerce of Tyre — a commerce which more 
nearly resembles that which Britain is carrying on 
at this day, than any thing else of the kind which 
the world has ever seen : — 

" Proud city, that art situate at the entry oi 
the sea! Tyre, who hast said, My borders are in the 
midst of the seas; attend to the judgments pro- 
nounced against thee! Thou hast extended thy 
commerce to (distant) islands, among the inhabi- 
tants of (unknown) coasts. Thou makest ships of 
fir trees of Sanir (the highest summit of Lebanon); 
the cedars of Lebanon are masts to thee ; the pop- 
lars of Bisan, oars. Thy sailors are seated upon the 
box- wood of Cyprus, inlaid with ivory. Thy sails 
and streamers are woven with fine flax from Egypt ; 



TYUB. 191 

thy garments are djed vnXh blue and purple of 
Hellas (the Archipelago). Sidon and Arvad send 
their rowers to thee ; Djabal (Djebila) her skilful 
ship builders ; thj mathematicians and thj sages 
guide thy barks ; all the ships of the sea are em- 
ployed in thy commerce. The Persian, the Lydian, 
and Egyptian, receive thy wages : thy walls are 
hung round with their bucklers and their cuirasses. 
The sons of Arrad line thy parapets; and thy 
towers, guarded by the Djimedeans (a Phoenician 
people), glitter with their brilliant quivers. Every 
country desires to trade with thee. Tarsus sends 
to thy markets iron, tin, and lead. Yonia, the 
country of the Mosques and Teblis, supply thee with 
slaves and brazen vessels. Armenia sends thee 
mules, horses, and horsemen. The Arab of Dedan 
(between Aleppo and Damascus) conveys thy mer- 
chandise. Many isles exchange with thee ivory and 
ebony. The Aramean (the Syrian) brings thee 
rubies, purple, embroidered work, fine linen, coral, 
and agate. The children of Israel and Judah sell 
thee cheese, balm, myrrh, raisins, and oil ; and Da- 
mascus furnishes thee wine of Halboun (perhaps 
Halab, where there are still vines), and fine wool. 
The Arabs of Oman offer to thy merchants polished 
iron, cinnamon, and the aromatic reed ; and the 
Arabians of Dedan bring thee rich carpets. The 
inhabitants of the Desert, and the sheiks of Kedar, 



192 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

exchaoge their Iambs and their goats for thj valu- 
able merchandise. The Arabs of Saba and Rama 
(in the Yemen) enrich thee with aromatics, pre- 
cious stones, and gold. The inhabitants of Haran, 
of Kalana (in Mesopotamia), and of Adana (near 
to Tarsus), the factors of the Arabs of Sheba (near 
the Dedan), the Assyrians, and the Chaldeans, 
trade also with thee, and sell thee shawls, garments, 
artfuUj embroidered, silver, masts, cordage, and 
cedars; yea, the boasted vessels of Tarsus are in 
thy pay. O Tyre! elated with the greatness of thy 
glory, and the immensity of thy riches, the waves 
of the sea shall rise up against thee, and the tem- 
pest plunge thee to the bottom of the waters. Then 
shall thy wealth be swallowed up with thee; and 
with thee in one day shall perish thy commerce, thy 
merchants and correspondents, thy sailors, pilots, 
artists, and soldiers, and the nimiberless people who 
dwell within thy walls. Thy rowers shall desert 
thy vessels. Thy pilots shall sit upon the shore, 
looking mournfully toward the land. The nations 
whom thou enrichedst, the kings whom thou didst 
gratify with the abundance of thy merchandise, 
trembling at thy ruin, shall cry bitterly in despair; 
they shall cut off their hair ; they shall cast ashes 
on their heads; they shall roll in the dust, and 
lament over thee, saying, What city shall equal Tyre, 
that queen of the seal'* 



Now we are in circumstances to feel how com- 
pletely the prediction has heen yerified. Look 
down, then. You see this little clump of mise- 
rahle houses immediately heneath, all huddled to- 
gether on this low island, which scarcely rises above 
the surface of the water. This is all that remains of 
the crowning city. You see that basin for ships on 
the north, wellnigh choked up with sand. There 
the fleets of the world were wont to cast anchor. 
A stranger from a far distant land passed this way 
not many years ago. He tells, that when he passed 
by, there was only a single fishing boat in the har- 
bour of Tyre. On the sandy plain which you per- 
ceive running up on the north of the town, stood 
Old Tyre. The army of Nebuchadnezzar lay thirteen 
years on that plain. Every head was made bald — 
every shoulder was peeled in the siege; but at last 
the city was taken. 

Before the banners of the Chaldean army were 
seen on the plain before Tyre, and even before Ne- 
buchadnezzar had projected the expedition, with 
what beauty had the prophet described the result 
of the siege ! " Thus saith the Lord ; Behold, I 
will bring upon Tyrus Nebuchadnezzar, king of 
Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with 
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and 
companies, and much people. He shall make a 
fort against thee, and casta mount against thee, and 

N 



194 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

lift up a buckler against thee, and he shall set en- 
gines of war against thy walls, and with his axes 
he shall break down thy towers. By reason of the 
abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee: 
thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, 
and of the wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall 
enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city wherein 
is made a breach. And I will cause the noise of 
thy songs to cease ; and the sound of thy harps 
shall be no more heard." 

Old Tyre was now in ruins. The inhabitants 
had fled to a little island a very short distance from 
the shore. There they proceeded to erect a new cit}-, 
which became the heir of the fame and the vast 
commerce of that which Nebuchadnezzar had de- 
stroyed. New Tyre continued to flourish till the 
times of Alexander ; but, as she stood in the way of 
the scheme of universal conquest which that mo- 
narch had formed, her reduction was necessary. In 
order to bring his engines of war close up to her 
walls, he found it necessary to construct a mound 
between the shore and the island on which the city 
stood. For this purpose he chose the materials 
which the place most readily ofi'ered. These were, 
the dust, the timber, and the stones of Old Tyre, 
which had lain here since the period of her destruc- 
tion ])y Nebuchadnezzar : " They shall lay thy 
stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of 



the water^' — " / will also scrape her dust fromher^ 
The arms of the conqueror prevailed, and the queen 
of the seas sank. She was soon rebuilt; but to suf- 
fer new calamities, and to come, in the course of ages, 
into the miserable state in which we now find her. 
" When you come to it," says Maundrell, " you find 
no similitude of that glory for which it was so re- 
nowned in ancient times, and which the Prophet 
Ezekiel describes. On the north side of it, it has an 
old Turkish ungarrisoned castle ; besides which you 
see nothing here but a mere Babel of broken walls, 
pillars, vaults, &c., there being not so much as one 
entire house left. Its present inhabitants are only 
a few poor wretches, harbouring themselves in the 
vaults, and subsisting chiefly upon fishing." 

Before we quit the eminence where we now stand, 
and from which we look down on the shadow of 
Tyre, let us observe how God has here inflicted his 
threatenings to the very letter. Here is the site of 
Old Tyre, a sandy plain, with the waves tumbling 
over it : " When 1 shall bring up the deep upon 
thee^ and great waters shall cover thee; I will 
make thee a terror^ and thou shalt he no more: 
though thou he sought for^ yet shalt thou never he 
found again, saith the Lord God'* Adjoining the 
peninsula on which the miserable village beneath 
us is seated, you perceive what you take to be dark 
rocks rising out of the waves ; these are very con- 



▼enientfor the fisliennen, who here spread ihdr nets 
in order to be dried. These are not rocks ; they 
are the stones of Tjre tumbled into the sea by her 
successiye destroyers: ^^IwiU mak^ ths$ lik$ tke 
icpqfa rock : tkou $halt be a place to epread netM 
fipon," Who now remembers this great city, whose 
fstil resounded oyer the seas, and caused this song 
of lamentation to be heard among its ides— a song 
which the prophet had prepared beforehand, and 
taught the kbgs and cities of the earth to sing, 
when the mournful eyent should haye come ? We 
quote part of this hymn of lamentation, and depart : 
<< Thus saith the Lord Qod to Tjrus ; Shall not ihe 
isles shake at the sound of thy fall ? Then all the 
princes of the sea shsjlcome down from their thrones, 
and lay away their robes, and put off their broidered 
garments : they shall clothe themselves with trem- 
bling ; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall 
tremble at every moment, and be astonished at thee. 
And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and 
say to thee, How art thou destroyed, that wast in- 
habited of seafaring men, the renowned city, which 
wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, 
which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it." 



CHAPTER XIIL 

" And I will giye unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the 
land wherein thon art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for 
an eyerlasting possession; and I will be their God/* — Gen. 
xvii. 8. 

" For the Lord thy Qtod bringeth thee into a good land ; a 
land of brooks of water, of fomitains, and depths that spring 
out of valleys and hills ; a land of wheat, and barley, and 
vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates ; a land of oil-olive, 
and honey; a land wherein thou shalt eat bread without 
scarceness, thou shalt not lack any thing in it ; a land whose 
stones are iron, and out of whose hills thoa mayest dig brass." 
— ^Deut. viii. 7-9. 

" The people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned 
among the nations."— Num. xxiii. 9. 

" Israel then shall dwell in safety alone : the fountain of 
Jacob shall be upon a land of com and wine ; also bis heavens 
shall drop down dew. Happy art thou, Israel : who is 
like unto thee, people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy 
help, and who is the sword of thy excellency ! and thine 
enemies shall be found liars unto thee ; and thou shalt tread 
upon their high places."— Deut. xxxiii. 28, 29. 



jubeau 

Land of Israel — Superior to other lands in phynoal beMity 
— In moral grandenr— Its desolation now— Doom denonnoed 
against it by the prophets — General stmctnre of the country 
— Potttion of Fftlestine with respect to other nations — Walled 
in all round — On the east and south by deserts to presenre H 
firom the Chaldean and Egyptian idolatries — On the west bj 
the sea as a defence against Bome— Amply stored with all it 
needed — Its position centrical yet secluded — Final ends of 
this — Journey over the land — Start from Lebanon — Country 
of Upper Galilee — Lot of Naphtali — Of Asher — Jordan yalley 
— Lake Merom — Saphet — Genuesareth and Lake of Galilee — 
Return to midland route through Galilee — Cana of Galilee — 
The Saviour's traces — Position and appearance of Cana — The 
marriage feast and first miracle. 




JUDEA. 

Nov we turn our face towards ft more glorioaB 
land than any we hare yet traTersed — (he land of 
Israel. What ia it wbich olher countries glory id 
in which this land does not tar excel them ? Is it 
variety and beauty of scenery? This was the home 
ot beauty. It was garuished by Him who made 
the earth, with every attribute of grandeur, every 
form of loveliness — the tall mountain, rising proudly 
to heaven in its snowy mantle — the little hill on 
whose humble summit the heavens delighted to 
pouidown their dew— the hroad plain, whose bosom 



200 RCINB OF BIBLE LAKD3. 

inyestiired with gardens, pastiixe«» and fiiresfci, was 
gpread out to heaven — the little dell, which drew 
its veil of woods and rocki close around it, as if un- 
willing that its heautj shonld he seen hj the eje of 
man — the riyer, which made glad the Talleys— -the 
streamlet, which made the rayine yocal with its 
music — ^the naked crag — the richly terraced hill — 
the hillowj shore, with its white sails — the wayeless 
lake, with its fringe of oliVes and yines*- its ram- 
parted cities — ^its palm-emhowered homes. But if 
thislandisentitled to claim a superiority aboye eyeij 
other on the score of its physical beauty, much more 
is it entitled to do so on the ground of its moral im- 
portance and grandeur. Were other countries the 
abode of science ? — the lamp of revelation burned 
here. Have other countries laid the world under 
obligations by the volumes of poetry and philosophy 
which they produced ? — here the Bible was written. 
Have other countries been the seat of important 
transactions ? — here the work of redemption was 
wrought ; that mighty event which links together 
the counsels of the past eternity with the glories 
of the coming one. Have other lands been the 
abode of sages and wise men ? — here prophets lived 
— here " God manifest in the flesh" sojourned 
— dwelt beneath its roofs, walked by its shores, 
preached the gospel in its cities, and prayed upon 
its moimtains. Such is the renown of this land—- 



JUDEA. 201 

a renown which can neither be increased nor dimi- 
nished by any eyent which may henceforward take 
place within it. But why do we linger at a dis- 
tance ? — let us draw nigh. As we approach its 
border, we can discern no signs of its ancient beauty 
and importance. The naked peaks of its moun- 
tains are before us, their sides marked by the 
ghastly scars which the hand of Ruin has impressed 
upon them ; its valleys are open to the eye, but they 
are lovely no longer. Every where on its plains the 
mounds of its buried cities are seen rising dimly, 
darkening still more the aspect of this once happy 
and beauteous land. The olive mourns ; for the 
hand that tended it has long been absent. The 
vine languishes ; for it hears no more the songs of 
its happy children. The cedar fears to display its 
stately proportions, as of old, on the sides of Leba- 
non — its mighty arms bend beneath the doom that 
presses upon them. Ruin has overwhelmed all 
things, and sits, as on a throne, on these hoary 
mountains in stem majesty. 

The prophets foretold the desolation of this 
land ; and with such a fulness of particulars, and 
variety of metaphors and images, as puts it out of 
our power to quote their words here. We would 
refer the reader to the prophets themselves; and the 
more he examines and compares, the more will he be 
satisfied that there is a perfect accordance between 



204 RDiNS OF BIBLE LA!n)3. 

for had anything like a free and general inter- 
course been kejit up between the laraeliteHnnd the 
people of these oonntries, the conscqiieuci^ would 
liave been in no common degree disastrous. The 
" lioly seed" would have " mingled with the 
heathen, and learned of them their way." Rome 
and Greece, on the WMt, were to bo the neit gi-cat 
seata of corruption and idolatry; therefore the 
Bca and the mountains vere interposed betwixt 
the Jews and these yet future empires. In the 
erectian of these tremendous batriers aud de- 
fences, God said most intelligilily, " The people 
shall dwell aloue." Thej, too, were a defence 
agaiust the arms of these powei-s. The exuberant 
aud varied fertility of their land held outastrong 
temptation to the invader. It was a fertile isle 
in the midst of an ocean of waste and barrenness. 
But never were the hostile nations around per- 
mitted to cross the desert, or scale the moun- 
tains, and violate the security of the land of 
Israel, save when sin had made the people weak. 
Transgression it was that unlocked their bars and 
gates, and gave admission to the foe. 

But if to guard against invasion, and the yet 
greater danger of idolatry, God had placed im- 
mense difficulties and impediments in the way of 
their intercourse with other nations, compensa- 
tion was made in the all but endless variety in 



JUDEA. 205 

the productions of their own country. They had 
no need to seek to other lands, drawn hy the 
love of foreign dainties ; on their own fertile soil 
grew whatever their souls could desire. Their 
plains yielded wheat of the finest quality. The 
produce of their vineyards was of unrivalled ex- 
cellence. The vine of Judah was the '^ choice 
vine." Their rocks poured out oil and honey. 
Their rivers abounded in fish: the pastures of 
Bashan in kine: the sheep-walks of Car m el in 
flocks : the glades flowed with milk and butter. 
Every tree had they that is pleasant to the sight 
and good for food. The fig, the apple, the citron, 
the melon, the pomegranate, were among the 
fruits which grew profusely in their woods and 
gardens. Wool and silk had they for raiment ; and 
stones, and timber, and iron, and brass, for build- 
ing. Thus richly was this land stored. It had 
all within itself. The people wanted for nothing. 
No cause had they to envy other nations, and 
nothing to tempt them to an intercourse which 
would have imperilled the great and special end 
for which they had been placed in Palestine. 
Shut up in moral quarantine, as it were, while 
idolatry, like a pestilence, raged around them, 
their predestined dwelling was comfortably and 
even luxuriously provisioned. " The fountain of 
Jacob," it was foretold, " shall be upon a land of 



S06 BUIK9 or Bmui lanim. 

com and wine> alao his heaveiiB shall drop doi^ 
dew." 

In the deserts that surrounded Fkdestine we 
see, too, a wise provision against the desire of ood- 
quest, so universal and so inourable in the earlj 
nations. With the exception of the AmmoioiteB 
and Moabites^ whom thej ultimately subdued, 
there were no territories near them of a kind to 
tempt them to extend their possessions, and so 
come into dangerous contact with otherSy and be 
diverted from the sacred end for which thej 
existed as a people. The great boundaries . of 
their land they could not alter; and it was well 
they could not, for if they had, Judea would have 
been dismantled, and become bereft of those for- 
tifications which fitted it to be the sanctuary and 
stronghold of truth. The great mountain bar- 
rier on the north, the ocean on the west, and the 
ocean-desert on the south and east, said to them 
most emphatically, " This is the * chosen land.' 
These are the limits and munitions within which 
you are to dwell. Here you are safe; but if 
you attempt to remove the boundaries which 
Divine power has set, be assured evil will follow." 

But herein lay the striking peculiarity of Pales- 
tine, that while thus isolated and cut off from the 
other nations and kingdoms of the world, it was, 
nevertheless, in close contiguity with them. The 



JUDEA. 207 

stage on 'which alone the Divine purpose could 
be worked with success, required to combine, in 
respect of position, conditions apparently incom- 
patible. It required to be at once remote and 
near at hand; far removed from intercourse with 
the nations, yet continually before their eyes. 
And these apparently unattainable ends were 
most completely attained, by placing it here, in 
the centre of the world ; in the very heart of the 
world's greatest monarchies, Assyria and Egypt 
first, then Greece and Rome next, yet walled off 
from them by nature's strongest barriers. It 
was centrical, yet secluded: conspicuous, yet 
secure. And set here, in the world's centre, 
begirt by the eternal hills, and the not less eter- 
nal desert, rays of light there were that were shot 
into the darkness of surrounding countries, if 
haply some in these lands '' might seek after 
God." And so long as Judea continued to be 
the abode of the truth, its position continued to 
be thus centrical; but whenever the truth de- 
parted, its position was changed. The chain that 
bound it to the leading kingdoms of the world 
was broken, and it fell away to the remotest 
verge of civilisation. Christianity now took its 
place, and had a station assigned it at the centre 
of empire and human progress. 

So long as Judea fulfilled its end, it was spe- 



208 BUI27B OF BIBUi LANDS. 

dally guarded and oared for. A free and nrjoio- 
ing people, fearing JeboTah, and fearing no one 
eke, eating every one of his yine, And ewerj one 
of his fig-tree, and drinUng eyery one die waters 
of his-oiBtem, oooapied the land without oaro^ 
fulness; but when they ceased to be God'a wit* 
nesses, then the oursb feU. It feU npon their 
heavens, and they became rainless; it fell upon 
their mountains, and they withered; it feU npon 
their plains, and they beoame wildernesses; it 

I 

fell upon their harvests, and ^ey beoame heaps: 
upon their vines and olives, and they perished; 
upoi^ their oities, and they became niins; upon 
their people, and they bowed their neck to the 
conqueror, and were led away captive into distant 
lands. Let us walk through the land, and mark 
as we go how the curse hath '^ devoured the 
earth." 

Behind us is Lebanon. It is still a *' goodly 
mountain:" nearly as much so as when Moses 
viewed it from beyond the Jordan. Clumps of 
olives and vine-terraces clothe its lower slopes, 
from amid which numerous picturesque villages 
peer out. Plantations of oaks wave on its 
higher altitudes; above, the rock juts, and the 
SDow gathers. This is the great northern wall of 
the land; and here, as we have said, we begin 
our journey. Our way lies for some time amid 



JUDEA. 209 

the knolls which are profusely scattered at the 
foot of the mountain. The land is here much 
greener than we shall find it when we have gone 
a little further south, for the numerous streams 
which have their rise in Lebanon rush down 
from the mountains, and meander over the plain. 
The scene is pleasant : there is an air of quiet 
and seclusion all around. The turf is soft be- 
neath the foot; and the country is pleasantly 
diversified with sprinklings of wild oaks and other 
trees, patches of com land, and occasional ruins, 
perched upon the rocky peaks or on the flat tops 
of the little hills. As we recede from it, I^eba- 
non, with his white summits, rises more majesti- 
cally into the sky ; while in front, rising above 
the billowy plain, may be seen the jagged sum- 
mits of the hills of Naphtali. Planted in this 
fertile territory, the tribe of Naphtali, according 
to the patriarch's prediction, grew like a "spread- 
ing oak" in Lebanon, and gave " goodly boughs." 
Westward, where this undulating plain slopes 
toward the sea, a^ the " fat" valleys of Asher. 
Here he "dipped his foot" in the "oil" of his 
olive-groves. Now -^ihe territory is overgrown 
with thistles, so intolerably rank, that it is with 
difficulty that the traveller can force his way 
through them, even on horseback. Once this 

was a populous region ; now the Lord hath 

o 



SIO Bunm or bibui hunm» 

^lemoTed men fiyr «waj" wdA tfaore is ^> great 
jfonakiiig in the midii of the land.** 

Had our traok lain more to the eeefe— down the 
Jordan valley, for inatanoe— we abeidd have had 
a walk of a grander and mote Tailed kiiuL Start- 
ing firom the great Hennon» white a-top with tti 
mows, end resounding «t its haae with tlie nmr- 
mur of innumerable Btream% we should hwve gone 
southward along the yallflgr, half meadow, half 
manih, lying within its endosure ol low hHISy 
whioh run right and left along its lAole oonnMi. 
The soil is arable, and of finest quality in many 
places, waying with long grass and Tsry tall 
thisUeSy as of old with wheat and olive trees. 
And had our time permitted to dimb the range 
on the west, and examine its hollows and knolls, 
we should have found excavated tombs, and re- 
mains of dwellings, and occasionally oil-presses, 
shewing that the olive once flourished here, 
though now there is not a single specimen of 
that tree to be met with in the region. 

Passing on for about fifteen miles. Lake Hdleh^ 
the "Merom" of the Bible, would have gleamed 
out before us, with its broad fringe of tall 
reeds, and a thin sprinkling of wild fruit trees on 
the plains around it. The shores of this lake 
saw the muster of Jabin and his confederate 
kings, with their chariots of iron^ to give battle 



JUDEA. 211 

to Joshua, and here that leader won his crown- 
ing victory over the Oanaanitish races. The 
ruins of Jabin*s capital, Hazor, as well as those 
of later cities, such as Dan and Csesarea Philippi, 
are still to be found ; the first on the plain north 
of the lake, and the two last on the lower slopes 
of Lebanon. On the south of Lake Merom rises, 
by successive ridges, a pyramidal mountain, on 
whose cool and breezy top sits the far-seen city 
of Saphet ; while farther to the south are the 
majestic hills, which stand so still and solemn 
round the plain of Gennesareth and the lake of 
Galilee. How sacred the region ! To that calm 
shore how often have come the blessed feet of the 
Saviour! On these noble hills how often has 
his eye looked ! To their lonely sides, when the 
night fell, was he wont to retire to pray. On 
these now ruined sites, amid which the traveller 
so doubtfully seeks the remains of Chorazin, and 
Bethsaida, and Capernaum, his mighty works 
were done, and his gracious words were spoken. 
The air is still eloquent with the undying echoes 
of his voice. 

But we return to our midland route. We 
have traversed the undulating plain which spreads 
out between Lebanon and the hills of Galilee, 
and seen its general covering to be that of a 
luxuriant but neglected herbage, with here and 



S12 Buiins or bibiiB lakds. 

there an Arab YiUage, surrounded by its patdh 
of cultiTation. Now dimb we the hills. The 
path is bad, and little traveUed. On the som^ 
mit of the first ridge, stop and look behind. What 
a fine Tiew of Acre in the north-west, with its 
noble bay, shut in on the south by the bold 
headland of CarmeL Now climb we. the seoond 
ridga Little table-lands open as we pass on, 
tilled and covered with corn-fields. Here the 
mountains are scooped into green basins, and 
there they are cleft into yalleys, which trend to 
the west, firagrant with wild fennel, and rich, 
some of them, with olive trees. There are a few 
villages, but more numerous ruins, and of a 
kind that indicate the former presence of a 
larger population, and cities more opulent by 
far than any that now exist here. Descending 
the southern slope of the hills we arrive at 
CkuB, el-Jelil, the Cana of Galilee, where our 
Lord's first miracle was wrought. 

Let us halt and survey the place. The foot- 
steps of the Saviour have been here. It is the 
first point on our present route at which we 
touch the sphere of his journeyings; for though 
he has been forther north, even on the skirts of 
that gleaming mountain on the north-east, the ! 
Great Hermon, yet not by this route, but along 
the plain to Capernaum, and up the valley of 



JUDE^. 213 

the Jordan to Csesarea Philippi, on the extreme 
northern limits of the land to the " lost sheep" 
of which he was sent. Here, however, we come 
upon his traces, for here began he to do those 
mighty works which spread his fame all over that 
land, and which remain the incontestable proofs 
of his Divine person and work. 

The place is solitary and ruinous. At the 
bottom of the range which we have just crossed 
rises a small tell or hill. On the southern slope 
of that knoll, with the ravine smelling sweetly 
of fennel and white clover, sweeping past them 
on the west, and opening into the great plain 
el-Buttauf, rise a few modem dwellings, in the 
midst of more numerous ruins, the remains of 
others which have fallen. The place has seen 
too many overtumings to permit of any trace of 
antiquity being still visible on the spot This 
is Cana. 

It is not with Cana as of old. Its house is 
desolate. Rarely now there comes the voice of 
mirth within its dwellings. The hard, naked, 
silent hills behind it, the equally wasted and 
silent plain before it, form a perfect picture of 
wearisome monotony and melancholy. Let us 
forget the present and call up the past. Let us 
go back to the night, eighteen centuries ago, of 
which we read, '^ There was a marriage in Cana 



RDUra 07 BIBLE LANDS. 



lee; and the mother of Jcbub was there : 
uuu th JeBUB was called, aud bis dieciplea, to 
the iiii.rriage." On their journey hither, what a 
different picture met the ejes of the Saviour and 
hJB disciples, from that which meets the traveller 
now ! Then every crag on these hills had its 
village] every slope had its plantation of olives; 
while corn-fields, gardens, aud vineyards, clothed 
m bloBBomB and filled with fragrance tbe nume- 
rous ravines aud valleys. It is towards eve, 
we shall Buppose, and our Lord aud his dis- 
ciples, having come across the plain — a sea of 
waving com, with villages and palm groves rising 
out of it like ialanda — approach the little hill on 
which Can a stood. The brief but dolicioua 
twilight of an eastern clime ia hastening to a 
close. Thick and fast come the purple shadows 
among the hills. On the opposite ridge of Sa- 
maria, across the plain of Zebulun, tbe higher 
villages, struck with the last raya of day, glow 
like torches. The Saviour, ascending tbe accli- 
vity, enters tbe gates, followed by his disciples, 
and becomes one of the marriage party. Hia 
presence brings no cloud upon the scene. He is 
not austere : on the contrary, his entrance is as 
a burst of sunshine upon the hearts of tbe com- 
pany. He sits down among them, affable, fami- 
liar, and serenely joyoua. He who beard tbe 



JUDEA. 215 

song of the morning stars listens to their mirth, 
and mingles therewith his own words of wisdom. 
Their wine is all spent. Who was it that created 
the vine, and taught the new wine to ripen in 
the cluster) was it not he who sat at that table ) 
Six water-pots are filled to the brim; the fiat of 
the God-man goes forth; and the servants draw 
and bear to the governor of the feast. ** Every 
man," said the governor, having tasted, " at the 
beginning doth set forth good wine, and when 
men have well drunk then that which is worse ; 
but thou hast kept the good wine until now. 
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of 
Galilee, and manifested forth his glory; and his 
disciples believed on him." 



CHAPTER XIV. 
ilFtom Cana tci 3SetfyeL 

" Make the heart of this people fat^ and make their ears 
heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, 
and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, 
and convert, and be healed. Then said I, Lord, how long? 
And he answered, Until the cities be wasted without inhabi- 
tant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly 
desolate ; and the Lord have removed men far away, and 
there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. But yet 
in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten : 
as a teil-tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, 
when they cast their leaves, so the holy seed shall be the 
substance thereof." — Iba. vi. 10-13. 

** And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place 
shall be, where there were a thousand vines at a thousand 
silverlings, it shall even be for briers and thorns. With 
arrows and with bows shall men come thither ; because all 
the land shall become briers and thorns. And on all hills 
that shall be digged with the mattock, there shall not come 
thither the fear of briers and thorns : but it shall be for the 
sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle." 
—Iba. vii. 23-25. 

" So that the generation to come of your children that shall 
rise up after you, and the stranger that shall come from a 
far land, shall say, when they see the plagues of that land, 
and the sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon it ; and 
that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burn- 
ing, that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth 
therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah 
and Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, and in 
his wrath ; even all nations shall say. Wherefore hath the 
Lord done thus unto this land 1 what meaneth the heat of 
this great anger T'—Dbut. zziz. 22-24. 



S'cata Cana tu 13(t!]cl. 

Tbe plain el-Btitlaof, the poBaegKioD of Zcbulon— Noo- 
cntered with thorna and thistles — Nnzareth hills — Vaie of 
Kaiaretb— AsiNKt of Noaiirqth— The tent pitched foe Christ's 
jouth — U>e« of tliis earlj Bcclasioa — iDterenC atUiobiiig to 
the vale— The Hehi Said— MagDificent view from its Hommit 
—Flam of Esdraeloa— Tftbor — Alountaina of Sucaria^Kuiiia 
of Samsria — Vale of Bheehem— Its great heauty— Jacob's 
well — Mountains of EplirMm^Awful dasolalion — Great 
northeni Iiighway— RaiDB of Benjamin— Bank bone of Folea- 
tine^Plain of Jericho— PUin of Sharon — BmaE!. — Scene of 
Abraham's encampment — The land parted botwixt Abraham 
and Lot — Juoub'e Btonj ooutli— Soene deaoribed — Great road 
&om Bethtl to Jericho — liistorie events connected with that 
road— Battle of Ai— Battle of MlehmSBh- Last jcuraej of 
BUJali. 



FBOM OANA TO BBTHEL. 219 



PROM CANA TO BETHEL. 

The little ruinous Cana looks out upon the 
plain el-Buttauf, a vast expanse of the richest 
soil, but totally neglected. The tribe of Zebulon 
possessed it of old ; and then, doubtless, it was a 
wide garden of vines, olives, and corn-fields ; now 
it is a tangled and luxuriant wild of unserviceable 
plants, of thistles tall of stem, and thorns that 
overtop the traveller. Nothing is a more com- 
mon production of the modem Palestine. Where- 
ever the foot wanders or the eye lights, there are 
thistles and briers. Thistles on its once corn- 
clad vales ! briers on its once vine-shaded hills ! 
"Why should I ascend Mount Tabor," said a 
person who had visited Palestine, to the Depu- 
tation from the Church of Scotland, — " why 
should I ascend Mount Tabor, to see a country 
of thorns?" He might have done so, if but to 
see with his own eyes the fulfilment of the pre- 
* diction, ^^ All the land shall become briers and 



220 RUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

thorns. And now go to, I loill tell you what I wiU 
do to my vineyard : I will lay it waste ; it shall not 
be pruned nor digged, but there shall come up briers 
and thorns.^ 

Now cross we the plain of Zebulon. Paths 
there are none; or if a faint track there be, it is 
almost blotted out by the tall grass and the 
taller thorns. *' The highways lie desolate, the way- 
faring man ceaseth,^^ We approach the Nazareth 
range. The hills rise hard and ridgy, with but 
few signs of vegetation on their surface, unless 
small clumps of oaks, and an occasional fig-tree 
standing companionless and solitary, and shading 
the bare soil with its broad leaves. In the 
centre of the range we light upon a large hollow, 
circular as a cup, with a little white town 
nestling within it. What vale and town is this ? 
Put off thy shoe from off thy foot. And yet 
no. There is no holiness in the soil of this 
vale, though once tenanted by Him who was 
" holy, harmless, undefiled." This is Nazareth. 
There is but little beauty in these bare hills; 
yet He who covers himself with light as with a 
garment made them his earthly home. In this 
deep seclusion did Christ pass his youth, and 
here he " grew in stature and in favour with God 
and man." 

The little town rivets our eyes. We behold 



it clinging to the western slope of the rock, as a 
child to its mother's breast. Small indeed are its 
pretensions to architectural grace. Its flat roofs 
are without a dome, a common accompaniment 
in this land ; and no one imposing feature would 
it possess to attract the gaze or delay the steps 
of the traveller, were it not that a tall white 
minaret and a few dark cypresses shoot up, and 
impart a touch of oriental beauty to the other- 
wise featureless town. The chalk of the sur- 
rounding hills looks out somewhat disagreeably 3 
but here and there, on their sides^ the fig-tree 
gives its much-needed shade, and a few olives, 
old and silvery, linger on the spot. At certain 
seasons, too, there is a delicious matting of short 
rich grass in the valley, enlivened with flowers, 
which, like all of their kind in Palestine, are of 
the brightest colours. 

This tent did God pitch for his Son's humanity. 
Its seclusion was perfect. In this connexion, it 
cannot but strike us that Scripture observes a 
profound silence regarding Christ's youth. It 
refuses, as it were, to draw aside the rocky screen 
within which dwelt the Holy Child Jesus. A 
hundred questions regarding the manner of his 
youth rush to our lips ; but they are instantly 
repelled by the decorum of the Bible, which for- 
bids us to break through and gaze. Two facts only 



SSS Bunm of voum IiAHS& 

have been oommnmoated to na nspeotiiig tiial 
portion of the SftTioux^t life that ivaa paaMd in 
thia Tale — ^namely, that he woiked at the trade 
of hia &ther Joaeph, who ivaa a oaipeoter, and 
that he waa obedient to hia parentL Grand 
lanonsboth: toork ia honoorable, and vbtdmee ia 
a daty. '' Honour thy &ther and ihy moliier," 
He himeelf had prodaimedfrom Knai^ and now 
he obeya hia own law. Bat who oan donbt that 
in thia eolitnde^ while he neglected no one duty 
of lijfe^ he waa preparing by meditation and 
prayer for hia entranoe, at the appointed time, 
upon the public scene I What the wildemeea of 
Midian was to Moses — ^what the wilds of Ziph 
and the caves of Engedi were to David — what 
the deserts of Judea were to the Baptist, where 
he dwelt ''till the day of his gnawing unto 
Israel" — this secluded vale was to the Saviour. 
Little did the world dream what that vale con- 
tained. The kings of the earth knew not that 
He who made the world was here, in the dis- 
guise of a carpenter's son. Little did Csesar 
think, when from the Capitol he issued his edicts 
to all nations, that amidst these mountains of 
Nazareth a kingdom was silently springing up 
which should one day overshadow his own. But 
to other beings what an interest must have 
centred in this vale 1 On earth all eyes are turned 



FKOM CANA TO BBTHF.L. 223 

to Eome, but in heaven all eyes are turned to the 
vale of Nazareth. How often have these orbs, 
in the still night, heard the rustle of wings, as 
some visitant darted past on his way to the 
little town among the Nazareth hills. In the 
pit, too, this vale had not failed to excite an 
interest. The wonders at the birth of Jesus 
were not unknown to the spirits of evil. Their 
eyes had been upon him ever since. As they 
saw his childhood pass into youth, and his youth 
into manhood, and still he bore no taint of evil, 
nor word nor action had betrayed any share in 
human corruption, their wonder had grown into 
fear. Often and bodefuUy had they mused 
" whereunto this might grow," but without being 
able to find any solution of the mystery at all 
satisfactory to the safety of their own power. 

We are loathe to leave the spot. But why 
should we 1 This vale is as empty now as the 
sepulchre. He is not here : he is ascended. Yet 
before we go, let us climb this crest on the west, 
which rises right over Nazareth, and survey the 
prospect which opens on this hUl-top, the Nebi- 
Said, Christ was a true man. All noble human 
susceptibilities and emotions dwelt in him. Se- 
cluded as was the home of his youth, it was yet 
placed in the immediate neighbourhood of some 
of the grandest scenery in the Holy Land. How 



224 BUINS OF BIBLE LANDS. 

often may he have climbed this very summit, 
and stood here with kindling eye and swell- 
ing breast ! In the far north, behind a desert- 
sea of mountains, rises Hermon, with the sun 
upon its snows, and looking an ever-burning 
torch. Nearer in the north-east is the dome of 
Tabor : on the south are the swelling ranges of 
Samaria: on the west is the goodly Carmel. 
Below, spread out within these great land-marks, 
as within eternal walls, reposes the Plain of Es- 
draelon. Further to the west is seen the broad 
bosom of the Mediterranean, arrayed in the glad 
and glorious light of a bridal day. 

We descend, and go eastward along the plain we 
have just named, the Plain of Esdraelon, so cele- 
brated for its extent, for its ancient fertility, and 
for its historic renown. But what mountain is 
this in front, directly in our path, which rises like 
a garland among the hills of Palestine ? How 
proudly does it exalt the symmetry of its form 
and the green beauty of its summit amid the 
desolate wastes around it ! This is Tabor. At 
its foot, stretched far and wide, from the gleam- 
ing waters of Galilee on the one hand, to 
the wooded heights which border the Plain of 
Acre on the other, is the Valley of Esdraelon — 
a vast expanse of uncultivated fields and ruined 
cities, deserted and solitary as the desert. " The 



FROM OANA TO BETHEL. 225 

cities are wasted without inhabitant, and the 
houses without man, and the land is utterly de- 
solate. The Lord has removed men far away, 
and there is a great forsaking in the midst of the 
land." 

We descend the beauteous Tabor, and, going 
straight across the plain, we leave on our left 
the unblessed hills of Gilboa, and strike into the 
mountains of Samaria. The prospects that open 
on us amid these hills are softer than we had 
expected to meet here — ^green slopes and woods 
of olives; so that were this region peopled and 
cultivated, neither of which it is at this day, its 
beauty and produce would exceed all calculation. 
Threading the valleys of Samaria for some time 
in this manner, we come at length to a more 
open space. We have now before us a circular 
mount, with fruitful valleys running round it, 
and these encompassed with not unfruitful hills. 
The central hill is decorated with a profusion of 
marble ruins, whose appearance indicates that 
they once formed part of sumptuous edifices. 
This mount was the seat of Samaria, the capital 
of the Ten Tribes. Its foundations are now 
poured down into the valley, and the '^ glorious 
flower" on the head of " the fat valleys" of Israel 
is faded. 

From the site of Samaria a mule-track leads 



226 Buiirs or buslm lmxdb. 

OTer ft range of baxren hills in front. Tn,retmDg 
these mountains, we descend into the Yale of 
Sheohem, which runs between the mountains of 
Ebal and Gerisim. It is thoroughly iixigatedi 
fertile, and well-cultivated. The town of Sheohem, 
the modem Nabulufl^ lies along the eastern base 
of Gerizim, embowered amid gardens of oliye^ 
and almond, and pomegranate^ and other fruit 
and flowering trees. In this place a venerable 
remnant of the Samaritans are still found dwell- 
ing. The song of birds comes full and melo- 
dious from the groTee^ raTishing the trayeUer, 
to whom such sounds are rare in a land where 
" the beasts are consumed, and the birds; because 
they said, He shall not see our last end." At 
the entrance of the valley on the east we come 
to a well, hewn in the solid rock, and still pos- 
sessing a depth of seventy-five feet — the same 
beside which Christ sat, " wearied with his jour- 
ney,'* and discoursed with the woman of Samaria 
of that water whereof he who drinks never more 
thirsts. Within the gates of this town Christ 
was kindly welcomed, and the curse which has 
Mien so heavily on all around would seem to 
have spared the beauty of this region. We would 
linger long amid its groves of orange and fig 
trees, its streams, and its rich cultivation, did 
our time permit; but we must leave it. Passing 



FROM CANA TO BETHEL. 227 

between Ebal and Gerizim, we bid it adieu; and 
in doing so, we leave behind us the last scene of 
beauty we are to see in this land. 

Here ends the region of Samaria. We pass 
over the boundary, and enter on the inheritance 
of Ephraim. At this point begins the more 
awful desolation of the country. We are now 
amid towering mountains, and we may journey 
for miles together without seeing a single atom 
of soil upon their sides. No language can ade- 
quately describe the frightful sterility of this 
region ; every trace of cultivation, every sign of 
the dwelling of man, has disappeared. Not that 
there are not a few wretched inhabitants among 
these hills, but the aspect of the country is so 
desolate and appalling, that one wonders where 
even a bird of the heavens, or an animal of any 
kind, can here find sustenance. The Lord has 
made the land empty and waste ; he has turned 
it upside down ; he has scattered abroad the in- 
habitants thereof : ^* The land shall be utterly 
emptied and utterly spoiled: for the Lord hath 
spoken this word^ But though such is now the 
aspect of this part of the country, far otherwise 
was it in former times. When " the mighty tribe 
of Ephraim" occupied it, it was a magnificent 
region of hanging gardens. Every mountain 
then equalled in beauty, and greatly exceeded in 



228 Bunro of bibli lahds. 

extent, the far-fiEuned gardens of Babylon. Ter- 
raoe rose aboye terraee, oovered with a profosion 
of vines and oliyes^ to the ooltiYation of whioh 
this region was peculiarly devoted ; and here, to 
this day, on the sides of the now naked bills, are 
the remains of the stone walla which formed these 
terraces. We punme our way, on a rocky track, 
amid mountains of brass, the path climbing now 
over their summit, now ?rinding round their 
base, now lying along the very edge of firightful 
precipices, and now descending over rugged rocks. 
Journeying on in this manner, we at length 
emerge from the passes of the Ephraimite hUls, 
and come out upon the culminating ridge or 
back -bone of the country. Our path lies along 
on this somewhat narrow table-land of rock. In 
every age of the Jewish people, this, doubtless, 
was the great highway from the capital to the 
north. One can easily imagine the concourse 
that crowded it in the better days of the 
country, the multitude of men going and re- 
turning continually, when the inhabitants of 
the plain of Sharon on the one side, and the in- 
habitants of the plain of Jericho on the other, 
ascending by the lateral valleys, passed along 
this route to Samaria, to Galilee, and to Damas- 
cus. Barely now is wayfarer seen upon it; it 
lies untrodden. Observe the country on either 



FROM OANA TO BETHEL. 229 

hand. You see these numerous little conical sum- 
mits rising up. These formed a goodly and 
gladsome sight in days of old. Over these 
heights, far and near, were scattered " the cities" 
of Benjamin. What a hum of people as the 
traveller passed along ! What a fair sight of 
terraced vineyards, running up the slopes, and 
girdling the cities perched upon their summits. 
But now all has passed away. A deep silence 
broods over the land. The country has reverted 
into its original nakedness, and the eye falls only 
on bare rocky summits, with here and there a 
miserable Arab village rising upon them, or, it 
may be, a few scattered stones, and broken foun- 
dations, with the moss and lichens of centuries 
covering them. 

But here, in this part of the country, are 
thickly planted the historic localities of the earlier 
days of Israel. If bereft of the vine and the 
olive, these naked peaks wear, in the eye of the 
Christian, the yet richer clothing which springs 
from their connexion with the grand events of 
the Bible. Scarce a summit is there within view 
on which a sacred light does not rest. Here 
Abraham has stood, there Joshua has warred; 
on that stony plain Jacob has slept, on that 
"high place" Samuel has prayed. In these val- 
leys now coming into sight, David has fed his 



230 BUUra Of BIBLI UlHINL 

flocks and tuned Ida lyre; and yonder a greater 
than all kings and prophets has been* Let ns 
indicate a few of these ever-memorable spots. 

This great ancient highway — this highway 
which prophets have trodden, on which ^ the 
tribes*' have gone up, ^ the tribes of the Lord 
unto the testimony of Israel" — ^lies along, as we 
have said, a table-land or platform of rook, whidi 
forms the culminating ridge or watershed of the 
country. The land maintains its general level to 
the distance of some six miles from the path on 
either side; then it sinks, forms into an immense 
slope, and finally subsides into the plains east 
and west of Palestine. Look here on the left. 
You see how suddenly the land sinks down, and 
by an abrupt and precipitous slope descends into 
that deep and chasm- looking plain, along whose 
arid and blackened bosom you can trace, by its 
fringe of forest and meadow, the course of a stream 
to yonder sullen and mysterious lake. This is 
the plain of Jericho. Full of cities and men 
once was that plain ; now it boasts but one poor 
* Arab village, and, generally speaking, inhabitants 
it has none, save the chance Bedouin wanderer. 
Look now on the west : you see what a long gra- 
dual swell, furrowed by ravines, leads oflf to that 
ample plain which has for its boundary the Medi- 
terranean — the plain of Philistia or Sharon. Of 



FROM GANA TO BETHEL. 231 

the valleys that lead down into these plains some 
are of historic interest. They are unlike in their 
physical characteristics. On the west they are 
waving grassy valleys, opening as they run 
into a fine breadth, and losing themselves, like 
rivers in ocean, in the great plains below. On 
the east they are narrower, with sides steep and 
jagged, and bottoms worn and roughened by 
winter torrents, but here and there expanding 
into little dells, with a gray olive as occupant, 
and a little carpeting of grass, enamelled with 
wild-flowers. 

Let us indicate, as we pass on, a few of the 
Bible localities which here lie so thick on all 
sides of us. What name has so sweet a frar 
grance of hallowed memories as Bethel ? Where- 
ever on the face of the earth, amid American fo- 
rests, or on India's plains, the Christian is permit- 
ted converae with his Father, or receives a token 
of Divine favour, it is from this locality that he 
borrows a name to designate the spot. He calls 
it Beth-bl, the House of God. We have now 
come within twelve miles' distance of Jerusalem : 
cast your eyes on the right of the track. You 
perceive, at a few paces' distance, a field of ruins, 
consisting of broken walls and prostrate columns, 
to the extent of three or four acres, lying on the 
eastern slope of a low gray hill. This is the 



1 



232 Bunra or bibli lajoml 

Beiirtn of the AralM, and the Beth^ of the Old 
Testament. Here, where Jaoob anointed the pil- 
lar and offered his tow, his idolatrons descend- 
ants prostrated themselyeB before the oalf whidi 
Jeroboam set up, and Beik^ was changed into 
Beth-ayen — ^the House of God into the House of 
the Idol : and now, as the prophet foretold, and 
as these ruins testify, Bethel has came to nought. 
But other objects of CTcn greater interest than 
these ruins claim our attention in this neighbour- 
hood. 

Turn now to the left. Ton see that hill, 
two miles or so east of you, rising beyond the 
low eminences in the foreground, and overtop- 
ping them, with an olive grove crowning its 
broad summit. That hill has witnessed the de- 
votions of the great progenitor of the Jewish 
nation. It was the scene of Abraham's second 
encampment after his arrival in the land. " And 
he removed from thence" (the plain of Moreh near 
Schechem, the scene of his first encampment) 
"unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, and 
pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and 
Hai on the east; and there he bnilded an altar 
unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the 
Lord." This mount brings another scene of 
patriarchal history before us, with its lesson that 
peace and concord between brethren are worth 



FROM GANA TO BETHEL. 233 

buying with a great sum. On this hill the two 
patriarchs, Abraham and Lot, took their stand 
when they surveyed the country, and parted it 
betwixt them, the elder, who was the divinely 
appointed heir of the land, saying magnanimously 
to the younger, " Let there be no strife, I pray 
thee, between me and thee j . . . . if thou 
wilt take the left hand, then I will go to the 
right ; or if thou depart to the right hand, then 
I will go to the left." Let us ascend the sum- 
mit, and, by actual observation, judge of the 
prospect then presented to the eyes of the pa- 
triarchs. 

The country would appear then much as it 
does now; for in that early age the cities that 
afterwards rose on these heights had not been 
built, and the olive woods, and vineyards, and 
other traces of labour and art, which afterwards 
covered these dells and ravines, did not then 
exist ; yet we know the country had then a more 
fruitful and cultivated look than it wears now. 
Its great features, however, must be the same 
still. Here, then, we take our stand on the skirts 
of the olive grove, near the summit. The eye 
mnges far and wide over the land. The back- 
ground is formed by the lofty mountains of 
Ephraim. In the east the eye reposes on the 
jagged heights that overhang the Jordan valley; 



284 Bunn of esbim lahimu 



and more in the distonoe is the dark line of tlie 
hills of Moab. Between na and these hilli^ and 
lying almost immediately beneath as, is the deep 
abyss-like valley of Jericho. It is as dolefol and 
unhappy a region as one can well behold; with 
its dark-browed, beetling diffii on either mde, 
wrapping it in a shroud of oheerless shadows; 
and its salt-encrusted bosom, on which no plant 
or flower can find nourishment^ and to which no 
stream comes to break with its murmur the op- 
pressiye silence, or freshen with its waters the 
arid waste. Far otherwise did it appear to Lot. 
Fairer sight had not greeted his eye since he left 
the valley of the Nile, from which he had but 
recently returned. Its pastures were green. 
Torrents leaped down from the hills, and the 
watera of the Jordan, conducted over it by little 
canals, fructified it everywhere. Groves of palm- 
trees rose upon its bosom; and its bounteous 
soil yielded the towns that studded it the twin 
fatal gifts of " fiilness of bread and abundance of 
idleness." The sight fixed the choice of Lot, who 
departed with his herdsmen and flocks to the 
left, while Abraham took his way over those low 
hills and grassy ravines which are seen running 
off to the west and south. Looking across these 
hills, in the far distant south, the eye catches a 
glimpse of the Hebron range. 



FROM OANA TO BETHEL. 235 

Somewhere in the immediate neighbourhood 
of this mount are we to seek for the stony couch 
of Jacob. " And Jacob went out from Beer- 
sheba, and went toward Haran; and he lighted 
upon a certain place, and tarried there all nighty 
because the sun was set; and he took of the 
stones of that place, and put them for his pil- 
lows, and lay down in that place to sleep." The 
track of ages lies through the valley on the west 
of this mountain; and here, beyond all perad- 
venture, was the halting-place of the wanderer. 
It wears the same character at this day it did 
then; a rough uneven track, here paved with 
the bare rock, and there strewn with large stones. 
But unkindly as it looked, it had ancestral me- 
mories which gave it a home-feeling to Jacob. 
On that hill he knew had stood the tent of his 
grandfather, and from its summit had oft as- 
cended the sacrifices and prayers of Abraham; 
he felt the more secure, therefore, in laying^ him- 
self down beneath its friendly shadows. No con- 
secration hallowed the ground; no aisled roof 
covered the sleeper, yet there Jacob saw God, 
and pronounced the spot, when he awoke, " vene- 
rable," and " none other but the house of God." 
"This man was born there." He lies down a 
solitary wayfarer, he rises from his couch the 
heir of the land. Might not one be content to 



oooupy Jacob's coucti, however hard, if one might 
hftve Jacob's visiun 1 Twice over hivJ the pro- 
mise of the land been given on this spot; for- 
merly to Abraham, whea he and Lot separated, 
the latter appropriating what appeared the better 
half; and now to Jacob, when on the eve of 
leaving it for a distant country. The time of the 
promise, in both cases, waa peculiarly approprinto; 
and the spot was selected, perhaps, because Bethel 
being, though not the highest point, the highest 
tract south of Lebanon, the patriarchs could 
look far and wide over the conntrj, and see how 
ample and how good was the land thus gifted to 
them. This vision became one of the great land- 
Toarks in the life und experience of Jacob- He 
ever looked back upon, it with awe and gratitude 
as the opening of his intercourse with God. In- 
stead of fading as it receded into the past, it rose 
in a glory that but continued to brighten as years 
rolled on. And when at last he lay a-dying in 
Egypt, his thoughts seemed to be all amidst the 
stony hills of Bethel, and his last touching words 
were spent in recalling the fair dawning of his 
spiritual day. " God Almighty met with me at 
Luz, in the laud of Canaan, and blessed me." 
And to the Christian stiU what name so dear as 
"(he God of Bethel:" — the pilgrim's God, the 
God who will be with ue to provide for all the 



FROM OANA TO BETHEL. 237 

wants, and defend amid all the perils of the way, 
till we come again to our Father's house in 
peace. 

The pathway, we have said, was the great ar- 
tery of the country. The tide of population 
flowing from the capital northward, or returning 
from Galilee and Samaria to Jerusalem south- 
ward, passed through this route. It served as 
the great highway, not only for the cities of Judah, 
but likewise for the inhabitants of the great 
plains on the east and west of the country. 
These, when they had occasion to journey to the 
north, ascended the lateral valleys we have al- 
ready spoken of, and joined the great road that 
ran along on the high lands of Benjamin. Two 
routes, in especial, led up from these plains, the 
one from the Jordan valley, and the other from 
the maritime plain on the west. These fell into 
the great northern road near the point at which 
we have arrived. Some of the great historical 
events of the country took place on these routes. 
Before proceeding further on our way, let us 
spend a little time in searching for these tracks. 
They will help to illustrate the events with which 
they stand connected. 

We are at Bethel. We know from numerous 
incidental statements in the historic Scriptures, 
that the great route by which the population of 



i,m nUISB OF BIBLE LitJDB. 

day, and the battle passed overuuto Bcthavenj" 
which meana that the Philiatiaes retired beyond 
the central ridge towards their own dwellinga on 
the BBft-sbore, and thuB surrendered the hill- 
country to the laraelitcB. 

Tears pass on, and Bathet faecotnos the seat of 
tbe court of Jeroboam, and of the idolatrous 
worship instituted by him. Oua day, as Jero- 
boam stands by the altar to burn iucense, there 
comes "a man of God out of Judah," who cries 
tiius, " altar, altar ! thus saith the Lord, Be- 
hold, a ciiild shall be born unto the house of 
David, Josiah by name; and upon tbee shall he 
oflGr the priests of the high places that bum 
iDceuse upon thee, and men's bunes shall be 
burnt upon thee." Wlien wo turn to the fulfil- 
ment of tlio prodiction, in the reiga of Josiah, 
we read, "And as Jusiah turned himself, he 
espied the scpuichres that were there in the 
mount (the mountain of Bethel so often referred 
to), and sent and took the bones out of the 
sepulchres, and burned them upon the altar." 
In the valley leading down from tlie mountiwn 
to the W&dy Suweinit, are numerous graves 
hewn in the roclr. These, doubtless, are the 
Hepuiehres from which Josiah toolt the bones of 
the priests to offer them on the very altar at 
which they had officiated when living, but taking 



FROM OANA TO BETHEL. 241 

care not to disturb those of the prophet from 
Judah, which were left to rest in peace. 

This highway comes into view for the last 
time in connexion with an incident of a different 
character. Two venerable men, in raiment of 
camel's hair, and the mantle of the prophet, are 
seen proceeding along it They pass on, with 
solemn step, and countenance erect and sublime. 
"Who are these?" is the inquiry of every one 
who meets the mysterious travellers, " and 
whither do they journey?" These are the master 
and the disciple. We hear the former say, 
** Tarry here, I pray you, for the Lord hath sent 
me to Jericho;" and the latter replies, '^ As the 
Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not 
leave thee." The two pursue their journey to- 
gether, till the chariot of fire and the horses of 
fire meet them, and part them asunder. Elijah 
goes up by a whirlwind into heaven, and Elisha 
returns to Bethel along this route, which now 
disappears from view, though we know it con. 
tinned long after to be the great thoroughfare 
from the Plain of Jericho into the interior of the 
country. 



Q 






^\ 



CHAPTER XV. 

JFtont Hz^tl to 3ttn$iBkxtL 

"Beantiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, in 
mount ZioD, on the sides of the north, the city of the great 
King. God is known in her palaces for a refuge."-— Psalm 
xlviii. 2, 8. 

" Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness, 
Jerusalem a desolation. Our holy and our beautiful house » 
where our fathers praised thee, is burnt up with fire : and 
all our pleasant things are laid waste." — Isa. Ixiy. 10, 11. 

** And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall 
say every man to his neighbour. Wherefore hath the Lord 
done thus unto this great cityl Then they shall answer. 
Because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord their 
God, and worshipped other gods^ and served them." — Jer. 
xxii. 8, 9. 

'* Thus saith the Lord God, In the day that I shall have 
cleansed you from all your iniquities, I will also cause you to 
dwell in the cities, and the wastes shall be builded. And 
the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate in 
the sight of all that passed by. And they shall say. This 
land that was desolate is become like the garden of Eden ; 
and the waste, and desolate, and ruined cities, are become 
fenced, and are inhabited. Then the heathen, that are left 
round about you, shall know that I the Lord build the ruined 
places, and plant that that was desolate : I the Lord have 
spoken it, and I will do it." — Ezek. xxxvi. 83-36. 



Jfxata Beti^el to Stxnmltttu 

Leave Bethel — Nebi Samwil — Gibeon — Valley of Ajalon — 
Bethhoron the Upper — Bethhoron the Nether — Battle of the 
five Amorite kings — Mizpeh — First sight of Jerusalem — 
Desolate and affecting aspect of the city — Jerusalem undergone 
seventeen sieges — Climb the Mount of Olives — Peculiarities 
of its site — Mountainous — Indicative of its special purpose — 
Diminutive size of site — Adaptation to its end — ^Jerusalem in 
the centre of the nation — Valley of Jehoshaphat — Temple 
wall — Jewish burial-place — Valley of Hinnom — Siloa's brook 
— Field of blood — Tophet — Water-course of Gihon — Jerusa- 
lem built on four hills — The mount of sacrifice — The mount 
of song — General survey of the country from Olivet — The 
Jews. 



I -. 



J 




FBOM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 2i5 



PROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 

Now, let us forward. Adieu thou " mountain 
of Bethel." Long has a false worship profaned 
thee, but the day draws nigh when the sanc- 
tuary of a purer faith, in which the seed of 
Jacob shall worship Jacob's God, shall be seen 
rising upon thee. We pass many a conical sum- 
mit, and sigh to think that where the olive 
flourished, and the vine yielded its grapes, the 
eye now meets only the naked rock. After a 
short journey of about five miles, the lofty coni- 
cal height of Nebi Samwil rises on our right. 
This is presumed to be the Gibeon of Scripture; 
the " great high place" where Solomon's sacrifice 
was offered. In form it reminds us of the 
'^Mountain of Bethel;" it resembles it, too, in 
another particular, namely, that it stands at the 
head of the great pass leading up from the west- 
em plain, as the other at the head of the great 
pass leading up from the eastern. This little 



246 BUINS OF BIBLB LANDS. 

town, which you see clinging to its northern 
flanks, is el-Jib, or Gibeon. 

In the environs of this little town, the ancient 
seat of the Gibeonites, whose clouted shoes and 
vessels of mouldy bread imposed so successfully 
upon the Israelites, there opens a shallow vale, 
which runs off to the north-west, and is soon lost 
to the eye amid the low rounded hills of Judah. 
This is the valley of "Ajalon," famous as the 
scene of Joshua's victory over the five kings of 
the Amorites. Let us observe how the nature of 
the ground exactly agrees with the account given 
of the battle that once raged along its course. 
We have not gone far from the little town till 
we find ourselves climbing a ridge that lies across 
our path. On the other side of the ridge we 
come upon a village called Beit-ur-El-Foka, the 
representative of " Beth-horon the Upper." The 
valley now contracts into a pass, runs steeply 
down the slope, and at about fifteen hundred 
yards is crossed by another ridge, on which 
stands the village of Beit-ur-El-Tathi, or " Beth- 
horon the Nether." Beyond this village the val- 
ley expands, comes round to the west, and, with 
a pleasant covering of pastures and corn-fields, 
sweeps on till it loses itself in the great Plain of 
Sharon. 

Up this valley had come the five kings of the 



FROM BBTHBL TO JERUSALEM. 247 

Amorites with their armies, and encamped at 
the head of it beside Gibeon. Joshua, to whom 
the Gibeonites had sent a pressing request for 
help, hurries up the eastern pass, which we have 
akeady described as leading from Jericho and 
Gilgal, by night, and crossing the table-land from 
Ai, appears before the Amorite camp as the sun 
was rising over the hills of Bethel behind him. 
The battle is gained ; the Amorites are discom- 
fited " with a great slaughter at Gibeon," and the 
Israelites '' chased them along the way that goeth 
up to Beth-horon." They now entered the nar- 
row pass. Here a cloud of fearful blackness, 
rising from the Mediterranean, and crossing the 
plain with fearful rapidity, met the fugitives as 
they struggled in the defile, and " they were 
more who died with hailstones than they whom 
the children of Israel slew with the sword." It 
was here that Joshua '' said in the sight of Israel, 
sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon," which towered 
conspicuously behind him, " and thou, moon, in 
the valley of Ajalon," which opened in front into 
the Plain of Sharon. This victory had a most 
important bearing on the subjugation of the 
country. The previous battle of Ai had placed 
the Plain of Jericho, and the east of Palestine 
generally, in the power of Joshua. The battle of 
Beth-horon made him master of the western 



plain, and tlie central bills of Judah, as far as to 
the desert. The victory of Hazor, which speedily 
followed, gave htm the whole land north to Lebsr 
Don, And thus, by three Buccessive and decifiivQ 
aotions, did Joshua conquer the whole country. 
" So Joahua took the wJiole land, accorcU-ng to all 
that Ihe Lord mid unto Moses." 

Now, let us forward to the capital. From thii 
point to Jerusalem is but a short journey of some 
six miles. We pass Bamah and Gibeah of Saul on 
the left. We climb the rooky eminence of SaopQ% 
the Mizpeh of Scripture, according to some. We 
pause on its summit. What gray town is this 
that rises before us! We see a long lofty wall 
crossing the plain. Within, rising out of the 
whitish and ruinous mass of houses, are several 
minarets and a few domes. On the west is a 
stony level plain; on the east a trench-like val~ 
ley, overhanging which is a conical hill, crowned 
a-top with a mosque, and here and there, on its 
gray slope, au ohve clump. But there is an 
unreal, an unearthly, a spectre- like air about the 
city. There is no noise in its streets; there Is 
no coming and going at its gatosj its bills and 
valleys are treeless, and fiowerless. There is the 
stamp of age on all about it : on its buildings, on 
its rocks, on its hills; on its very olives— on all 
is the mould of centuries — of long, changeless, 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 249 

wearisome centuries. What city is this) This 
is Jerusalem ! 

" How doth she sit solitary that was full of 
people!" Although the prophet had seen her as 
she now appears, what other exclamation could 
he have breathed over her? " How is she be- 
come as a widow ! she that was great among the 
nations, and princess among the provinces, how 
is she become tributary! She weepeth sore in 
the night, and her tears are on her cheeks. All 
her gates are desolate." Sadder city than Jeru- 
salem is not perhaps on the face of the earth. 
Nineveh is more utterly forsaken. Babylon is 
more completely ruined: it is swept with the 
besom of destruction, as prophecy foretold it 
should be, and no living thing abides in it now, 
save the owl and the cormorant. Thebes has 
gone down to the pit, and sleeps beneath the 
sands of the desert; and, accordingly, on these 
once populous and magnificent sites you have 
utter desolation. But it is a desolation not 
nearly so affecting as that which meets you in 
Jerusalem. It is the loneliness and silence of 
nature that reign over the site of the Assyrian 
capitals. At Jerusalem it is the desolation of 
living sorrow and human woe. There is the 
image of a city: you look for the presence of 
man; for the trade, the cultivation^ the social 



It 


^^^^^H 




SniNS OP BIBLE LANDS. 


enjoyments, the life, the activity that spring up 
around the dwellings of men; but nouo of thcee 
do you find here. These plains are verdurelees, 
these hiUa are bare, these streets are empty: 
heapa of rubbish and ruins render them barely 
passable. A few veiled figures meet yuu in 
them, which glide into these withered and ruin- 
ous tenements, and diaa.ppear. " The Lord bath 
swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and 
hath not pitied; he hath throwu down in his 
wrath the strongholds of the daughter of Judah : 
he hath brought them down to the ground." 
" The stones of the sanctuary are poured out at 
the top of every street." " The elders have 
ceased from the gate, the young men from their 

Indeed, we are walking above the remains of 
the former Jerusalem. The city is iiterally 
" trodden under foot." Her remains, or what 
little may be left of them, lie eotombed at the 
depth of forty feet below the present surface. 
The city has endured seveuteeu sieges in all; 
ten of these have happened since the days of 
Christ; sis or seven times has it been rebuilt: it 
has sunk and risen; sunli and risen again; not one, 
but many Jerusalema lie below your foot. It were 
vain, therefore, to seek here for such antiquities 
as one sees at Rome. Its accumulations of soil 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 251 

and rubbish have so grown as literally to bury 
entire edifices from base to roof, which so late 
as the age of the Saracens were wholly above 
ground; and though not to obliterate, yet greatly 
to modify and change the natural features of the 
place. '* Is it a reality," asks the traveller, " or 
a troubled vision? Can this forlorn town be 
Jerusalem — the city of which David sang, ' Beau- 
tiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is 
Mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city 
of the great King' r' 

We pass not within her gates. We cross the 
plain on the north of the city towards the Mount 
of Olives, that overhangs it on the east. We 
soon become aware that this plain must, at a 
former day, have been built upon. We can 
trace the foundations of edifices; we see stones 
lying about that evidently were used in build- 
ing; and we come on portions of tesselated pave- 
ment. In &ict the city must have covered this 
plain formerly, and been enclosed by the ram- 
parts, though now it lies without the modem 
wall. We traverse the Valley of Jehoshaphat, 
with its gray rocks and its dry torrent bed, and 
climbing the sides of the Mount of Olives, we sit 
down on its summit, and take our last survey of 
this land. 

Immediately below us is the city. Its posi- 



MS EUUn OF BIBUILAHD& 

tkm !» a remarkable one on many aoeeontiL 
FirBty its davatioa is verf great . It is waop- 
rounded by eminences faigber than itsaL^ jasli* 
fying the desoription given of it in the Pwlni% 
**tbe mountains axe xoond about Jeroaslem;* 
but its own site is a monntsinoiis one. It staiids 
at almost the highest point of the detrated table- 
land that mns lengthwise across the oonntrf . 
One ooming from either the eastern or the west- 
em plain has a steep and oontinnons asoent^ and 
he thinks of Jerusalem as ooonpying ^the top of 
the mountains.'' It is wellni|^ three thoosand 
feet above the level of the Mediterranean. The 
place was sung of as being the special selection 
of God, who " refused the tabernacle of Joseph,** 
namely, the Valley of Shechem, where the ark 
was pitched on the people's first arrival in the 
land; and " chose not the tribe of Ephraim;" for 
neither was Shiloh nor Bethel made the perma- 
nent seat of the Divine worship; " but chose the 
tribe of Judah, the Mount Zion which he loved. 
And he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like 
the earth which he has established for ever.** 
Jerusalem, and especially Zion on which dwelt 
the ark, was the heart of the nation emphati- 
cally; thence their life flowed : it was the centre 
of the world's hope; and therefore God made 
**the mountain of his holiness" impregnable. 



FROM BBTHEL TO JERUSALEM. 253 

"For, lo, the kings were assembled, and they 
passed by together: they saw it, and so they 
marvelled; they were troubled, and hasted 
away." 

Jerusalem is almost the only capital in either 
the ancient or the modem world that occupies a 
mountainous position. All the great capitals of 
ancient times were situated on plains, on the sea- 
shore, or on the banks of a stream communicating 
with the ocean, and affording fsicilities of inter- 
course with the world around. Such was the 
position of Nineveh, and of Babylon; and such, 
too, was the position of Thebes, of Eome, and of 
Athens. And such is the position of the great 
capitals of modem times. London and Paris 
occupy basins little raised above sea-level; so do 
St Petersburg and Vienna. Madrid, and Con- 
stantinople, and New- York, are placed on the 
seashore, or on firths opening into it. Jerusa- 
lem alone, of all capital cities, is placed not on 
plain, nor on river, nor by the sea, but inland, 
on the summit of the mountains. The site is 
sufficiently indicative of the purpose God meant 
that city to serve. Jerusalem was chosen, not 
for the cultivation of commerce, like Nineveh 
and Tyre ; nor for the cultivation of art and lite- 
rature, like Athens; nor for the cultivation of 
war, and the diffusion of civilisation through a 



254 BUIKS OF BIBLB LANDS. 

universal empire, like Rome: it was chosen for a 
holier purpose — even the preservation of the 
great truth of God^s spirituality and unity, and 
the developement of the idea of the world's re- 
demption through the one Mediator. The Jews 
were not a nation of merchants and traders, like 
the Tyrians j nor a nation of sculptors and philo- 
sophers, like the Athenians; nor a nation of war- 
riors, like the Romans : they were '^ a kingdom 
of priests." And the vocation of the nation was 
announced in the very site of their capital, the 
ruling idea in which was isolation and impregna- 
bility. Facilities of intercourse with other nations 
were as sedulously shunned in their case as they 
were sought after in that of others. 

Observe, too, the size of the site of this once 
renowned city. The rocky platform that gave 
standing-room to the capital of the Jewish na- 
tion is a square of something less than a mile. 
This is a smallness that may well astonish us. 
The modern Jerusalem has a compass of about 
two miles and a half. The ancient Jerusalem, 
even in its palmiest days, could not have been 
much greater. On the east it could not have 
been more extensive, for there it is hemmed in 
by the steep descent of the Valley of Jehosha- 
phat ; on the south, too, its limits are determined 
by the Ravine of the Son of Hinnom. On the 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 255 

north and noi*th-west only could its ancient 
limits have surpassed its present ones, for there 
the ground is level. But even granting that the 
Jerusalem of David and of Solomon covered 
these little plains, which doubtless to some ex- 
tent it did, still the city, in point of size, was 
comparatively insignificant. Jerusalem was small 
compared with the colossal capitals of pagan em- 
pires — Babylon and Rome, for instance. It was 
small compared with the overgrown capitals of 
modern times — with London and Paris, for in- 
stance. But we just see in this its peculiar 
adaptation to its special end. Commerce re- 
quires, as it creates, a great city ; but the radia- 
tion of social and intellectual influence is better 
accomplished by a small and compact city, which 
Jerusalem was. Its size was £ivourable to its 
morality. It had greater community of feeling, 
and greater unity and combination of action, 
than it could have possessed had it been larger. 
In all ages small countries and cities have been 
employed by Providence for acting on mankind, 
for there the two conditions requisite for such 
action, namely, internal soundness and combina- 
tion of forces, can best be secured. 

The site, moreover, was centrical. The line 
from Jerusalem northwards to Lebanon was only 
a little longer than that from Jerusalem south- 



''^■ 



Sff 6 Bonra or Btatm lasixl 

wirdi to the Desert The tnn^JwUnio tribe% 
end thoee oooapjing the fbxae of the Meditenm- 
nean, were about eqiiidiiteiit. Thus Jeranhm 
mui utnated neeiiy in the heert of the natunir 
This would not haife been of mneh oonaeqneiiioe 
in the chief dtj of any otihier people; but in the 
oaee of the ohoaen peo{ile it was of grsat momenti 
Four times every year must all their males ap- 
pear before the Lord. This was an admizaUe 
arrangement finr promoting the nnity of the 
nation; lor keeping intelligenee einsnlatiiig^ and 
fior conserringreligiony inaamuoh as it gave eveij 
one an opportunity of witnessing the great car- 
dinal rite of the Old Testament worship-— the 
germ of all revealed Truth — ^the rite of Sacrifice, 
namely, which could be witnessed nowhere in th^r 
land but at Jerusalem; and the centrical posi- 
tion of the capital &cilitated the carrying out of 
this wise arrangement. 

Let us now look at the city. It occupies ihe 
same hills with that noble and beauteous capital 
in which Solomon dwelt, and so far it presents 
an image of the Jerusalem of other times, though 
but a £Bdnt image, so fidnt that it may be com- 
pared to that which the &ce of the dead pre- 
sents of the countenance of the living man. Still 
it aids the imagination in recalling the picture of 
the Jerusalem of the Bible. On all sides, save 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 257 

the north, is Jerusalem encompassed by deep 
ravines. These are trenches which nature has 
dug, and they conspire, with the hills which stand 
around the city, to render it impregnable. This 
deep cleft at the bottom of the Mount, dividing 
it from the city, the ramparts of which run 
along above on the very brow of the steep slope 
opposite, is the Valley of Jehoshaphat. Its bot- 
tom is seamed with a torrent bed, which flows 
only when the winter rains fall — the Kedron. 
How many sacred memories gather around that 
brook 1 We know whose feet it was that crossed 
it so oft, seeking the sequestered uplands of 
Mount Olivet. Look how deep and chasm-like 
the valley is, as it passes the south-eastern comer 
of the rocky platform on which the city stands. 
You perceive the old gray wall that rises on the 
brow of the steep above; that wall once enclosed 
Solomon's Temple, for there stood " the holy and 
beautiful house,** rising over the Valley of Jeho- 
shaphat, and fronting the Mount of Olives, on 
the same area where now is seen the dome of a 
Turkish mosque. Some of the stones in the 
wall have lain there ever since : they are of -colos- 
sal size, being in some instances thirty feet by 
sir. Beyond the torrent bed, on the western 
slope, sleep the Turkish dead; and here on this 
sioe the brook, beneath the shadows of their own 

B 



258 RUINS OF BIBLB LANDS. 

Temple Mount, which stretch across at eve to 
cover the old brown flags that pave their burial- 
place, sleep the Hebrew dead. Thus the last 
races of that people have come to resemble the 
first, in that they are strangers and sojourners 
in the land, and have not so much as a foot- 
breadth of it, save a place in which to bury their 
dead. 

" Closed are the portals of their synagogue 
No Psalms of David now the silence break. 
No Rabbi reads the ancient Decalogue 
In the gitind dialect the prophets spake." 

You observe that valley that comes winding 
down from the west, deep and gorge-like, be- 
tween the city and that bluff bare hill that over- 
hangs it on the south side, and which joins the 
Jehoshaphat Vale at the south-east corner of the 
city wall ; that is the Valley of the Son of Hinnom. 
It rises on the west of the city, runs along the 
city walls on that side, sweeps round the corner of 
Mount Zion, and passes on under the southern 
wall, till it falls into the Kedron Valley that 
comes down on the east at the point we have 
indicated. Let us take a stroll along its course 
to the west, and note as we pass its many his- 
toric localities, some true, some fabulous. We 
turn round the sharp rocky promontory of Ophil, 
the brow on which stands the south-east corner 
of the Temple wall, and on our right there opens 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 259 

a cleft, formed by the termination of the valley 
that comes down betwixt Akra and Moriah. In 
the cleft is a pool, fed by a stream of living 
water which flows out from beneath the Temple. 
This is none other than 

" Siloa's brook, that flow'd 
Past by the oracle of Qod " 

Here, too, is the Pool of Siloam, to which our 
Lord sent the blind man to wash. The hill that 
rises above us on the left, forming the southern 
boundary of the valley, is the Hill of Evil Coun- 
sel, so named from the tradition that here stood 
the country palace of Ananias, the high priest, in 
which Judas completed his infamous bargain of 
selling the Just One for thirty pieces of silver. 
The ancient graves that are here seen mark it 
out more surely as the " Field of Blood," which 
was bought with these same thirty pieces of sil- 
ver " to bury strangers in." We go on our way. 
The Valley of Hinnom is here narrow, and deep, 
and gloomy, and brings unpleasant remembrances 
with it, for here was Tophet. Deep down in this 
gorge stood the brazen image of Moloch. Often 
have these clifls been dyed with the ruddy glow 
of the fires of the idol; and adown that slope 
oft has come the Hebrew mother to oifer her 
infant to the god. Idolatry inverts all things, 
even a mother's love. The Arabs now call the 



1 



S60 BUIKB OF BIBLB LAVM, 

Talky WAdj Qehe&na^ or the "^ Yallej of HelL** 
Am we pass onwards we oome under Hbe brow of 
Mount Zion^ which here forms the northern tdde 
of the valley. Winding round the base of Zion 
we turn to the north, and emerge on the weet of 
the dtj, at the opening of the Yallej of Hin- 
nom, which is here vety shallow. 

In the basin or head of the valkj was tlia 
Fountain of Gihon^ of which we read that Heaa- 
kiah ^ stopped the upper waterKxnirae of Qthooy 
and brought it down on the west to the city of 
David." We leam from Josephus that an aqu»> 
duct conveyed water to the tower of Hippicus!, 
which stood in the western wall of the city; and 
an aqueduct is likewise spoken of in connexion 
with the royal palace on Zion. These precau- 
tions were taken, doubtless, in case of siege. 
Eecent discoveries of great interest have corro- 
borated these statements. They are thus given 
by Dr Robinson, in his "Later Biblical Re- 
searches in Palestine." *' The general correctness 
of the preceding view,*' says Dr Robinson, "has 
been singularly attested by the discovery of an 
'immense conduit' beneath the surface of the 
ground on Zion, brought to light in digging for 
the foundations of the Anglican church. This 
edifice occupies apparently a portion of the an- 
cient site of the royal palace; it being not far 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 261 

from the northern brow of Zion, nor also from 
Hippicus towards the east. On sinking a shaft, 
the workmen, at the depth of more than twenty 
feet, came upon the roof of a vaulted chamber 
of fine masonry, in perfect repair. Under this 
they found an ' immense conduit, partly hewn 
out of the solid rock; and where this was not 
the case, it was solidly built in even courses, and 
cemented on the face with a hard coating of 
cement, about one inch thick, and was covered 
over with large stones. The direction of this 
aqueduct was east and west.' Mr Johns, the 
architect of the church, to whom we are indebted 
for this account, traced it eastward for more than 
two hundred feet. In respect to the chamber 
and aqueduct, he further says, * There is no 
doubt on my own mind that they have been used 
for the purpose of supplying the inhabitants with 
pure water. This, indeed, is shewn by the ce- 
ment; as also by there being several apertures 
at intervals, apparently for drawing up water.' 
Here, then, is the aqueduct, in all probability, 
which we know existed in connexion with the 
royal palace on Zion." 

Now, let us take a last look of the city itself — 
the poor, forlorn, and stricken city, that occupies 
the site, and bears the name of Jerusalem. There 
is no point that commands a better view than 






262 RUINS OF BIBLE LAND& 

that which we now occupy. The hang of the 
ground on which the city stands is from west to 
east, a circumstance that throws open its whole 
interior arrangements to the eye of one stationed 
on Olivet. Jerusalem stands on four hills, or 
swellings, of which the two on the south are by 
much the most famous, as they are the highest. 
You see them leaning over the Valley of the Son 
of Hinnom. This next us is Moriah ; that one 
beyond is Mount Zion. They are parted by a 
'• depression or low valley that comes down from | 
the western gate, and which, in the days of i 
Josephus, went by the name of the Tyropa3on, or 
Valley of the Cheesemongers. The Tyropaeon, 
too, divides Mount Zion from the third hill, viz., 
Akra, which is a low rocky ridge, running across 
the centre of the city on the north of Zion and 
Moriah. On the north of Akra, again, is the 
fourth hill, namely Bezetha, which is still lower 
than Akra, in fact almost a plain. These four i 
hills supported separate and well-kaown divisions 
of the city. On Moriah stood the temple; on 
Zion, the palace of David; on Akra, the main 
portion of the city; and on Bezetha, the north- 
ern suburbs, which, after our Lord's time, were 
enclosed by the wall. It were bootless to enter 
on any description of the heavy, unadorned, and 
ruinous fabrics; the narrow and tangled streets 



FROM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 263 

that make up the town before us. The main 
interest centres in Moriah and Zion. On Moriah, 
now desecrated by a Mohammedan temple, the 
heaven-appointed sign of Redemption for our 
fallen world continued throughout the ages in 
the offering of sacrifice. Remission was cried by 
Heaven's own voice ; but remission through the 
shedding of blood. On that mount the high 
priest, in his "garments of glory and beauty,'* 
has often walked ; but there a greater Priest has 
left his ineffaceable traces, even the Priest after 
the order of Melchizedeck, in whose sublime sha- 
dow all the priests of Aaron's line are for ever 
hidden. Scarce less sacred is the hill on the 
west, Mount Zion. There were written, and for 
the first time sung, many of those psalms, whose 
melody is still heard in every clime of earth in 
the sanctuaries and dwellings of God's people, 
and will continue to be heard till time itself shall 
end. Fitly does the mount of song adjoin the 
mount of sacrifice; for had there been no cross 
there would have been no songs on the earth. 

Now we look abroad over the wide desolation 
of Judea. Jerusalem is at our feet. With what 
accuracy hath Tasso described the position of this 
city, as respects the surrounding localities ! — 

" By oast, among the dusty valleys, glide 

The silver streams of Jordan's crystal flood. 




On our north is the desolate mountain region 
which we traversBd on our vay tliither, and of 
which, therefore, we need not noir speak. Be- 
hind uB, on the east, aro the stupendous and 
naked piles which aeparate Jerusalem from the 
Valley of the Jordan. That valley appears but 
at a little distance ; it looks as if it were buried 
beneath the mountaans of Judea on the one hand, 
and those of Moab on the ottier. It exhibits no 
trace of its former cultivation ; it is scathed and 
blackened, and bears on its bosom the ruins of 
its cities — Jericho and others. On the south it 
is shut in by the waters of that mysterious lake 
which covers the Valley of Siddim aud the Cities 
of the Plain, and which ia here distinctly vjaibla. 
On the south is the hilly region which fall to the 
lot of the tribe of Judah. Here, "binding Lis 
foal unto the vine, and bis asa's colt unto the 
ohoica vine, he washed hia garments in wine, and 
his duthes io the blood of grapes," The region 
was equally celebrated for its milk as for its 
wine ,- and vine-stocks are stil! found here of such 
eize aa to justify the renown this part of the laud 



FBOM BETHEL TO JERUSALEM. 265 

enjoyed as a region of vineyards. All the hills 
and valleys of this extensive tract, south to the 
hills of Hebron, are covered with the ruins of 
towns, to an extent which no one could credit 
who has not actually traversed it. Now, last of 
all, we turn to the west. Here, one rounded 
summit rises behind another as far as the eye can 
look, with patches of cultivation in some of the 
valleys, and nothiug to shade the sides of the 
hills, save occasionally a wild fig-tree. Beyond 
these mountains is the Plain of Sharon — a vast 
garden in former days, a wilderness now. Its 
£Eice is made up here of sand, there of long grass, 
and there of swamps, interspersed with a little 
cultivation — one or two modern towns, half in 
ruins, and abundance of ancient cities, wholly so. 
What need of more evidence to shew that the 
prophecy is fulfilled, " Tour land shall be desolate, 
and your cities waste '^? 

The people, not less than the land of Judea, 
were the objects of prophecy ; and on them, not 
less than on the country, have these prophecies 
been fulfilled. We find in Palestine at this day 
few men, and these are not her ancient inhabi- 
tants, but strangers. On the former a sentence 
of expatriation was long since pronounced ; and 
who is so ignorant as not to know that it has 
been executed 1 For eighteen centuries the Jew 




has been an sxilc ; and during tbat period he has 
troddea with a weary fcut, aad witb a heart still 
more weary, eveiy couutry uader heaven, from 
the islands of Japan in the east to the forests of 
America in tlie far-distant west. Aud wherever 
we meet a Jew, there we bohold a monument of 
tfaa troth of prophecy : " And it shall come to 
pass, that aa the Lord rejoiced over jou to do 
you good, and to multiply you ; so the Lord will 
rejoice over you to destroy you, and to bring you 
to nought : and yo shall be plucked from off the 
land whither thou goeat to possess it. And the 
Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from 
the one ond of the earth even unto the other ; 
aud there thou shalt boftq other gods, which 
neither thou tior thy fathers havo known, even 
wood and stone. And amoug these nations shalt 
thou find no case, neither shall the sole of thy 
foot have rest : but the Lord shall give thee there 
a trembling heart, and foiling of eyes, acd sorrow 
of mind ; and thy life shall hang in doubt before 
thee; and thou shalt fear day and night, and 
shalt have none assuranca of thy life." 

Thus have we gone round the region of Fulfilled 
Prophecy; and here wa lay aside our pilgrim 
staft 



CONCLUSION. 267 



CONCLUSION. 

Let us now look back on the track over which we 
have gone. Which of its cities, doomed to fall, now 
survives ? Is it Babylon ! — then what mean these 
desolate mounds on the Plain of Chaldea ? Is it the 
cities of Edom, or of Moab, or of Judea ? — then 
what mean these ruins with which the lands east 
and west of the Jordan are overspread ? Which of 
these countries, doomed to desolation, is now fertile 
and flourishing? or which of the nations, concerning 
which it was said that they should be cut off, re- 
mains to this day ? The Jews are still a people ; 
but the Edomites, the Moabites, and the Ammonites, 
have perished. Consider, moreover, that what the 
prophets pronounced concerning these lands was 
not simply a sentence of general desolation — they 
particularized the nature of the ruin of each. Re- 
garding one country, they said that its soil should 
be destroyed; regarding another, that, retaining all 
the riches of its soil, it should cease to be cultivated. 



-. .;». V 




SC8 CUINB (NT aOBia IiAHDB. 

Of ooe Gtij, Ae po^hets fineidd dnt it di^^ 
io eompl^y dettro jed diat its rite should nol be 
fimnd; of another, that itabouldhe tenaalfld hj 
owb; of a thutl, thai sopeots aiidwild heasli dioold 
lodge in its nuns; and of a foiirtfa» that it dioiild 
beastaUeforcamda. Ofoiiepeoj^eiitwaafbte* 
toM that ihey shoidd beccmie ezilea ; of anodbery that 
ther should be cut off firarerar. Ckmrider, also^ that 
these predictioiis trere|;i?e& manj ages befine their 
fiilfihneiit; and that, as regards many 4»f die threat? 
enings of the prophets, they were giren when the 
nations by whom they wore to be ezecoted were 
either rery insignificant, or not in existence at alL 
And consider, last of all, tbe extreme improbability 
of what was foretold. Suppose any one were to 
foretell that a day should come when Europe should 
cease to be inhabited — when nothing should be 
seen on the fields of Scotland and England but a 
few shepherds with their flocks—when a sail should 
never be seen at the mouth of the Mersey, nor a wai* 
steamer in the docks ot Plymouth — when there 
should not be a single inhabitant in the cities of 
London and Paris— when the soil of France should 
be so wasted, that a few flocks should be unable to 
subsist on it — when ruined heaps only should stud 
the banks of the Rhine — when, in short, all the 
cities throughout Europe should be abandoned to 
ruin, and occupied, some in one way, some in 



CONCLUSION. 269 



another. This would be deemed a most unlikely 
event. Any one setting up for a prophet would 
never he so mad as to risk his reputation by select- 
ing, as the subject of his random prediction, the 
most imlikely of all unlikely events; and yet the 
desolation of the countries we have gone over was 
far more unlikely when it was foretold. Men in 
that age had had no experience of countries deso- 
lated; and even though they had had, they would 
never have conjectered that such a calamity would 
ever overtake these countries — the earliest seats of 
population, and containing, moreover, the finest 
cities and the richest soils on the surface of the 
earth. Assuredly, it would have been thought 
that these would be the last countries to be aban- 
doned; especially when, abandoning them, men 
had to seek new homes, in lands then covered, 
as our own was, with swamps and impenetrable 
forests. 

We ask, too, whether the sagacity of a mortal 
could have foreseen all these changes? The sagacity 
of a mortal is not able to foresee the changes which 
may befall himself during his short time on earth ; 
how, then, could he have foreseen all these changes? 
Just think of what would have been required in 
order to foretell the fall of but one of those cities 
that now lie mouldering on the walls of Sjrria! 
All the causes which were to operate in the world, 



S70 BDINB 07 BISLS LANDB. 



and the manner in whicb all the Wings, living, or 
yel to live, were to act, between the time wlien the 
prediction was given forth and the time when it 
was to be fulfilled — all, we say, must have been 
foreseen before tlie future overthrow of even one of 
these cities could have been foretold with certainty. 
No reasoning is needed to convince us that this 
lies not within the scope of finite sagacity. 

But, in the Inst place, may not all these occur- 
rences, all this singular Agreement between pro- 
phecies, countless in number, and the facta we have 
adduced, have been the result of chance? The 
man who could propose Buch a solution, most be 
driven to the last resort. Could chance have 
formed the steam-engine? What would he thought 
of the intellect of that man who could believe that 
the marvellous piece of meclianism we have just 
named was brought into being by an artisan simply 
throwing a few iron rods together ? But what 
opiuion are we to form of the infellect of the man 
who could believe — I do not meau merely profess, 
but seriously believe — that the magnificent scheme 
of prophecy which the Bible presents, embracing, 
as it does, the history of the world from the days 
of Daniel to the end of time, was formed by a few 
impostors throwing together a number of hap- 
hazard predictions ? No; there is only one con- 
clusion to which the evidence we have adduced 



lends, and to that conclusion it tends ineritably 
and oTerwhelmingly, namely, that the Bible is the 
word of God. And it is utterly useless in any 
man to cry out for more proois, or stronger argu- 
ments. We Btate the sober truth, and me state it 
in the soberest terms, when we say, that the man 
who will not belieTc Hoses and the prophets, on 
the cTidence we have adduced, would not beliere 
although the^ should rise from the dead. 



f\ 



t l_ 



fi 



BOOKS 

FUBUSHSD BT 



W. R M'PHUN, 

BOOKSELLER AND PUBLISHER TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE ALBERT, 
84 ABGYLE STEBET, GLASGOW. 



" THE MOST VALUABLE BIBLE FOR USE IN SABBATH 
SCHOOLS EVER PUBLISHED," 

Now completed, in an elegant Volume, illustrated by 
numerous Maps and Plates, 

Dr CaiiLpl>ell*s Expository Bible. 



In plain Cloth, the price is 5s. 6d. 

In embossed Boan, gilt ed^es, 6s. 

In Fr. Morocco, bUnd tooled, 7s. 

Do. gilt extra, 7s. 

In Tnrkey Morocco, blind 

tooled, flexible back, . 9s. 6d. 



In Tnrkey Moroooo, • • 98. 
In Tnrkey Morocco, extra 

flexible back, . . . lOs. 

In plain Calf, red edges, . 8s. 

Do. gilt edges, . 8s. 

Do. marble edges, 7s. 6d. 



The Bible, bownd in amy of the above styles, vfith the Scotch Metrical 
Psalms, Qd. additional; or toith the Cplopcedian Biblical Index, 6d. a4dir 
tionaZ; or wUh the most popular selection of PsaUm Times, Is, extra; or 
with Ferrier*s Patent Index, Is, 6d. extra. 

Clasp and Rvms, and other Mountings, toUl be supplied, according to the 
wish of the pv/rchaser, at any price, from Is, ypwaaxU* 

From the Bishop of Carlisle. — " I am rejoiced to see yon have 
undertaken another work which is likely to be the means, nnder God, 
of propagating Gospel truth. Such a Bible I feel to be a great 
desideratum for Sunday-school Teachers. The terse, clear style of the 
notes I expect will prove a great blessing to Sunday-schools throughout 
the country." 

From the Bishop of Manchester. — "Your 'Sabbath-school Expository 
Bible' promises to become, under Providence, a valuable aid in contri- 
buting to these results. As an assistant to the teachers, and means of 
recalling to the pupil the instruction received, it cannot fail to do 
much good. You have thus added an additional good work to those 
which already entitle you to the sympathy and. ^Ti!ii.^'^QX^<6a^KQ^» ^ 
every well-wisher to the spread of Qod'a tnxlYsu* 



PUBLISHED BY W. R IPPHUN, GLASGOW, 



From ike Rev. Professor Gibson, Free Church College, Glasgow.^ 
" The notes are characterised by his usual vigour of style, by sim- 
plicity as well as force of expression, by sound judgment, and by great 
point and conciseness — while there is nothing in them that is quaint 
or affected. The views of divine truth exhibited in some passages 
involving the peculiar doctrines of the Gospel, are strictly in accord- 
ance with the Catholic doctrines of the Protestant Beformation. Con- 
sidering that there are some notes to the Scriptures much in use in 
Sabbath-schools, whose accuracy is at least doubtful, it is of very great 
importance that such an ' Expository Bible,' as that of Dr Campbell 
promises to be, should be in the hands of Teachers of youth. It has 
my hearty wishes and prayers for its success. The References selected 
by the Keverend David M'Meikan, as my personal knowledge of his 
sound judgment, extensive acquaintance with Scripture, accurate theo- 
logy, and superior scholarship, would have led me to expect, are 
judicious and appropriate." 

From iJie Rev. Dr GiUan, St John's Church, Glasgow. — " The re- 
ferences are made, and the parallel passages selected, with unusual 
accuracy. The expositions of the leading points in each chapter are 
clear and instructive — the reflections are judicious and striking — while 
the doctrines deduced are in strict accordance with orthodoxy.^ 

From the Rev. Dr Smyth, Free St George's, Glasgow. — ''Sabbath- 
Bchool teachers cannot fail to receive many advantages from such a 
concise and Scriptural Commentary ; whilst the references must needs 
greatly facilitate the efficient conducting of their classes." 

From the Rev. Dr M^Gilvray^ Free Qilcomston Church, Aberdeen. 
— " The skill with which such a mass of matter has been digested and 
compressed within the narrow limits assigned to it, is really quite mar- 
vellous. It exhibits rare powers of selection and combination on the 
part of the Editor, and renders this work the shortest and the cheapest, 
and yet, perhaps, the most suggestive Commcntar}' that has ever yet 
been offered to the public." 

From the Rev. Dr Lorimer, Free St David's CJiurch, Glasgow. — 
" The notes are not scraps from preceding writers, but ideas thought 
out by the author himself — shortly expressed, weighty in sentiment, 
compact in form ; and, instead of being run out to weariness and 

commonplace, suggestive — calculated to make the reader think 

At a time when there is so general a wish to improve the system of 
Sabbath-school instruction, and varied helps have been prepared for 
the purpose, nothing can be more appropriate than to present the "Word 
of God — the only authority and the grand storehouse of wisdom — in 
a form so interesting, as to attract inquiring and intelligent minds." 

From the Rev. Robert Cowe, Free St Stephen's Church, Glasgow. 

— "The annotations are fresh and interesting, and pcn-aded by a 

healthy evangelical tone. The principal points of the Sacred History, 

requiring elucidation, are made the subjects of expositor}- remark ; and 

'uch valuable matter is presented in a small compass." 



PUBLTSHED BY W. R, JfPffU^, GLASGOW, 3 

From the Rev. John Mucduff, South -West Church, Glcisgow. — 
'* If succeeding numbers sustain the excellence of the opening one^ 
they will prove a valuable acquisition to our Sabbath school litera- 
ture." 

From the Rev. Dr M*Leod of St Columha Churchy Glasgow, — "The 
very name of Dr Campbell was of itself sufficient to secure my entire 
approbation, for T am no stranger to the great talents, the sound sense, 
the Biblical knowledge, and the accurate theology of that highly re- 
spected divine. I have read the different commendations which you 
have received regarding the excellency of this performance, and in all 
the unqualified praise bestowed on the work^ as far as it has gone, I 
cordially concur. Most earnestly and sincerely do I wish it all manner 
of success, and if my testimony can be of any weight, I do indeed re- 
commend it, and shall do all I can to promote its circulation." 

From the Rev. George Philip, Union Free Church, Glasgow, — "The 
worth of a book is to be measured not simply by its intriuBic excellence, 
but also by its fitness to accomplish the object for which it was written. 
The ' Sabbath-school Expository Bible ' has in view a particular design. 
It is intended for the guidance and assistance, more especially, of 
Sabbath -school Teachers and Scholars, both in their private devotions 
and weekly preparations. If we judge of it by this test — ^whether w« 
look at the marginal references or the expository notes — it is not easy, 
to conceive how Dr Campbell could more satisfactorily have performed 
the extremely difficult task, of comprising into the compass of little 
more than an ordinarily sized Bible, so much valuable and suitable 
matter bearing on the interpretation, not of a detached chapter here 
and there, but of the whole range of the Inspired Yolume." 
* * * * * • • 

Mr MThun feels honoured to have it in his power to lay before his 
friends — the friends of the Bible — the preceding communications from 
so many distinguished clergymen, two even from dignitaries so high 
in the Church of England as Thb Bishop of Cabli^le and The Bishop 
OF Manchester. In no instance in all his experience has tho Publishex 
been honoured with commendations of his labours, so numerous and' 
80 unqualified, as have been bestowed upon Dt Campbell's Sabbatb- 
SOHOOL ExposiTOBT BiBLB. From an immense variety of criticisms, 
the following are selected: — 

From the British Quarterly Review. — "The recommendations of 
this work are — 1. It will give the whole Bible in a volume not too large 
for the pocket. 2. The mai^ginal references have been all carefully 
revised and re-arranged, so as to render Scripture the interpreter of 
Scripture. 8. To the text brief notes are appended by Dr Campbell, 
giving the results of criticisms upon it, in terms sufficiently clear and 
terse to be readily understood and remembered. 4. The type is neces- 
sarily small, and the paper is necessarily thin, but the Bagsters them- 
selves have hardly succeeded to the same extent in giving a clear 
page with such materials. 5. The work is published in weekly nr 



4 PU BLISHED BY W. R ItPHUN, GLAS GOW. 

hen, price one penny, or in monthly parts, price foorpenee, in the 
hope of securing the large circolation through the medium of Sunday 
schools and otherwise, which must be necessary to the financial success 
of such a project. The publication is not of the sort which it is in 
our way to notice ; but both the publisher and the editor deserve ea- 
couragement, and we wish them success in their enterprise." 

From the Evangelical Magazine. — " That a work so important and 
so usefal as this should be placed within the reach of thousands by the 
low price of one penny for each number, gives us both pleasure and 
surprise. Dr Campbell's name is a security for soundness in the 
faith, as well as for discernment and assiduity in pursuing this labori- 
ous and responsible work. The character of the exposition on which 
he has entered is placed clearly before us in luminous and grati^ring 
statement, [the original prospectus,] and we trust that it will secure 
for his encouragement, and for that of the enterprising publisher, a 
very numerous class of those readers who have neither time to read, 
nor money to purchase any of our yoluminous expositions. We most 
cordially recommend it, and hope it will prove to be, on a very wide 
and extended scale, a blessing to our families and our Sabbath- 
schools." 

From the Glasgow Examiner, — " The first part, comprising the 
first four numbers of this work, is now in the hands of the public, and 
reflects alike credit on the Editor and Publisher. In these days of 
new theologies, a work from the pen of the assailant of theological 
error in every form will be held by the Christian Church as an ines- 
timable boon. Probably no living man is better qualified than Dr 
Campbell for such a work. He is not only well versed in theology, 
but he is well aware of the prevalent modes of thinking — the prevalent 
errors — the prevalent wants of society, and, above all, of the peculiar 
circumstances of the rising generation, for whom he more specially 
writes. The first part comprises the book of Genesis, and the greater 
part of the book of Exodus. The latter book is one of the most diffi- 
cult to expound within the whole compass of revelation ; but the 
Doctor has managed to make his remarks striking, useful, and popu- 
lar. Without going into details, he gives in a few sentences the scope 
of a chapter or part of a chapter ; and he never omits to point his 
readers to the one great sacrifice to which all the ritual of the Mosaic 
dispensation pointed. The work is to be comprised in fifteen parts, 
which are to cost but so many groats. What say the publishers of 
cheap literature to this 1 A new Commentary, with Maps and Illus- 
trations, for sixty pence ! We shall only say, that the Editor will 
have a busy time of it to bring out a Commentary in little over a year. 
The Editor is quite up to the spirit of the times, and, instead of 
drugging his readers with long doctrinal discussion, gives them a whole 
body of divinity in a sentence — or, at least, gives as much useful, strik- 
ing matter in a sentence as some bodies of divinity contain. It is due 
to the Publisher to say, that the work is printed in beautiful pearl type, 
■nd is otherwise very tastefully got up.'* 



PUBLISHED BY W. R M'PHUN, GLASGOW. 5 

From the London Christian Weekly News, — " Here are twenty-one 
chapters of the Book of Genesis^ heautifully printed, in small type, on 
fine paper, with innumerahle marginal references, a map of the world 
as peopled hy the descendants of Noah, and valuable notes appended 
to each chapter, by Dr Campbell, and all for the small sum of one 
penny I The veiy enterprising publisher, Mr M'Phun, of Glasgow, 
calls it a ' specimen number.' All we can say is, that if the numbers 
that are to follow shall equal this in workmanship and value, the 
' Sabbath-school Expositor' will prove a boon of great magnitude to 
the Sabbath-school Teachers of these islands. Perhaps two men 
could not be found more likely to co-operate efficiently in a work of 
this kind than the publisher and editor. Mr M'Phun's Biblical en- 
terprises have been, in some respects, unexampled. He does not 
seem to know the meaning of the word ' difficulties,' except for. the 
purpose of conquering them, and making them subservient to his 
original design ; and as for our friend and fellow-labourer, Dr Camp- 
bell, nobody will suspect him of giving up a good purpose until he 
sees it completely realised. And to place such a Bible as this in 
the hands of our glorious army of Sabbath-school Teachers is a good 
purpose. The ' Notes ' are condensed, suggestive, clear — ^the results 
of much reading and careful preparation. The incidental reflections 
interwoven with the historical facts are sometimes very fine." 

From the London Record, — ** The Notes in the first number are 
pointed, suggestive, and faithfal. Besides these, the work claims the 
merit of a careful revision, by another minister, of the marginal re- 
ferences, every one of which, from Genesis to Eevelation, is to be 
verified anew. We welcome such a contribution to our stock of Bib- 
lical exposition. It will be useful to many besides those for whom it 
is more immediately designed." 

From the Methodist New Connexion Magazine. — '* There is no 
waste of words. The author's thoughts are condensed, as by hydraulic 
pressure, into the smallest possible space, but they are pregnant with 
meaning, and highly suggestive ; being adapted, not to cram the in- 
dolent, but to assist and stimulate the inquirer ; not to supersede, but 
to promote the careful perusal of the Sacred Word. Looking at the 
quantity as well as the quality of the work, it is marvellously cheap — 
sixteen closely printed pages, embracing twenty-one chapters and 
notes, with a map of the ancient world, besides wrapper, all for one 
penny ! As a cheap, suggestive, portable exposition of the sacred text, 
it has our hearty recommendation. It will be a boon to Sabbath-school 
teachers, and especially to those of limited means and opportunities." 

From the Leeds Mercury. — " The type is small but distinct, the 
notes pithy and to the purpose, the ordinary marginal references are 
corrected, and the maps well executed. No doubt can exist as to the 
competency of Dr Campbell for the execution of the task upon which 
he has entered, and Mr M'Phun's name is a sufficient guarantee for 
correctness and beauty of typography." 



« PUBLISHED BT W. R. IPPBUiT, OLASOOW. 

M^Phun's Presentation Family 

Bible. In one magnificent folio Volume, substantially 
bound in the following styles, finished with the 
greatest care, and in the most elegant manner : — 

French Morocco, pMn, bat substantially finished, ... £2 lOi. 

Do. do. elegantly gilt, do. do., .... £2 Ifti 

Turkey Morocco, blind tooled, saperior, . £3 6b. 

Do. do. richly gilt, extra, do., £3 lOs. 

Do. do. flexible back, yery el^ant, . . • • . £8 ISi. 

Do. do. in the Antique Style, richly gilt, ... £4 4b. 

Do. do. finished in the most sumptnous maimer, • £4 10b. 

In calling attention to this New and very beautiful Eidition ol 
the Scriptures, Mb M'Phun, without the fear of contradiction, 
takes leave to say it will be found not only the most splendid, 
but the Cheapest of all the fine editions of the Bible that have 
ever yet been ofifered for public approval 

He has chosen for it the distinctive title of the " Presentation 
Bible," from the circumstance that, since he suggested the 
greater suitableness of giving a copy of the Sacred Volume as a 
Marriage Present, or as commemorative of the return of a birth- 
day, instead of some useless ornament, his friends have very 
generally adopted this suggestion, and it has now become all but 
the universal practice to give a handsome copy of the Bible as 
the Marriage Present; and hence the desirableness of preparing 
a Bible for this special purpose. 

He will not enlarge on the great beauty and elegance of this 
edition of the Bible which he has now produced, further than to 
say that it is in every way a most splendid Volume, complete in 
every detail, and most appropriate for the purpose for which it 
has been got out. It is printed on the finest paper, from a clear 
distinct type, with the Messrs Ballantyne's usual artistic care, 
and is bound in the most recherche styles ; while the Notes, being 
selected from the most practically useful of all commentators, 
Scott and Henry, renders it all that could be desired as a Fikst- 
Class Family Bible, and which, he is confident, the most 
fastidious will acknowledge it to be. 

Mr M'Phun, therefore, with confidence recommends to the 
notice of his friends, as wortby of their patronage, his most 
^ecent enterprise — Thb Pfisa^aaTA-Tios ^issiia. 



PUBLISHED BY W. R li>PEUN, GLASGOW. 7 

The Working-Man's Family Bible. 

The Pablisher has very great pleasure in announcing that the Sale of this 
Splendid Yoliune has iJready attained to the unprecedented number of 
Thibtt Thousakd Copibs. This, be it remembered, has been accomplished 
in little more than five. and a-half years, and he is heartily rejoiced in being 
able to say, that the demand for it is now greater than has ever been since 
the day it was first issued from the press. The more it becomes known the 
more highly it is appreciated, and the more does the demand increase. 

The yery laige sale this Bible has had can scarcely be credited by some 
parties. It is certaroly huger than ever was known to have been reached by 
any Bible of its dass in so short a period before: but the ''great fact" of 
its being now at the Thirtieth Thousand is an mdisptttaMe fact; and 
although a triumph like this was never previously accomplished in the diffu- 
sion of the Scriptures by any publisher, yet it does not follow that it is — ^as 
some would have it said — <m inypossihUity, 

The great secret of its success is this : Such a book was never produced 
before at the price — such a book was much wanted by the Christian public 
— and such a book was specially wanted for, and deedred by the Industrial 
Classes. For their special benefit the Publisher primarily devised, projected, 
and prepared it. And not a little of the success which has attended its 
publioation has arisen from the popular and convenient mode of issuing it 
all at once in a Portable Volume, handsomely and substantially bound, 
ready for use, thus happily helping to explode the old offensive and expen-' 
sive system of supplying the industrious artisan with Bibles in Numbers, 
through the medium of Book Canvassers and Hawkers, for which accommo- 
dation he was not unfirequently mulcted in four or five times the intrinsio- 
value of the book. 

The Publisher's lengthened experience has thus enabled him to accomplish 
what nevw was done before in the sphere of usefulness in which Providence 
has placed him ; and for this, and the continued support and kind aid of 
his numerous friends, he is, as he ought to be, deeply grateful. 

Iir The price of the Working-Man's Family Bible continues as before — 
21s., 24s., 28s., 30s., 32s., 34s., 38s., according to the style of Binding, and- 
is sent any distance by the Publisher to purchasers. Free of Carriage, direct 
from his Bible Emporium. 

This is unouestionably the Most Complete One Volume Commentary ever 
produced. The large sale this Bible has had is certainly Uie most condu- 
give proof that could be adduced of the hi^h estimation in which it is held 
br the public, and the great need that existed of such a first-class Family 
Kble hieing prepared to meet the wants of the industrial population. 

It is believed that the &ot of Twenty-eight Thousand Copies of a Family 
Bible at such a price having been sold in so short a period, is wvpreeedemUA 
in the annaU of Bible jmbliihing. 

This volume, although a folio, is still, as its title implies, a verj " Port- 
able" one — one convenient to handle — and not at all bulky or unwieldy. 

The Commentary is sufficiently copious, and is selected from the rich rtmsa 
of Biblical research left by Dr Scott and Matthew H.QQr^>'<Q:^«^ \^%^Q3&:ras.- 
mUj admitted ezcellencgr o£ whose wriUngii ilb "wonailbi x^ ^EMnau^^sossvk ^a 



8 PUBLISHED BT W. R WPHUN, GLASGOW. 

enlarse. It baa been prepared for this Tolnme by Professor Eadie. Besid^ 
this, in the colamnar portion the reader has abore Six Thousand Additi<HU^ 
Explanatory Notes, selected with great taure and admirable adaptation totiit 
elucidation of the text, from the sreat Standard Authors of Europe and 
America, by Dr M'GilTray of Aberdeen. As many of these are given as td 
make the volume reaUy useful to the general reader. The Commentair is, 
in &ct, 80 extensive as to contain nearly double the quantity of matter oi the 
text itself, being a great deal more than is usually found in one-volume oom« 
mentaries. 

The laudations bestowed upon it have emanated from members of eve^ 
evan^lical denomination, and ha^e been so universal and so unqualified, 
that it is difiicult to make even a selection from them in an ordinary oompas&r 
With one of these, reoentlv received, the Publisher was veiy mudi gratified, 
cominff as it did from so high a personage as a Bight Bev. Bishop of the 
Ghurtm of Bnghmd (the Bishpp of Maiichegteg)^ and from wMoh he makes 
the foUowing exoerpt :-^ 

" Maitldbth Hall, Manekester, Jan, 23, 1856. 

"It is scarcely possible for me to state too stnmglv the pleasure and satis* 
faction which I have received from it. As &r as I have been able to ex- 
amine, the Commentary and the Maiginal Notes shew skill, aocara<7, and 
intelligence. On several passages which I referred to, tii^ also appear sound, 
jndicious, scholarlike, and yet practical. 

" It is no small advantage to the working man to have placed within his 
reach a beautiful and correct copy of the Word of God, rendered accessible to 
him still more by simplifying the results of talent, research, and attention, 
m seeking to explain and illustrate Holy Scripture. The mode also in which 
he is enabled in many instances to obtain it oy weekly subscriptions is use* 
frd, as tending to encourage habits of economy. 

" In an undertaking calculated to secure so excellent a gift, so beautifully 
set forth, and at a cost so moderate, vou are justly entitled to the gratitude 
of every Christian who values his Bible as his sole charter of his religion, if 
rendered effective by the Holy Spirit. — I am. Sir, with good wishes, your 
faithful servant, ''J. r. Manohesteb. 

Mr W. R. M'Phun, Glasgow.*' 



it 



From the Rev. Dr Campbell, Editor of the British Bcmner. — " It is not 
aflSrming too much to say that it contains the essence and the marrow of both 
Scott and Henry, as much as, for the bulk of families, will be either desired 
or read ; for nothing is more certain than that, all that the millions, even 
of godly people, do with these great Commentaries, is to dip in here and 
there. Here, then, we say, the marrow is selected from its spongy accom- 
paniments, and for purposes of edification not a line more is required than is 
furnished. We know of no Family Commentary to be compared with it, for 
fulness, completeness, and adaptation, while the typography is equal to any- 
thing that has been produced, even by Bagster himself. Had there been a 
council of the ancients as to the best method of thoroughly popularising Scott 
and Henry, and turning their prodigious labours to the best account lor the 
millions, a wiser decision could not have been reached. It only remains to 
be added, that by a special manufacture of paper, of a very compact and solid 
texture, the book has been kept within proper dimensions, and that as a 
folio work it is not over thick ; it is simply well proportioned. We have, 
then, to congratulate Mr M'Phun on the accomplishment of this great work, 
incomparably the best of its kind, which will constitute him a great public 
benefactor, and hand down his name in honourable conjunction with the 
Word oi God to a late posWrlly." 



PUBLISHED BT W. R. JfPHUN, GLASGOW. 9 



MThnn;s New Polvglott Bible 

is kept in Stock, read^ bound^ in the following variety 
of Styles, adapting it K>r all classes of Society — ^from the 
prince in his palace to the peasant at his plough :^ 

In Boan^ gilt edges, yeiy neat, 4s. 6d. 

In Morocco extra, degcmt, 5s. 6d. 

In Turkey Morocco, richly ^t, 6s. 6d. 

In Turkey Morocco, bound in the very besfc flexible back, not mferior to 

Boffster^tf blind-tooled, -very chaste, 8s. 
In Turkey Morocco, with the y&cj best flexible back, tastefully gilt, 8s. 6d* 
In Turkey Morocco, flexible binding, with gilt clasp, lis. 
In Turkey Morocco, flexible binding, gilt clasp ancf comers, 14s. 
In Turkey Morocco, flexible binding, with ricniy gilt exterio]>-^t olasp^ 

and splendidly furnished dlt bands, 25s. 
In the richest Silk Yelyet, with gUt clasp, very chaste, 18s. 
In the richest Silk Velvet, with gilt clasp and comers, 218. 

This Edition of the Scriptures {The New Polyglott) makes a 
most appropriate and most elegant marriage present ; and as two 
copies of it may now be had at the same money formerly paid 
for one of the old-fashioned Bibles in two volumes, it has become, 
as might have been anticipated, the favourite <' Marriage Hble,'* 
and is being aJmost universiEdly adopted as such. 

" It is no exasperation to sa^, that La the bringing out this useful and 
elegant edition of the Holy Scriptures, Mr MThun nas distanced all his 
competitors."— i^Tor^A British Mail, 



''For cheapness, el^ance, and utility, it stands unsurpassed in the annals 

ushing. 
<* This'is one of the cheapest and most elegant Pocket Beferenoe Bibles 



of Bible pubushing." — Bjenfrewahvre Advertiser. 

'* This is one of the cheapest and most 
we have ever seen." — Belfast News Letter. 



Freparing for Immediate Pvhlicatum^ to he iemed in MorUMy 

Farts, 

M Phnn's Beference Paragraph Bible. 

The arrangement of the paragraphs in this edition of the Scrip- 
tures will be found much more in accordance with the original, 
and to convey more readily to the mind of the reader the mean- 
ing intended by the inspired penmen, than an vthing of the kind 
that has ever been published. This edition of the Bible has been 
carefully prepared by the Bev. Dr M'Gilvbay of Gilcomston 
Churchy A Deraeen. 

The Self-Interpretiiig Bible; or. The Bible its 

own Commentator, in which apposite portions of Scripture 
are carefully selected and adjusted so as to explain the 
various parts of Scripture. The Inspired Word thus 
throws hght upon itseil This edition of the Bible is ixt 
course of preparation by the Rev.D,^\&5\&sscLKS>C^^^^ 
of the Free wurch, Cum\;)eman\du 



10 PUBLISHED BT W. R JPPITUJSr, GZAJSGOW. 

M Plinn'B Diamond Pocket Bible. 

This will be an exquisite little volume— a perfect gem. From 
its being printed from a much larger type than is usual to be met 
with in the very small sized Bibles, it will be found a much more 
useful book than any other in circulation. The difficulty of giving 
a good readable type in the smallest possible compass, it wiH be 
seen, has been here successfully overcome. 

The Pearl Bible, printed in Three Colmnnsi in 

place of the usually adopted arrangement of two, producing 
thereby a neat thtin book which will lie flat in a gentle- 
man's pocket without being perceptibly feltb Price Two 
Shillings and upwards. 

The Pearl-Type Pocket Bible. 

24mo. Very Cheap Edition. Tenpence and upwards. 
j^ij^ Now ready, 

JXI -Thnn's Large-Type Pew or Closet Bible. 

This edition is printed with a very large-sized type, so as to 
make it useful for the aged or those who are weak in sight. It 
may be had strongly bound in one vol., 9s.; or if in two vols., 
price lis.; in three vols., 13s.; or, in a very convenient form, in 
four vols., 15s., rendering it a very handy book. It is also done 
up in a great variety of styles, in superior bindings. A neat, firm 
quality of workmanship has been adopted, so that those requiring 
a large, readable type, and yet wishing a light volume, will find 
this most admirably adapted for the object in view. 

M Phun's Large-Type Pew or Closet Testa- 
ment. 4s. 6d. 

This will be found a most convenient volume for either of these 
purposes — a large type, and yet of a moderate size. 

Price One Shilling and Sixpence, 

The Confession of Faith, the Larger and Shorter 

Catechisms, with the Scripture Proofs at large ; together with 
the Sum of Saving Knowledge (contained in the Holy Scrip- 
tures, and held forth in the said Confession and Catechisms), 
and Practical Use thereof ; Covenants, National and Solemn 
League ; Directories for Public and Family Worship ; Form 
of Church Government, &c. of Public Authority in the 
Church of Scotland, with Acts of Assembly and Parliament 
relative to, and appiobaUve of, tVi^ «a.iicvQ., 



PUBLISHED BY W. R. M'PHUN, OLASGOW. 11 

MThnn's Quarto Family Bible* 

with 5000 Practical Comments, and Brown of Hadding- 
ton's Beferences, strongly bound, 10s. 6d. 
%* The cheapest Quarto Family Bible ever issued from the press. 

" I may be permitted to say, that the numerous additional illustrations in- 
troduced by my esteemed and lamented young kinsman, the Editor, are 
worthy of those rare talents and acquisitions by which he was distinguished^ 
and the premature loss of which to the Church and the world has been 
the subject of deep regret wherever he was known. They are characterised 
by an uncommon union of scholarship, critical acumen, sound judgment, 
correct taste, and Christian piety ; and materially add to the yalue of the 
Woris as an exposition of the sacred writing9."-VoA» Brovm, D,D^ 
Edinburffh. 

M'Phun's Beautiful Polyglott 

Testament. Price One Shilling and Sixpence. 
\* This volume is quite imique in iteelf, singularly neat, and 
for thinness unsurpassed, portable for the pocket, and pliable to 
the body. A most convenient Oentleman^s Chwrch Testament, 

MThun's New Pulpit Bible, 

Printed on the Finest Paper, from a bold and beautiful 
type, without being so heavy as to dazzle or confuse 
the eye, yet large, distinct, and clear, supplying what 
has long been felt to be a desideratum in the market— 

A FIKST-CLASS PULPIT BIBLE, 
cU a Moderate Price, and in a convenient sized volztme 
Most substantially and tastefully bound, gilt edges, 21s. 

M'Phun's Pearl Beference Bible. 

This is the cheapest Reference Bible ever issued from 
the Press. It is printed from a clear distinct type— 
although small, yet easily read^-on the thin ivory paper, 
which does not, as is the case with the most of thin 
Bibles, permit the print to shine through, obscuring 
the opposite page. Price only Two Shilhngs. 
%* A HbertJ ^owance is given to .&kbbath-schools, or for gra- 
tuitous distribution. 

M'Phun's Beference Testament. 

♦^* An uncommonly pretty little volume, by far the most 
compact Reference Testament ever issaed from the preaa. Ptk^ 
One Shilling. 



12 PUBLISHED BT W. R. JPPHUN, OLASGOW. 



MThnn's Pictorial Pocket Bible. 

The beautiful Illustrations interspersed in this Edition 
are from original designs, and are engraved in the very 
first style of the art. Most of them are from the Old 
Masters, and from their fidelity to delineation, cannot 
fail to be productive of beneficial results, especially to 
the young, in impressing on their minds the narratives 
and scenes descnbed in the Scriptures, from 6s. 6d. to 
28s. 

M'Phun's Book of Common Prayer 

is kept done up by itself, in all the different st^es— 

roan, gilt edges, 2s., or with engravings, 2s. 6d. ; limp 

plain, 2s. 6d., or with engravings, 3s.; limp extra, 3&, 

or with engravings, 3s. 6d. ; limp plain, with gilt clasa 

4s., or with engravings, 4s. 6d. ; limp extra, with gut 

clasp, 4s. 6d., or with engravings, 5s. 

This Edition is the prettiest by far that has ever yet been 

produced. It comes into so small a space — so neat-HSo thin— so 

convenient for the pocket, that nothing can surpass it. The limp 

style of binding m£^es it a peculiarly nice volume for gentlemen. 

MThun's Church of England Ser- 

vice, complete, in a unique volume, only one inch in 
thickness, gilt edges, is kept in stock — 
In Roan, gilt edges, very neat, 3s., or with the 24 en^vings, Ss. 
In Morocco extra, elegant, 6s. , or with the 24 engravings, 7s. 
In Turkey Morocco, richly gilt, 6s., or with the 24 engravings, 8s. 
In Turkey Morocco, bound in the very best flexible back, not inferior to 

Bagster'a, blind-tooled, very chaste, 8s. , or with the 24 engravings, lOs. 
In Turkey Morocco, with the very best flexible back, tastefully gilt, 8s. 6d., 

or with the 24 engravings, 10s. 6d. 
In Turkey Morocco, flexible binding, with gilt dasp, 12s., or with the 24 

engravings, 14s. 
In Turkey Morocco, flexible binding, gilt clasps and comers, 14s., or with 

the 24 engravings, 16s. 
In Turkey Morocco, flexible binding, with richly gilt exterior, gilt clasp, 

and splendidly finished gilt bands, 15s., or with the engravings, 178. 

W Price Eighteenpence, 

orship from the Word. 

A selection of passages from the Scriptures, suitable for 
public and private devotions, set to music, with accom- 
paniment for the Organ or Piano. 

This most admirable little work has evidently been got up with great care, 
and. at considerable expense, and will be found worthy of very geneiul adop- 
tion. It contains Thixly-oiiQ ChasitA, "^i^Vj ^^<^\^<^\^a from, the DiTine 



PUBLISHED BY W, R WPETJN, GLASGOW. 13 

Word, and Twelve Anihenui, all set to mnsio with piano or organ acoom- 
XMmiment. The selection has been made with great care and jadgment, and 
the mnsio is correctly and beantifally printed, so that we have no hesitation 
in prononndnff the work a little gem. Altogether apart from the principle 
soggested in tne work, it is calcolated to he most nsefuL The harmony, 
thonffh simple, is rich and beautiful. Sereral are really gnmd in their 
simplicity. The anthems, while they possess the great attraction of bein^ 
short, simple, and easily learned, are at the same time effectire and beanti- 
fuL This book has the peculiar recommendation, that there can be nothing 
wrong in it, for every word is the word of God, and it can therefore be 
joined in by all sections of the Christian Church. It is thus thoroughly 
unsectarian. 

Erice 4s. pit edges, or 3a. plain,., 

The Bible in the Coimting-House. 

By the Key. H. A. Boabdman, DJ),, with au Introduction 
by the Bishop of Bifon. 

From Preface. — " The editor, having attentively perused the work, is 
deeply impressed with the conviction that its republication in the present 
form cannot fail to be attended with practical benefit. English literature 
has been hitherto singularly defective in works of this sjpecific character. It 
has been too much the costom to maintain a distinction between tiie pur- 
suits of commerce and those of religion, as if the affairs of trade and specu- 
lation could have no sort of affinity with the cultivation of personal hounese 
in the fear of God. Whatever tends to break down this unhappy and un- 
scriptural distinction must do good. It is an immense vantage ground 
given to Satan whenever religion is represented as a matter for the sano- 
tnar^ and the closet, but not for the market or exchange. Men need to be 
remmded tiiat rel^on belongs to the afiEiEdrs of every-day life as much as to 
Sabbath-day exercises, or to morning and evening aevotion. It is no more 
out of place at the desk, or behind the counter, than when visibly recognised 
in the ' great assembly.' The secularities of life are not to be divorced from 
those higher pursuits which daim the best energies of an immortal being." 



^^ Price Two Shillings, 

The Old Orthodox Faifh Superior 

to Modem Opinions ; or, Truth and Error surveyed in the 
light of History and Fact. A short Treatise for the Times. 
Bv t}ie Rev. John G. Lobdceb, of Free St David's Church, 
Glasgow. 

*' An admirable little work, and one eminently adapted to the times."— 
Scottish Guardian, 

" A short but effective defence of Soriptore Calvinism."— .FViee (Mrch 
Magagine. 

'* Sound in ita views and aolid in its aignmeati.''— Oria«MJL S^wMoteit^ 
Magagine. 



14 PUBLJ8SSD BT W. R JPPSUK GLAJB&OW. 

■ ■ • r 

Book of Family Pmrer--Tw»ntieib Tboyiaimd" ■ 
—^ Price Two Bhilting^ 

The Christian's Voice of Beyotion ; 



a Manual of Frayon for Family and Brivyte WpnhivL wifchBnB- 
ftoe If Ha BoT. J. G. LoBOora, of Free 8t Davids GhnrdL 
Glasgow. This TQlame opntaina a Six WetU Ooune ^ 
Frayen selected from the meet eminent aathqis iriio have 
published on the subject : — Matthew Henry, Jeremy Tayloi^ 
ttichard Baxter, ^^^^ Ootterill, V^pn, SpinckeSy Pr Momaon, 
Br Hope, T. B(^;ers, Hickersteth, Jenks, Jay, Dewar, Wilfiamfl^ 
Kelsony Toplady. Wilson, I^eiff hton, EettWwell, Soott, Dod- 
dridge^ Swete^ Andrews^ Smithy May, 'WUson, Th^nas i 

In Two Volumes SyoPrioe Four ShUlingB each; doth boordi^ilhift- 
trated with many Characteristio Snnayings, each volume com- 
plete in itself and sold separately. 

Some idea of the yalue and dheapnessof this work may be wet- 
oeiyed when it is mentioned, that the Two YohucneB contain matter 
mora than equal in amount to flye and a-half Volumes printed 
same as Dr Hanna's Life of Chalmera^ e^ch yolume of whiSi con- 
tains 550pagea. 

The Scottish Protestant. 

Edited by James Gibson, AJM^ Professor of Theology and 
Church History in the Free Church College, Glasgow. 

It is no exaggeration to assert of these volumes, that there never 
was such a mass of clear evidence and convincing Scripture argu- 
ment brought to bear upon the pernicious principles and demoral- 
ising practices of the Church of Home. They form, withotU ef- 
ception, the best text-books on Popery thai have yet appeared; and 
all who desire to be prepared fully to meet the subtleties, and 
successfully to combat the sophistries of that " Child of the Devil," 
" The Man of Sin," must possess " The Scottish Protestant'^ for 
themselves. 



ti 



This exceedingly usefol, well-timed, and ably conducted Periodical con- 
tinues to hold on its energetic career, as with — 

* A two-edged blade 
Of heavenly temper keen ; 
For double are the wounds it's made. 
Where'er it smote between : 
*Ti8 death to sin.* 
" On tbe one hand, it has wielded successfully the 'two-edged blade' in 
arousing Protestants from their culpable, if not criminal letha^ and indif- 
ference to the present perilous position in which their dearest interests are 
placed ; and, on the other hand, it has been equally successful in aw^ening 
the dormant, and deluded, and degraded minds of many (would that it were 
all !) of our Roman Catholic brethren to a true sense of the state of hcuidage 
Aod thnddom which priestly infiuence baa Yjioq^^ \L^n them," 



PUBLISHED BY W. R MPBTIN, GLASGOW. 16 



__ Price Two Shillings, 

The Christian's AnaoiH: affainlst 

Infidelity ; a Collection of Rare and Valuable TSots upon 
the evidences of Divine Revelation, by distinguished writers, 
with a Preliminary Essay on the Character and Pretensions 
of Modem Infidelity, together with Notes and Illustrations. 
Bv the Rev. John G. Lorimer, Minister of Free St David's 
Church, Glasgow. 

wb Price Sixpence, 

The Price of Sin in the Church 

of Rome. TAXA CAMERA : or the Price of Sin in tfie 
Customhouse of the Church of Rome ; containing the BuUel 
Dispensations, and Pardons for sdl manner of Yillanies and 
Wickedness, with the several Sums of Money given, and to 
be paid for them. Published in 1 678 by Anthony Egane, B.D., 
late Confessor-General of the Kingdom of Ireland, and after- 
wards Minister of the Gospel according to the Reformed Re- 
ligion. To which is added, the New Creed of the Church of 
Borne, and several other Remarkable Things not in the former 
Editions. 

___ Price Sixpence^ 

The Casquet: (Graelic Soiig^Bookt 

Compfled by Taicsb Munro of GardelL 
«__ Price Two Shillings and Sixpence, 

The Anatomy of Drunkenness. 

By Robert Macnish, iIl.D., Member of the !Faculty of Phy^ 
sicians and Surgeons of Glasgow. 

Contents. — Chap. I. Preliminary Observations — ^11. Causes of 
Drunkenness — III. Phenomena of Drunkenness — ^IV. Drunken- 
ness inodi^ed by Temperament — ^V. Drunkenness modified by the 
Inebriating Agent — Vi. Enumeration of the less common Intoxi- 
cating Agents — ^VII. Differences in the Action of Opium and Al- 
cohol — Vill. Physiology of Drunkenness — IX. Method of Curing 
the Fit of Drunkenness — X. Pathologv of Drunkenness — ^XL Sleep 
of Drunkards — XII. Spontaneous Combustion of Drunkards — 
XIII. Drunkenness judicially considered^— XIV. Method of Curing 
the Habit of Drunkenness — ^XV. Temperance Societies — XVL 
Advice to Inveterate Drunkards — ^XVIl. Effects of Intoxicating 
Agents on Nurses and Children — ^XVIIL Liquors not alwa^&b»s^(- 
ful 



16 PU BLISHED BY W. R. MTHUN, OLASGOW. ^M\ 

___ Price Two Shillings and Sixpeace, ^™ 

The Philosophy of Sleep. 

By Robert Macnibh,'lL.D. 
Contents. — Chap. L Introduction — IT. Sleep in general — IH 
Dreaming — IV. Proplietic Power of Dreams — y. Nightmare — TL 
Daymare— VH. Sleep-Waliing— VIIL Sleep-Talking— IX. Sleep- 
lessness — X. Drowsiness — XI. Protracted Sleep — Xll. Sleep from 
Cold— XIIl Trance— XrV. Walking Dreams— XV. Sj^otral Hia- 
Bions-XVLEcverie— XVIL Abstraction— XVm. Sleep of Plmta 
— XIX. Oenentl blouagement of Sleep. 

_^_ Price Two ShillingB and Sixpencsj 

The Book of Aphorisms. 

By Robert MiCNiaa, LL.D. 
" ' Tte Dook of Apbarisms' ie a highl;_ cnriDos prodaction. Tbe antbol 
calls himBelf a Modem FythagDrean ; he is oertajmy a man of wit. Semi 
ot these remnrkaUc myingn will be found highly use foi ; others are humoroos, 
■od not a few eiqaiaitelj satirical." — Londaa Weeklj/ Dupalch. 

___ Price Two Shillings, 

The Battle of Waterloo, from the 

Traditions of the Soota Greys and Highlanders ; to which is 
subjoined, a Narrative of the Sanguinary Straggles of the 
Fiist Frenoh Jterolation. 

-I One Large Volume^ 8vo, Cloth, Price redaced to lOs. 6d., 

Drs S'Leod and Dewar's Englisli- 

Gaelio and Gaelio-En^ish DictioitaTy. 

" lia tenaary a Tonoli«d ibr by the iMrpeetable namei of ibs Editot^ St 

Mlisad of Glasgow, and Dr Dewai of AlrardeeD — two gentlemen who an 

imbueil with cluneal a» well as Celtio liteiatim, and whoBe namea muU 

Teasonahly giTS cnnenijy to a work of mon pr^iuuion than the pnamt."— 



Price Sixpence, 

TA« Gold Seffiom of Awtralia — Who ought ta Go, and Who 
m. Oagkt to Remain at Home. 

ate Guide to the Digndngfg 

iuth Wales — Blue Mountain Range — OpmrDiggSga 
— Turon DiEgingB— Oakey Creek — Braidwood or Araluen — 
Narou Creek— Louisa Creek — Aberorombie Diggings — Vic- 
toria Diggings — Buninyong — Mount Alexander — K^cedsle 
Creek — n«duoe of Diggings — Foretit, Friars', and fiendigo 
Creeks — Maneroo Country — More New DiCTJngs — MeroO) 
Louisa, Campbell's Creeks — Hargreavea — Statcnbury — Bimg- 
ing Book — Schofield's Station— Spriog Creek— Average ^m- 
ii^ By 8. BUTLEB, Esq. 



PUBLISHED BY W. R M'PHVN, GLASGOW. 17 



My 



Price One Shilling, neatly got up as a Gift-Book for Boys^ 

First Concealment : the Remorse 

of Conscience Depicted in the Confessions of an Exile : a 
Book of Warning and Advice for Boys. By the Bev. 

WnUAH CXJRRIE. 

This is a strikinely told narratiYe^ depicting in strong but tnie colours the 
mn and danger of the young giving way to temptation. A boy at seven years 
c^ age conceals for his own ose a small sum of money due to his parents. The 
effects resnltix^ from this '* first conceahnent " are most strikingly pictured 
forth, and made to come oat in vivid reality — shewing how one misdeed only 
])aves the way for another and a worse — ^leading from the smaller to the 
greater sin. This -gad of the book is very successfully sketched off. It sets 
forth how fearfully^ and by what easy steps, the hardening process goes on in 
the young mind if once the door is opened to deceit. The result is, tiiat 
when the boy arrives at being a youuR man, the passion continues to crow 
upon him, and he becomes more reckleBS, and commits a crime for which 
he is obliged to fly the countiy. It is when far from his Other's happy 
home that he gets time to ponder over his misdeeds : and remorse, swaLung 
in his bosom, subdues the evil inclinations, and makes him, in this Auto- 
bio^phy, pour forth in all the bitterness of his soul the torturing suffering 
he IS now enduring — ^the consequence of his successful '' first concealment. 
The narrative teaches an excellent lesson to the young, and cannot but 
prove nsefol as a beacon to all into whose hands it may come. 

^_ Price Eightpence, 

The Emigrant's Complete Gnide to 

Canada ; a Hand-Book of Facts, collected with the view of 
guiding intending Emigrants in their proceedings ; together . 
with much I^ractical Advice. By Samuel Butleb, Esq. New 
Edition, enlarged. 

--- Price Sixpence, New Edition, 

The Australian Emigrant's Com- 

plete Guide, containing a Descriptive History of Australia, 
an Accoimt of the Climate, Soil, and Natural Productions of 
Western Australia, South Australia, and Swan Hiyer Settle- 
ment ; the facilities they offer for Emigration ; the terms 
upon which Land is purchased in each ; uie advantages they 
present for increasing the Capital of the Emi^ant, and fur- 
nishing a profitable market for his labour. £y S. Butleb, 
Esq. 

— ^ Prize Essay on Popery— Price Five Shillings^ 

Fqpery the Man of Sin and Son of 

I^rdition. A Prize Essay on Popery, by the Bev. RaBxa:& 
Gault. 



ii pVBtiatBb Bt #: k ihrmm, ^iikilefoW. 



ITh 



Wortihias. fiKWRABBiA. SdoftiQAir A; to H ktorioM Aooomil 
of fhemost amineht SOOTS WOftmlBSk Noblefiien^ QanUe- 
men, Mmijrten^ and othen^ wlio testified or Mfltocia fiv the 
'«Mf8e of Befefrailioti in Sooti^^ 

Sizteuiih Omttiry to the jeir 1688 ; MnntJ^ ooQmMI hf 
J6hn Hbin6of Loobgoin; now BeviBed, Oorxectedy ndfii- 
hiiged by a Cleigyman. uid enriofaed with a^min anl 
Koftas by Wtloam UKkym, Biq, Autbor ^ <«19m firbfcea- 
iati^" te. to. 

«rn,ia is 1^ ^ Oia Im* «dhioB of ihii aMM^ 
Hvor taen ib6 Udit H« la niottroiihjtliA luaM<tf_ii 8oo*1p]i6 anteli- 
iiArtnl to flieiraT of thMS ffinlfaloui ^Ti*i—v«»tii— ^ — ffprtHOMiWoii^ JTaM- 

Vidlbnn iVitlL the above In bisb todjpttoi and intended * a 

oemnanion to & is 

e last Words ana Byinr ^jtesli 

numies of the Soottiah WorthieiL. Thewhole That is lo ha 
found in those well-lmown woAs, "TfiOS OLOtJD OS* WHV 
NESSES" and "NAPHTALZ," toffether with others, extracted 
from memoirs of their lives, and other documents, both in 
old published collections and original Ynahusdilpts. Tile whote 
is accompanied with Historical Notices and ObservatioDS, 
explanatory and corrective, by a Clergyman, and enriched 
with Preface by W. M'GAvm, Author of "The Protestant.'* 

In elegant Binding, most suitable for a Present or Kiihdav 
—.Gift, 

The Bev. Dr Memes' Edition of 

Cowper^ Works. The Poems end Letters, each complete of 
itself, separately or together. Five Shillings and ^j^noe each 

"We would advise those who know and appreciate Cowi>er to possess 
themselves of this edition. There is much good sense and critical acomen 
displayed, and Cowper is jadiciously allowed to tell as nrnch of his own stoiy 
as the papers he left behind him contain.*' — AtUu, 

** Such a work has long been a desideratum in the literary woilcL"— 
Court Jov/moL 
-_. Price One Shilling, 

The Practical Engineer's Pocket 

Guide ; a Concise Treatise on the Nature and Application of 
Mechanical Forces, the Action of Gravity, the Elements of 
Machinery, &c. ; with a variety of Bules and Tables, of the 
greatest use to Engineers and Mechanics in genera). By Pro- 
fessor Wallace. 



PUBLISHED BY W. R. IPPHUN, GLASGOW. 19 

Price One Shilling, 

The Pocket Medical Gnide ; a Popn- 

lar Treatise on Diet and Eegimen, Cold and its Effects, and 
the Use and Doses 6f Medicine ; the whole selected from the 
latest and best authorities, and carefully adapted for the Use 
of Families and Non-Professional Readers. By a Physician. 

GoNTSiinB. — ^Part I. On Diet and Regimen.— Chap. I. General 
Lnatomy of the Digestive Apparatus — Chap. IL Of Hunger and 
liirsi>--Chap. III. What is the Natural Food of Man ?--Chap. 
\r. Of Alimentanr Substances — Chap. V. Rules for taking Food 
-Chap. VL Of Indigestion. — Part II. On Exposure to Cold, 
ND its Effectts. — Chap. I. Of Cold in general — Chap. IL Of 
lie Diseases caused by Exposure to Cold — Chap. Ill, Of the 
Leans whereby the Bad Effects of Exposure to Cold may be 
LYoided.— Part IIL On the Use and Doses of Medicine. 

Price One Shillings 

DecUacUed, bt^ permissionf to Ifobert Napier, Esq^ Vvloan 

Foundryy Glasgow^ 

The Practical Mechanic's Pocket 

Quide ; containing Rules and Tables for calculating the Work- 
ing Effects of Prime Movers of Machinery ; of the Strength, 
Resistance, and Pressure of Materials ; with Tables of the 
Wei^^t and Cohesive Strength of Iron and other Metals ; and 
the Elements of Machinery, including the Mechanical Powers, 
with Practical examples and illustrations. By Professor 
Wallace. 

Contents. — ^Animal, Wind, Water, and Steam Power — ^Weight, 
itrength, and Strain of Materials — Practical Tables — ^Weight of 
ietali— Specific Gravity and Weight of Materials — Steam and 
(team-Engines — Specific Cohesion and Strength of Materials — 
lechaniccu Powers. 

" In no department of sdeiioe or hteratore have wo met a more tnily nsafol 
lanoal than this tiny Tolome." — Athencemn. 

Price One Shilling, 

Fhe Tonnff Man's Pocket Guide 

to Practical Wisoom ; designed to elevate the Character and 
Improve the Understanding of Young Men about to eatAs. 
upon the Business of Life. By Mssreo^ 



I 



Tb 



PUBLISHED BY W. It. MTHUN, GLASOOW. \ 

Fiice One Shilling, 

e TTniversal Calculator's Pocket 

Guide ; a Companion to every set of Mathematical Table^ 
shewing tiieir Construction and Application to Arithmetiii, 
Mensuration, Trigonometry, Surveying, Navigation, Astro- 
nomy, &0. &0. By Profeasor WauiAcb. 

The work contnine an explBjiatiou of the principles of the con- 
struction and use of Logarithms, and Boveral methods of calcukU 
ing them by common arithmetic, some of which are indeed 
founded on purely arithmetical principles. Mathematical invea- 
tigationa of the moat usefiil Algebraic formulie relating to Loga- 
rithms and to Ti'igoQometrical functions connected with them in 
{iractice. 

" This Utile work is intetiiled as a siiitible companioii to evcnr Bct of 
Mathemntical Tables. ' The Dniveraal Culcuktor's Pockot Guide' is truly 
» vMlltiin in pai-nu—B, niiudnium of intelligence in a minimiini of bulk."— 
Criticai Btviea. 

__ Price One Shilling, 

The Touig Housekeeper's Pocket 

Guide, a Manualcontaiijing much iniormation calculated to 
increase domestio comfort and h^ipiueaa at the Bmallwt a, 

Kioe 7s. 6d., bound in cloth, engraTod in the best style of 
the art, 

A Series of Improved Mercantile 

Forms of Accounts, Commercial Correspondence^ &&, to 
which are subjoined Numerous Exercises, designed to excite 
a taste for writing with neatness and elegance, and to com- 
pete Young Men for the Counting-House. By O. Mobbibos, 
Writing-Master and Accountant, Qla^ow. 

The Ufe of a Siulor, Price Two Shillings, in a neat pocket 
__ volume, 

Two Tears before the Mast ; a 

Penonal Narrative of Life at Sea. 
■_ Vvjx One Shilling and Sixpence^ 

The New Stamp Acts. 

A popular Exposition of ibe Practical Working of the He* 
Sbunp Acts ; with special reference to the Iaw of £ea^|itft 



Th 



PUBLISHED BY W. R WPEUN, QLA8G0W. 21 
-_. Price One Shilling, 

The Mother^s Pocket Guide: a 

Treatise on the Physical Education and Diseases of Children. 
Compiled for popular use from the writings of Drs Eberle, 
Dewees, Bums, Hyan, Kennedy, and others. By a Physician. 
Contents. — The Prophylactic and Physical Managemevit of 
Children, — Of the Conduct of Mothers during Pregnancy — Diet 
during Pregnancy — Dress and Exercise — Moral Influence— Blood- 
letting — ^The Breasts — ^Parturition — The Management of New- 
bora fcifents — ^The Food of Infants — ^The Employment of Nurses 
-^Artificial Nursing — Exercise, Air, Temperature, and Nurseries 
'^The Diseases of Children — Syncope, Asphyxia, and Imperfect 
Besmration — ^The Tongue-tie — Inflammation — ^Teething--Diabe- 
tes. Erysipelas, Thrush, Ulceration of the Mouth — Colio— 3)iuTho8a 
—Ophthahniar— Cholera — Croup. 

Price One Shillings 

e Practical Chemist^s Pocket 

Guide ; beingan Easy Introduction to the Study of Che- 
mistry. By William Hope, M.D., Operative Chemist. 
. "We have no hesitation in saying thai this Manual of Chemistry is one 
of the best we have ever met with. It is literally a complete mvUum in 
parvo of useful information. In its method of arrangement it has the 
powerful recommendation of extreme simplicity. In its langaage it is clear 
and intelligible. Its Ulnstrations are eyidently the result of practical in- 
Testigation. ' — Liverpool Standard. 

MMi 11 Price Sixpence^ 

Watson's Apology for the Bible. 

Price Eightpence, 

What is the Theology suited to 

Cure the Evils of the Present Times ? A Discourse pro- 
nounced in the School of Evangelical Theology at Geneva, 
at the opening of the Session, October 1852. By Meblb 
D'AUBIGNB, DJ). With Prefatory Notes by the Rev. J. Q. 
LoBiMEB, D.D., of Free St David's Church, Glasgow. 

--^ Price One Shilling, 

The Christian Teacher's Pocket 

Guide ; a practical Treatise on the Sacred Doctrines of 

Christianity. A most valuable work for those who have 

the conducting of Sabbathnschools. 

Contents. — I. On Human Depravity. — II. On the Atonement.— 

HI. On Repentance.— IV. On Faith.— V. On Regeneration.— VL 

Directions to the Inquirer^— VIL On the Nature of Inabiliii. 

— YIII. On Divine Sovereignty. 



88 PUBLISHED BY W. R. ItPHUN, QLABQOW. 
a^^ M^ Prioa One flhillinfc 

M iPhim'8. Diamond Gazetteer of 

the World ; a Comprehensive Geojpnphicel Diotionaqr 
of all the Eingdonu^ Kaiionai Cities, Bivera^ &a Hm 
popidation is aooorately given from the QovenmieDt 
tSuunia 

"Mr KThim, lonc^ diatiiiigniahud fm hia dioap Bilte, praniiaei to bi 

' Twentj Thoonnd Googmphiflal FadVy' oompriaed in a Toiimie of aboio 
000 pigea. and yet ao muul aa that it con be oanried in an ordinarrmt 
poeketT Tbia Tonr neat little Tofaime ia a oompendioua GeQpEraphioal Di» 
ttonaiy of all the kingdoma, nationB, dtioL Tiren, fto., of thia gi e ai ivorid. 
Tbe popolation «€ eaoa town ia alao giTen ntun the laat Goremment eeana 
(jaMttema have kithoto been known onlj aa hnfle fidioa and qoartoig M 
we have now one more convenient than anr of them, and more ooamkAi 
than moat, in the ahape of a volnme abont the bulk of a anAll PlBafan-nok» 
We have tamed op a nnmber of plaoea, gnat and amall, and ibnnd then 
all in the little book, and aoouatolj alloeited. Our readen ahonld aU no- 
fore M^yhvi'a pretty Gaaettaer."— iiTortik **- ** -^ "" 



^^ Price One Shillings 

Banking and Commerce. By O. K 

Bel], Esq^ Author of '< The Philosophy of Jointnstock Bank- 
ing." 

THE MERCHANTS AND BANKER'S COMMERCIAL 
GUIDE, a Manual of the Principles of Banking, Broking, Fairs, 
Foreign Coins, Foreign Exchange, Insurance, Market Prices, Public 
Funds, and Commercial Transactions in general 

** This is a little volume which eyery ])erson connected with oommereitl 
pursuits should possess." — Belfast Northern Whig. 

'* Most pregnant with useful matter." — Glasgow Constiiuiional, 

** This is one of the most useful and best executed little worioi of a pzac* 
tical kind we have ever met with." — Edinburgh Evening Post. 

" Eveiything interesting to the banker and general merchant may be here 
found briefly explained." — Dumfries Advertiser, 

^-- Price Sixpence, 

The Moral, Intellectual, and Phy- 

sical Training of the Young Explained, Illustrated, and Eo- 
forced. Being a New Edition of Mrs Child's Mother a Book. 

Contents. — On the Means of Developing the Bodily Senses in 
earliest Infancy — Early Development of the Affections — Early 
Cultivation of Intellect — ^Management in Childhood — Amuse- 
ments and Employments — Sunday— Religion — ^Views of Death — 
Supernatural Appearances — ^Management during the Toens— 
Views of Matrimony. 



PUBLISHED BY W. R M'PEUN, GLASGOW. 23 
___ Price One Shilling, 

The Eliqiiette of the Toilette Table ; 

a Manual ot Utility, Elegance, and Personal Comfort, adapted 
for the every-day use of both Sexes. By An Officer's 
Widow. 

"This is decidedly the best -work that we bave seen on tbe subject of 
personal adornment. The authoress has completely succeeded in divestmg 
"the subject of the mystery in which it has been hitherto usually enyeloped. 
She has furnished us with a copious fund of information on the proper 
management of the complexion, the hands, the feet, the teeth, the mouth, 
the breath, the lips, the hair, the beard, the eye, and the ear. She has also 
giyen us a Tarietv of useful mnts on the subject of dress, and on the use of 
the bath. To all this there is appended a multitude of recipes for preparing 
every description of perfumes, cosmetics, dentifrices, ointment for the growtii 
and preservation of the hair, &c Those who are anxious to cultivate per- 
sonal beauty and grace, will find in this elegant pocket volume a store of in- 
valuable maxims, the observance of which, we are bound to add, will be 
Ibond in most oases highly conducive to health.**— ^ivdrpoo^ Standard, 

___ Price One Shilling, 

The Practical Mathematician's 

Pocket Quide ; a Set of Tables of Logarithms of Numbers, 
and of Logarithmic Sines and Tangents ; with other useful 
Tables for ^gineers, Surveyors, Mechanics, &c. By Profes- 
sor WaIiLACB. 

-_- Price Sixpence, ^^ 

The Law of Husband and Wife, a 

Concise and Comprehensive Treatise, shewing their Belative 
Bights and Obligations. By A Solicitob beforb thb Su- 

FBBMB COXTBTS. 

" We oordially recommend it to the notice of our readers. The contents 
are admirably arranged under the following heads : — Constitution of Mar- 
riage ; Oonse^ences of the Relation, and its effects on the Person and Pro- 
perty of the Spouses ; Rights and Obligations of the Spouses ; Donations 
between Spouses, and Dissolution of Marriage : and under each division is 
given everything relating to the subject, devoid of technicalities, and in a 
eommon^eense style." — Ayr Observer. 

** We cordially recommend it to the perusal of all our readers, trh^Br 
married or unmarried." — Perth Conatitutional. 

" It is a clear, concise, and valuable treatise on a most important sub- 
ject. It contains a vast amount of information ; and we have been unable 
to detect in it a single error." — Dailp BvUetin, 

iH^ Price Sixpence, 

Brother Jonathan, Sketched by 

Himself. A book containing a tvxiid. oil ^^^n^^ ^ciss^^^^ 
in the choicest specimens of xai^e^\L\]j£kO\>x« 



I PUBLISSED BY W. R. M'PHUN, OLASGOW. I 

Frioe Sixpence, 

jaw of Landlord and Tenant; a 

Plain, Practical, and FamiBar Treatise on the Law of Landlord 
and Tenant, adapted Tor gaiding the LantUord and Factor ia 
the Letting at Property, and in enabling the Tenant to maio- 
tain his rights to its use and possesaion, including a Chapter 
for Lodgers ; and MiscellanoouH Obaervations, esplauuDg thfi 
points that have proved stumbliugblocks either to Landlord 
or Tenant. Sy aa Old IjAWzbb. 



Price Siipenc^ 

The Law of Master and Servant 

Famiharly Explained. 

CoHTEKra. — Chap, L How the relation is constituted. Sect. I. 
Engagement. 2, Verbal Engi^ement. 3. Arlea. 4. Written En- 
gagement 6. Local Cuatorua. 6. Perioda of Service. — Chap. It 
Ohligationa incumbent on Mastera. Sect. 1, To receive and keep 
a Servant. 2, To use him properly. 3. Wages. 4. Character to 
Servant. — Chap. IIL ObUgations inmimbent on the Servant. Sect 
I. To ent«r to and remain in hia ptaoe. & Servant to obey ordns 
and to be reepectfuL 3. Servant to be qualified and to apfJ; 
Limself soleh to hia duties. 4. To be fiidthM and honeat, and ob- 
servant of all the decenciea of life. — Chap. IV. How the Contract 
terminates. Sect 1. Wanting. S. Imphed Warning. 3. "EStdt 
of Local Usage aa to Warning. 4. Warning fixed by Agreement 
Arrestment of Servant's Wages. BespooaibiUty <H Ahsten for j 
Gerrant and of Serranta themselves. | 

Price One Shillii^ 

Fifteen Pleasure Excursions to the 

Highlands, its Lakes, ita Mountains, and its iloora ; amon^ 
otheiH, embracing — Loch Iiomond, Ben Lomond, Sob Roy's 
Cave, Loch Los^, Dumbarton Castle, Rotbeeay, Eylea of 
Sute, Ailsa Craig, Ooatfellj Olens Sannoi and Rosa, In- 
verary Castle, Oban, Stafia, Fingal'a Cave, lono, Dnart 
Castle, Skye, Spar Cave, Mull, Baira, Loch Awe, Ben Nevi^ 



PUBLISHED BT W. R WPHUN, GLASGOW. 25 

Price One Shillings 

Fhe Pocket Ouide to Commercial 

Book-keeping ; a Practical Treatise on Merchants' Accounts, 
by Single and Double Entry, according to the latest and most 
approved Systems. By Professor Wallace. 

Contents. — ^Definitions, Books used in Business, Definitions of 
)ebtor and Creditor, General Bules to find Dr. and Cr., Daily 
iooks, Cash Book, Bill Book, Bills Beceivable Book, Bills Payable 
{ook, Day Book, Jones's System, Journal or Sub-Ledger, to J our- 
lalise the Cash Book, to Journalise the Bill Book, to Journalise 
he Day Book, Ledger by Single Entry, Ledger by Double Ikitry, 
Salancmg the Books, Check on the Balance Sheet, Memorandums 
f Tnmsactions. — Inland Trade. Memorandums of Transactions, 
!!ash Book, Bill Book, Specimens of Bills, Bills Receivable Book, 
(ills Payable Book, Day Book, Cotton Book, Bank Account, Lidex 
Ledger, Ledger, Single Entry, Balance Sheet, Check, Journal, 
ledger (A) Double Entry, Trial Balance (A). — ^Foreign Trade. 

" Of all the expositionfl of the principles and practices of commercial book- 
eepingy * The P<x^et Guide * is tne cheapest, the simi)lest, the clearest No- 
[ling is pnt down but what is absolutely needed ; yet it embraces eyeirthing 
seful in the science. The definitions are dear and comprehensiye, tne ex- 
ositions succinct and perspicuous, and the plan quite unique."— JS^rwicfc 
Viurder* 

Price One Shilling, 

Fhe Pocket Guide to Domestic 

Cookery. By a Ladt. To which are added, Listructioos 
for Trussing and Carving, with Plates. Li this Edition has 
been included an entire chapter on Preserves, thus making 
the work the cheapest, most complete^ and most concise treatise 
on Cookery extant. 

Price One Shilling, 

KEThun's Tourist's Guide to the 

Trosachs, Loch Katrine, Falls of Clyde, and other Ro- 
mantic Scenery, arranged in Boutes for the Quidance of 
the Tourist ; being a New and Improved Edition of 
^ The Scottish L^d Tourist's Pocket Guide to the 
Picturesque Scenery of Scotland," with the Eailways. 

Price Sixpence, 

Fhe Marriage Customs and 

Ceremonies adopted by all Nations of the World. 
" Woe to him that la alone,"— Ecclw, \^ A^. 



I 



ae PUBLIBEED BY W. R. M^FHUN, OLASGOW. 
^^ Price SixpeocB, 

M'Fhnn's Catechisms of TTsefnI 

Knowledge. No. I. Miscolkoeous Elementary Kuow- 

" Wb haye erent pleasure in peniaing tliii eMeUent littie Catechiem. Tin 
snbjeata intnidaced uannot fail td iaturest anil uistnitt the miDdB of childnn- 
I|ar the purpoee uf eicKIng mental eiertion, tbsre ore numeroaB qneBtioitf 
■without «ijj aDBwers ; tliis we think an importiint improvement of modOTn 



No. IL The Shorter CateohiBm, with Notes ; Catechisms for 
Children, bj Ibaao Watis, D.D, j and a Collaction of Hjmns by 
Yurioua Autliors. 

Price Sspenca, 

Scripture Beferences, for the TTse of 

Sabuath-Schools, Fellowahip Societies, and Private Families. 
By CRARLE8 Leckie. a most valuable book for the use of 
Sabbath- school 9 — a comi'lete Bible Reference and Help to 
the Study of the Scriptures. This valuable Manual his 
rapidly passed through the Press Eighteen tiioes — a anfficieiit 
proof of itself of the escolleace of.tEe.vork, 



eat«naive a drcaktdon. It conaiBta of no f^wei than ITS diBtinot dootrinw 
m propoBtioDB, lUuntrated and supported by copious referancei. The amnge- 
ment u exceedingly good, aad Uie aelection of passages bigM; judiciinii. lie 
author givea a due placs to certain dottrinsa which we hSTs not aeeu stated 
in works ofa similar nature. "—^coUiiA Pretbj/teriaa. 

^^ Price Sjipence, 

The Commercial Correspondent's' 

Complete Direetor ; contaimug the most approved Modes of 
addressing all Bonks of Society in Epistolary Communica- 
tion ; 'with Accurate Forms of the Superscription, Com- 
mencemeat, and Conclusion of Letters. 

In One Volume^ Post 8vo, Price 6&, 

Sinconrses,' on Anniversary tad 

other Special Occasions. By the Bar. Joan ^nrE^IU}, 
Glaagow. 



PUBLISHED BT W, B. WPHVN, GLASGOW. ^ 
__- Price One Shilling and Sixpence, 

The Practical Uses of Phrenology, 

eiemplified in the application of the Science to every-day 
life. By Gall the Younger. 

"Phrenoloj^, if carefully studied^ will enable eveiy one to put the right 
man in the right place." 

|M| Fourth Thousand. Price 3s. 6d., illustrated by Plates^ clothi 

The Philosophy of Phrenology. By 

a Member of the Phrenological and Philosophical Societies 
of Glasgow. 

" The aathor of the work before us deserves very greab pndse. He has 
wmplified Phrenology very materially^ and his observations being written in 
a dear and lucid style, they will be easily understood and digested. It is 
also a very excellent feature in this book, that the writer founds uniformly 
upon evidence^ and never thinks of convincing his readers by bare asser- 
tions." — Aberdeen Herald, 

M— ^ Price One Shilling, 

f hun's Catechism of Phrenology, 

illustrative of the Principles of the Science. By a Member 
OF THE Phrenological Society of Edinburgh. 

iSt It is not saying too much for this Elementary Treatise on 
Phrenology, to assei*t that it has done more for the propagation 
of the Science than any other i^ork on the same subject that has 
yet appeared. The very fact that 32,000 copies of it have been 
sold, is a sufficient test of its well-merited popularity. 

Price Sixpence, 

iguette: The Philosophy of 



Et 



Manners; The Principles and Practice of True Politeness, 
and the Courtesies of Life. By F. Talbot, Esq., Cheltenham. 
Dedicated to the Honourable the Lord Provost of Qlasgow. 

" This is a jndicions Seqnel to the Laws of Etiqnette, and onght to be 
in the hands or all yoang persons who aspire to elegance of deportment, or 
refinement of manners." — Kilmarnock Journal. 

** It contains many excellent hints for the regulation of manners, and 
may be profitably studied even by the most polished." — BoUon Free Preu, 



g^^ ^^ Price Sixpenc e, 

How to Woo ; How to Win; and How 

to get Married. With Counsels to a Newly Married Pair 
for securing True Happiness in their Wedded Life. Beicuot, 
the true Philosophy of Love,Go\\TtR\i\^,^\A'^^38x\S3Me^* ^^ 
the Hon. Mra Selina RiNijraAR,"Pi\or3\kcA%^,^^^i^«t- 



'88 PUBLISHED B7 W. R. M'PHUN. GLASGOW. 4H 
Price Sixpence, 

Advice to a Toung Commercial 

Traveller, how to Conduct Ilimaelf so aa to secure the 
Esteem of his Emplojera sitd the Confidence of his Cus- 
tomers. 
CoNTKNTB. — The Importance of Commercial Travelling — On the 
Changes of the System — Education — Personal Eemiisitea — HaWto 
—The Commenaal Room — Pinner — Servanta — Fees — Modes of 
Conveyance. 

"A nlover littla fn-Mhnre that ought to be in tbe heniia of all oonunar- 
dal trarellers. It is wHtten in a pleneant, spriditiy style — sonnd sease (at 
the Bul^JBot matter, seasoned with wit, aod bbttw with good taate." — I*ii«»- 
' fries Standard. 

Price Sispence, 

The Principles of Bible Temperance. 

By the Kev. Profeagor Gibson, A-M^ Professor of Theology 
and Church History in the Free Chureh College, Olaagow. 



Th, 



^e Temperance Question viewed in 

the Light (sthe Sodptures, with an Appeal to ChriatiaiiB 
of all DBnominatioiia. Bjr the Bev, Clgu. cb Fayb, 



race Bupence, 

The Mother at Home; on Principles ) 

of Maternal Piety. Familiarly Illustrated. By JomT S. O i 
AsBOT, Pastor of the Calvinistio Church, Worcester. 
CoiiTmns.^BeBpoDBib)lity — Materoal Authority — The Hothead 

Difficulties — Faulte and Erronh—Bel^ous Instruction — Bhutto. 

Price 2a. Sd., or elegantly bound, gilt edges, for presentation, 3b. Sd, 

Amy Wilton ; or, Ligrhts and Shades 

of Chriatian Life. Bj Euma Jake Wobboibx. With BIiu- 
tratioDS by Birket Foster. 



^tfflMmfonan't JfofoinK. 



PUBLISHED BT W, R. M'PHUN, GLASGOW. 29 

Price Sixpence, 

Fodd's Lectures to Children. 

CoNTBNTB. — ^How do we Bjiow there is any God ? — ^Repent- 
nce for Sin — Angels' Joy when Sinners Repent — What Faith is, 
od what its Use is— God will take Care of us — Jesus Christ 
*astins Death — Christ Interceding for us--Giving Account to 
k>d — Great Events hang on Little Things — Fragments all to be 
aved— The Sabbath to be kept Holy— The Grave Losing its 
Ictory. 

Price Sixpence, 

Fhe Child's Own Frayer-Book, con- 

sisting of Prayers and Graces for the Young : a Help to 
Nursery Devotion. 

" There is a fervency throaghont -which cannot fail to impress the hearts 
feren the youngest, and an wnction which must so fully engross the mind 
'hile engaged in the sacred duty of prayer as to shut out all ^terior objects^ 
ad eleTate the affection from nature's works to nature's CKkL" — Olasffcw 

Price Sixpence^ 

Fhe Toung Wife's Own Book. Her 

Domestic Duties and Social Habits. By Mrs Hendebson of 
Wilton Park. 

Contents. — ^Duties of a Wife-— Obligations of Married Life— > 
londuct to Relations — ^Morning Visits—Conduct to the Husband 
-Duties of a Stepmother — Servants — ^Visitors — ^The Bargain- 
kiyer — ^The Domestic Lady — ^True and False Meekness — On the 
iaealiar Tempers of Man — ^The Wife— Peevishness— Obstinacy. 

''An excellent present for a Toung firide, from which, if she carefolly 
erase it, she may reap much adyantage." — Caledonian Mercury, 

"Written with er^t good sense, and contains, in a short space, a multi- 
ide of advices ana directions calculated to be erfcremely useful to those for 
fnoae benefit it has been composed." — F^eshire JouamaL 

Price Sixpence, 

Fhe Young Lady's Friend. By the 

Misses Westall of Westall Manor. 

Contents^ — ^Litroduction — ^Lnprovement of Time — Domestic 
iconomy— Dress — Behaviour to Gentlemen — Conduct in. P^sh^ 
-leaner Fkirties— Evening Partiea---^oii^Qt«adsioi[i--^^^^ 



Tlw Art «f O^iMlteBMU 



iviA mnto kow EfikMbtlj ififtam ill the D«tMilf t 



Qottlnttan ai tho Dumer 

eotting vp-Hiod Ok piooeM U iwplilii^jlaUL^joiranbyjSnM of^lfi 
This ii, we think, the most TaliiaUe put of the vodiy b^^ 
boar tliflmMhrn tolenbly at telila an laiaanlily ignonnl of eanw 
fliuqvter on markoting will alatf Ixf taHaift py ifl good ho u a c w i twi^ 



Letters to the Worldiir GIs^^ on 

IibportwKi Sttlsjeots. % Oiti <rf Ta a J am m 

tiHMiit-m. H]«iiOf7 of the Kew TmU^ 

or apparent oontradiotioiiB of Soriptare/— V, lliiuoleai 

Dedicated to Professor' iSTlOHOi^ CfUxsgow University, "Pnoefii, 

The Weather Indicator. How to 

Judge of the Weather to Come, from the position of the 
Moon, at its Bising and Setting ; by the appearance of the 
Sun and Stars ; by the Wind, and by the Clouds ; and othn 
Atmospheric Induences ; and by signs exhibited by Aniyir^yli^ 
Plants, &C. 

Contents. — ^The Weather as Indicated by the Moon — Chanm 
of the Moon — Signs from the Sun— Si^s from the Stars — '&M 
Aurora Borealis — Clouds — ^Mists and Fogs — ^The London ¥oi 
—Signs of Kain— St Swithin's Day— The Rainbow— The Wind 
— ^The Helm Wind — Storms — St Elmo's Fire — Signs preceding 
Great Storms — Sounds from the Sea — ^Thunder and Lightning- 
Precautions during ja Thunder Storm — Hail — ^Locs^l Infiuencea— 
Signs of Weather Indicated by Bodily Feeling — Signs Exhibited 
by Animals — ^The Weather Foretold by Observing the Habits of 
a Spider — Indications of the Weather by Snails-^ Signs from 
Plants — ^The Barometer — ^The Marine Barometer — Chemical Btoo^ 
meter— Earthquakes-^The Cycle of the Seasons— Climsfe' d 
Britain — Continental Climates^jleneral Observations. 

"Man is so dependent npon the weather, not only for his com^ni^ M 
even for his suhsiBtence, Mdk\, to be fii.ble to aaoertain its coming cfaang« ha% 
HAtorally, always been to Vmn ttn <A:)\«rXi t:! «iXinsi&& i^^s^q^a^" — Ckarki 
Knight'e Fenny MagaavM. 



I 



PUBLISHED BY W. K M'PHUN, GLASGOW. 31 



Price Sixpence, 

Indijg^estion Curable, and Dig^estion 

macte Easy. Practical Advice on the Pre^^ntion of Diseases 

of the Stomach. 
Contents. — Structure and Functions of the Mouth, Mastica- 
tion — Dental Pulp — Development of the Teeth — Structure and 
Functions of the Organs of Deglutition — Structure and Functions 
of the Stomach — Chymification — ^The Gastric Juice — Of Hunger 
and.l'birst — Of the Foodr—Of Chylification — Of the Absorption 
of the Chyle— Of the Digestive Function of the Lymphatics — 
General Remarks on Dietetics. 

Price 7s. 6d. in Cloth, 870, pp. 38% 

Currency, Self-regulating and Elas- 

tio: ezi^ained in a Letter to the Duke of Argyl], with Li- 
troductory Chapters on the nature of Capital and of Money. 
3y a British Merchant- 

Dedicated by express permission to Sir Archibald Alison, Bari, 
Price Sixpence, A new and exact Compendium of 

The Law of Succession in Moveable 

Rights. By Thb Old Lawyer. 

CoKTBNTS. — I. Subjects of Intestate Moveable Soooession. — II. Order of 
Succession. — III Mode of Succession. — IV. Inventory and Succession Duty. 
— ^V. Questions between Heir and Executor.— VI. Rights of Husband and 
Wife.— VII. Legitim; or Children's Rights.— VIII. Miscellaneous Points. 
— IX. Operation of Foreign Law. 

Price Tenpence, 

The Bible Scholar^s Class Book, a 

popular View of Divine Truth, adapted to the capacitieSy . 
and intended to assist the young mquirer in his pursuit 
after Scriptural knowledge. 

CoHTKNTS.— Existence and Character of God— The Trinity— Gk)d*s Pur- 
ooqes — Creation — Providence — Apgels — Rule of Obedience— Apostasy*- 
Depmit]^ — Atonement — Regeneration — Holy Love — Repentance —Faith — 
Jufffeineation — Perseverance — Death — Future State— RMurrection— Judg- 
ment — Future Hanpiness — Future Misery— Means of Grace — ^Worship — 
Sabbath — Church Baptism — Lord's Supper — MUlennlum. 
•• TMi is a popular view of divine truth, adapted to the capacities of yoang inquirers, 
li derignad to stimnlate their search after Scriptural knowledge. Its range of sub. 



Jects is extensive, consisting of thirty-one in all : the questions propounded are perti- 
flliBnt^ and the answers given are singularly copious. The definitions and Illustrations 
an accurate and most instructive. The book is entitled to the attention of w«ak..<^ 
anA aab]l»|lh^chool teachers^ as it is fitted to be an \ul«r<»\.\uv&X«^v.\^QOLV^ >i2Qi^ 
dMttiig ojf adraaoed dasfoi^'^-^toi^ow <8aUKi(/uM)iooVUwUiiv M(M)axi(^«. 



SHED BY W. R. M-PEUN, OLASOOW. 

' Svw itioni of iKe /o/loiding Worti are in Ihe Press, and will 
i/iortlt/ be piiblished. 
1 1 I [koiii ravig), in {s&p. Sro, prtoa 2s. 6d., or ricLI; gilt, 3s. fld., 

Iter's Family. By the Bev. W. H. 

JNGTOH, LL.D., Miniatar of Frea St Paul's, Edia- 
PHnttdimtargilypt,a»tiiitahJefortIieAgtdas Ihtg are edifyiitg for 

The Wayside Tracts. First and Second Series. 

Eilit&d by the Eev. A. Cameron, Editor of "The Chriatiaa 
Treasury," &c. 

The Fireside Tracts. First and Second Series. 

Edited by the Eov. A. Cameron, Editor of " The Christian 
Treasury," &o. 

Tracts on the Martyrs and Covenanters. 
Buniatore Series of Interesting Narratives, 

many of them by cmiueut men. Amougwhom are the Bev. 
John M'Donald of Caioutt« ; the Rev. Dr WnsoN of Bora- 
bay ; the Rev. E. M. M'Chbtne, Dundee ; the Rev. William 
Arnot, Glasgow ; the Bev. Dr Neviss, Baltimore ; Hev. 
John Edmond, Glasgow ; Mrs Harriet Beecber SrowKi 
the Rev. Andrew Thomson, DJ), Edinburgh; the Bev. 
Chablbs John Brown, Edinburgh. 
A detailed liat at the vhole of the ttboin moat ioatnicliTe Beries of TncU 

and NBirativeB ib ia prepanttiou, and viU be printed in a. eeparote furm foi 

general distribution. 

Buins of Bible Lands. A Journey over the 

Region of Pulfillod Prophecy. BytlieRev.J.A.WTLiE.LL.D, 

Author of " The PapEioy," " The Modern Judea," &c. &c 

*.* Tbe preaetit is the Fifth Editioa in Britain. The Work has been le- 

printed in Ameriea, and widely circuUtted ttere; iihas also been tramtated 

inb) Welsh. Thit Edition contairui oil the modem discmeriei, and extendi 

to tfeutk lAt »ize o/tAc previmu EdUiont. 

Price Ell. 6d., boond in oloth {nov rtadjfj. 

The Wages Calcnlator : Being Tahles for Cal- | 

culating Workmen's Wages, from Ss. to L.S, 2a. per week, I 
at Ten working Hours each Day,_for any number of Hours, 
from One Hour to Two Hundred EUid Fifty, embracing ] 
Twentv-five Working Days. Suitable for Payment <rf 
Monthly and other Contracts, &c. By At.irT. M. CamebON, 
Musaelburgh. 

£zoiirsiona to AtxaUf Ailai Ctai^, &o. By the 
Bev. Datid Iiunie8oaQTi«B,'DX>. 



T 



OUH0 8Y 
»* GR4y 



1 



I 






OUND Vf *1 
VtnC/fjty I 



