











Theology Library 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 
California 











a 


a ae in 
ee AS Ie ae 95% (EN 

“SS! fee 

Sees. ith. oF 





. : a 
TO Ya rte 


1) aa 


YIIMAe 


ea [0:0 





—— 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 
BS ON THE GOSPELS, 


Des 


FOR FAMILY AND PRIVATE USE. 





WITH THE TEXT COMPLETE. 


BY THE REV. a C. RYLE, ‘'B. A, 


CHRIST CHURCH, ee 
RECTOR OF HELMINGHAM, SUFFOLK; 


AUTHOR OF “LIVING OR DEAD,” “WHEAT OR OHAFF,” “STARTLING QUESTIONS,” 
“RIOH OR POOR,” “PRIEST, PURITAN, AND PREACHER,” ETC., ETO. 


eP. MACK Ks 


NEW YORK: 
ROBERT CARTER & BROTHERS, 
530 BROADWAY. 


1863. 





Thaslsaiy |Libraey 
SEHEC. @= Ti OLOGY 
® AT Sey AY <eMONT 

California, 


PREFACE. 


Tue volume now in the reader’s hands, is a continuation 
of a work already commenced by “ Expository Thoughts 
on St. Matthew.” 

The nature of the work has been so fully explained in 
the preface to the volume on St. Matthew, that it seems 
unnecessary to say anything on the subject. It may be 
sufticient to repeat that the reader must not expect to find 
in these “Expository Thoughts,” a learned critical com- 
mentary on the Gospels. If he expects this he will be dis- 
appointed. The work before him makes no pretence to 
being anything more than a continuous series of short prac- 
tical Expositions. 

The main difference between this volume and the one 
which has preceded it, will be found to consist in the 
occasional explanatory foot-notes. The subjects of these 
notes will generally prove to be difficult passages or expres- 
sions in the inspired text. I cannot pretend to say that I 
have thrown any new light on the difficulties in St. Mark. 
But I can honestly say that I have endeavored to put the 


reader in possession of all that can be said on each difficulty. 


iv PREFACE. 


In composing these Expositions on St. Mark, I have 
tried to keep continually before me the three-fold object 
which I had in view, when I first commenced writing 
on the Gospels. I have endeavored to produce something 
which may be useful to heads of families in the conduct of 
family prayers—something which may assist those who 
visit the poor and desire to read to them—and something 
which may aid all readers of the Bible in the private study 
of God’s word. In pursuance of this three-fold object, I 
have adhered steadily to the leading principles with which 
I began. I have dwelt principally on the things needful 
to salvation. J have purposely avoided all topics of minor 
importance. I have spoken plainly on all subjects, and 
have striven to say nothing which all may not understand. 

I cannot expect that the work will satisfy all who want 
some book to read at family prayers. In fact I know, from 
communications which I have received, that some think the 
expositions too long. The views of the heads of families as 
to the length of their family prayers are so exceedingly 
various that it would be impossible to please one class with- 
out displeasing others. In some households the family 
prayers are so short and hurried, that I should despair of 
' writing anything suitable to the master’s wants. In such 
households a few verses of Scripture, read slowly and rev- 
erently, would probably be more useful than any commen: 
tary at all. As for those who find four pages too much to 
read at one time, and yet desire to read my Expository 


PREFACE. Vv 


Thoughts, I can only suggest that they have an easy reme- 
dy in their own hands. They have only to leave out one 
or two divisions in each exposition, and they will find it 
as short as they please. 

In preparing for publication this volume on St. Mark, I 
have looked through all those Commentaries mentioned in 
my preface to the volume on St. Matthew, which throw 
any light on St. Mark.* After careful examination, I feel 
obliged to say, that, in my humble judgment, very few com- 
mentators, whether ancient or modern, seem to give this 
Gospel the attention it deserves. It has been too often 
treated as a mere abridgment of St. Matthew. This view 
of it I believe to be an entire mistake. 

The only large separate Commentary on St. Mark, that I 
have been able to meet with, is a remarkable work consist- 
ing of 1666 folio pages, by George Petter, Vicar of Brede, 
in the county of Sussex, published in the year 1661. It is 
a work which from its scarcity, price, and size, is much less 
known than it deserves. The greater part of the impression 
is said to have perished in the great fire of London. Some 
account of this book may not be uninteresting to some 
readers. 

Petter’s Commentary was originally preached by him in 
the form of expository lectures to his own congregation. 
He began to preach on it, June 7th, 1618, and continued 
preaching on it most Sundays with very little intermission 


- * It is needless to repeat their names. 


vi PREFACE, 


uill May 28, 1643. The-dates of each sermon are given on 
the margin, 

The doctrine of this remarkable book is excellent—Prot- 
estant, evangelical, and spiritual. The learning of the au- 
thor must also have been not inconsiderable, if we may 
judge by the number and variety of his quotations. His 
faults of style and composition are the faults of the day in 
which he lived, and must therefore be charitably judged. 
But for laborious investigation of the meaning of every 
word, for patient discussion of every question bearing on 
the text, for fulness of matter, for real thoughtfulness, and 
for continual practical application, there is no work on St. 
Mark which, in my opinion, bears comparison with Petter’s, 
Like Goliah’s sword, “there is none like it.” 

I now send forth these “Expository Thoughts on St. 
Mark” with an earnest prayer that it may please God to 
use the volume for His glory. It has been written under 
the pressure of many public duties, and amidst many inter- 
ruptions, No one is more conscious of its defects than 
myself. But I can ‘honestly say, that my chief desire, if I 
know any thing of my heart, in this and all my writings, is 
to lead my readers to Christ and faith in Him, to repent- 
ance and holiness, to the Bible and to prayer. 

If these are the results of this volume in any one case, the 


labor I have bestowed upon it will be more than repaid. 


HELMINGHAM RECTORY, 
Sept., 1857. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


MARK. PAGR 
L I—8. The Gospel begun by John the Baptist’s 
ministry : z é 1 
9—20. Christ’s baptism; templagea sch wai of 
His first disciples : 5 F 6 
21—34, An unclean spirit cast out, Bodie wife's 
mother healed : : sal 
35—39. OChrist’s private prayers,—purpose hae Christ's 
coming into the world A - < < 16 
40—45. A leper cleansed . ; : < b 21 
IL 1—i2. Privileges of Campernaum,—one sick of the 
palsy healed . : : 26 


13—22. Calling of Levi,—Christ the pupae of 
souls,—new wine and old bottles . ‘ 30 
23—28. The right view of the sabbath day expounded 36 
TL 1—12, The man with the withered hand healed on 
the sabbath day,—Christ watched by his 
enemies and grieved 4 : 43 
13—21. Ordination of the twelve apostles, Christ’s 
zeal misunderstood by his friends . y 48 
22—30. Warning against divisions—fulness of gos- 


pel forgiveness,—eternal damnation . : 53 
31—35. Christ’s brother, and sister, and mother : 58 
IV. 1—20. Parable ofthe sower . . 62 


21—25. Light not to be put under a irahel othnort. 
ance of hearing, and of using what we 


hear. : 3 67 
26—29. Parable of the ses ia into ‘the hank ‘ 12 
30—34. Parable of the grain of mustard seed . - 17 


35—41. Storm on the sea of Galilee miraculously 
calmed . ‘ : : pan ; 82 


Vill 


1—17. 
18—20. 
21—34, 


35—43, 


7—13. 


14—29. 


30—34. 
35—46, 
47—56. 

1—13. 
14—23. 
24—30. 


31—37. 


1—13. 


14—21. 


22—26. 
27—33. 


34—38, 


1—13. 
14—29. 


30—37. 
38—50. 


1—12, 
13—16. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


A devil cast out in the country of the Gada- 
renes 

The man that had et hn with ie 
devil sent home to his friends. . 5 ° 

The woman with an issue of blood healed. 

The ruler’s daughter raised to life , = 

Christ in His own country,—the sin of 1 un- 


belief. 3 : . 
The first sending forth of the apostles #, 
preach. e = s 


John the Baptist put Z soos by Herod : 

The apostles’ return from preaching,—the 
importance of rest, Christ’s compassion 

The multitude fed with five loaves and two 
fishes 2 : - 2 a e 

Christ walking on the ve : 5 

The religion of the Pharisees. 

The heart the true source of impurity 

The Syrophcenician woman whose daughtor 
had an unclean spirit eB 4 - 

Healing of one who was deaf and dumb 

The multitude fed with seven loaves,—un- 
belief of the Pharisees : . : 

Warning against false doctrine Saas 
to understand in disciples 

The blind man at Bethsaida healed 

Peter’s noble confession of faith,—Peter’s 
ignorance of the necessity of Christ’s death 

Necessity of self-denial,—value of the soul, 
—danger of being ashamed of Christ 

Christ’s transfiguration 

The boy with an unclean spirit foe 

The crucifixion predicted,—humility enforced 

A tolerant spirit enjoined,—the necessity of 
self-sacrifice,—the reality of hell 5 

The right view of marriage expounded 

Young children brought to Christ,—a plea 
for infant baptism 


PAGE 


82 
93 
98 
103 


107 


ig 
116 


122 
126 
130 
133 
140 


144 
148 


153 


157 
160 


163 
168 
173 
179 
184 


189 
195 


201 


x. 


17—2". 
28—34, 
35—45. 
46—5 2; 

1—11. 

12—21. 
22—26. 
27—33: 

1—12. 

13—17. 
18—27. 

28—34, 
35—44., 

1—8. 
9—13. 

14—23. 

24—31. 


32—37. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS, 


The young man who had great possessions, 
—Christ’s love to sinners,—the peril of 
being rich 4 

Encouragement to forsake all for Christ's 
sake, Christ’s foreknowledge of His own 
sufferings é : ‘ . 

Ignorance of the sons of Zebedee,—lowli- 
ness and self-devotion enforced by Christ’s 
example . F ‘ 5 2 : 

Blind Bartimeeus Bodied 4 : ° 

Christ’s public entry into Ferostilons} and 
voluntary poverty ‘ ‘ 

Christ’s manhood,—the fig-tree oxide ithe 
temple cleansed : A 

Importance of faith, necessity of a forgiv- 
ing spirit 

Spiritual blindness of the chiet jest Rea 
scribes,—mental dishonesty of prejudiced 
unbelievers ‘ ° 

Parable of the wicked fhastasitinen i ° 

The tribute, and the respective claims of 
CesarandofGod . é S i : 

The Sadducees, and the doctrine of the re- 
surrection : ‘ ° ° 

The Scribes, and the grea wet Roe of 

Christ in the Psalms,—warning against hy- 
pocrisy,—the widow’s mite 2 a . 

Beginning of the prophecy on the mount of 
Olives 

What Christ’s toe niust path eee 
His first and second adyents  . : ° 

The lawfulness of using means to provide 
for our safety,—privileges of the elect 

Second coming of Christ described,—impor- 
tance of observing the signs of the times 

Uncertainty of the time of Christ’s second 
advent, duty of watchfulness 


1x 
PAGE 


207 


211 


215 


221 


226 


231 


236 


241 


246 


251 


255 


261 


265 


201 


277 


281 


285 


296 


10—16. 


17—25, 
26—31. 


32—42, 


A852, 
53—65. 
66—72. 


1—15. 
16—32. 
33—38. 


39—47. 


9—14. 


15—18, 


19—-20. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Crafty designs of the chief priests overruled, 
—anointing in tho house at Bethany A 
Judas Iscariot undertakes to betray Christ 
for money,—connection between time of 
passoyer and time of crucifixion _ . 
Institution of the Lord’s supper 
Christ’s fore-knowledge of His disciples’ 
weakness,—self-ignorance of believers x 
Agony in the garden,—infirmity of the apos- 
tles : $ 2 5 : 
Christ taken prisoner by His enemies . . 
Christ condemned before the high priest “ 
Peter denies Christ three times . 5 : 
Christ condemned before Pilate . c : 
Christ mocked and crucified = 
Christ’s death, and signs accompanying it 
Christ’s burial . : 
The power of love to Christ, hs, stone sean 
ed away,—tmercy to backsliders 3 : 
Proofs of the resurrection,—kindness to great 
sinners,—weakness of believers E é 
The apostle’s commission,—the terms of the 
Gospel,—the promise to faithful laborers 
Christ’s ascension to the right hand of God, 
—the word of faithful preachers confirmed 


by signs . - 5 . ° . . 


PAGE 


298 


301 
306 


312 
316 
321 
326 
331 
335 
340 


344 
349 


353 
358 


362 


367 


TABLE OF CONTENTS OF FOOT NOTES, 





Quotation from Steir on the character of St. Mark’s Gospel 
Severe from Petter on the uselessness of a mere intellectual 
aith ‘i 7 

On the apostle Peter being a married man ; 

Quotation from Traill on the importance to ministers ‘of private | 
prayer. - : 

On the “time to be silent,” and quotation from Petter . 0 

On the “bottles” mentioned in the Gospels. zl 3 . 

On ‘“ Abiathar the high priest,” summary of opinions . > 

On the Son of man being “Lord of the Sabbath” . : 

Quotaticm from Bishop Butler’s Sermon on Resentment . : 

On the unpardonable sin f 5 ¢ : ‘ 

On the conduct of our Lord’s mother. 5 : : 

Quotation from Thomas Taylor 4 5, : : 5 

On the stony ground hearers . 

On our Lord’s use of the same expressions on different occasions 


Quotation from Archbishop Grindal 2 : : - ; 
Quotation from Greswell on parables. ; A 5 e 
On the size attained by the mustard plant 6 é 0 
On the meaning of the parable of the mustard seed . - 
On the sea of Galilee. 2 5 5 : é H 


On Satanic possession 

On our Lord’s command to the man possessed with a devil to. 
‘eo home” when cured 

Quotation from Melancthon on the woman healed of the issue 
of blood . 

On the expression that our Lord “could do no mighty works” 

On the disciples anointing the sick with oil. - : ° 

On modern copies of the religion of the Pharisees . : " 

On modern instances of excessive zeal for traditions 

On subtle evasions of the fifth commandment, and quotation 
from Petter 

On the importance of remembering the wickedness of the heart 
in educating children 5 A - . A 

Quotation from “Lather 2 é 

Quotation from Victor Antiochenus 

Quotation from Brentius . 

On the coming of Elijah the prophet 

On the expression, ‘‘ greatly amazed” 

Quotation from Augustine : 

Quotation from Quesnel . 5 3 


a 8S. & ey 8 & 
@ ee) fe a 3) “tne 
C0 a eee te me 

. 


PAGE 
2 


103 
111 
116 
135 
138 


140 


142 
152 
174 
176 
178 
184 
187 
191 


36. 


Bile 
38. 


39. 
40. 
41. 
42, 
43, 
45, 
46. 
Al. 
49. 
50. 
51. 


52. 
53. 


54. 
55. 


56. 
BT. 


58. 
59. 


61. 
62. 
63. 
64, 
65. 


66. 
67. 


CONTENTS OF FOOT NOTES. 


PAGE 
On the expression, “every one shall be salted with fire,” boy 
and summary of opinions . 3 5 5 ° 2 194 
Quotation from Latimer . 5 ih 197 
On Jewish customs about divorce, ‘and our Lord’s “judgment 
upon the whole question . 2 298 
On the expression, “for the hardness of your hear,” ke. . 200 
On infant baptism . c 5 f ~ A : a 


Quotation from Quesnel . 
On the different meanings of the words sh baptism” and ee baptize” 220 


On the real manhood of our Lord . < - : . 228 
On the cursing of the fig-tree . : ‘ - 2 . 232 
On the expression, “removing mountains” A ps e250 
On the expression, “stand praying” : : : 4 . 241 
Quotation from Gerhard . 5 £ : - 2 .« 242 
Quotation from Brentius and Quesnel 4 ‘ “ .- 243 
Quotation from Matthew Henry . . : re 
ae 


Quotation from Sibelius . 

On our Lord’s use of the text, “Tam the God of Abraham,” 
&e.,” and quotation from Pearson. - - 260 

On the expression, “all her living,” and the two mites 2 . 270 

On the two sieges of Ji FSR foretold in the Prophecy on the 


mount of Olives .. : P 5 271 
On the temple : 272 
On the misapplication of the words, “take no thought before- 

hand, &e. . A ¢ * . 280 
On the abomination of desolation 285 
On the ieee “sun, moon, and stars,” and “this genera 

tion” : 290 


On the expression, “of ‘that ‘day knoweth no man, no not 
the Son,” and quotations from Cyril and Gualter . - 291 


Quotations from Jerome and Calvin j 294 
On the number of women who anointed our Lord—one, ‘two, 

orthree . 297 
On the true meaning of the word “ passover, * and quotation 

from Bishop Lowth . 3 . 306 
On the expressions, “ fruit of the vine, ” and « kingdom of 

God” ; « hE 
On the union of two natures in Christ’s person, and quotation 

from Petter . 7 als 
On the “young man who fled : away naked” in the garden - 325 
On the expression, “‘ warmed himself at the fire” . . oat 
On the darkness for three hours when our Lord was crucified . 345 


On.the character of Mary Magdalene before her conversion . 369 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 


ON THE GOSPELS. 





MARK I. 1—8. 


1 Tue beginning of the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ, the Son of God; 

2 As it is written in the prophets, 
Behold, I send my messenger before 
thy face, which shall prepare thy way 
before thee. 

8 The voice of one crying in the 
wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the 
Lord, make his paths straight. 

4 John did baptize in the wilder- 
ness, and preach the baptism of re- 
pentance for the remission of sins. 

5 And there went out unto him all 
the land of Judea, and they of Jeru- 


salem, and were all baptized of hmm in 
the river of Jordan, confessing their 
sins. 

6 And John was clothed with cam- 
el’s hair, and with a girdle of askin 
about his loins ; and he did eat locusts 
and wild honey ; 

7 And preached, saying, There 
cometh one mightier than I after me, 
the latchet of whose shoes I am not 
worthy to stoop down and unloose. 

8 I indeed have baptized you with 
water: but he shall baptize you with 
the Holy Ghost. 


THE Gospel of St. Mark, which we now begin, is in 
some respects unlike the other three Gospels. It tells 
us nothing about the birth and early life of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. It contains comparatively few of His say- 
ings and discourses. Of all the four inspired histories of 
our Lord’s earthly ministry, this is by far the shortest. 
But we must not allow these peculiarities to make us 
undervalue St. Mark’s Gospel. It is a Gospel singularly 
full of precious facts about the Lord Jesus, narrated in a 
simple, terse, pithy, and condensed style. If it tells us few 
of our Lord’s sayings, it is eminently rich in its catalogue 
of His doings. It often containg minute historical details 


2 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of deep interest, which are wholly omitted in Matthew, 
Luke and John, In short, it is no mere abridged copy 
of St. Matthew, as some have rashly asserted, but the 
independent narrative of an independent witness, who 
was inspired to write a history of our Lord’s works, 
rather than of His words Let us read it with holy 
reverence, Like all the rest of Scripture, every word of 
St. Mark is “given by inspiration of God,” and every 
word is “ profitable.”’* 

Let us observe, in these verses, what a full declaration 
we have of the dignity of our Lord Jesus Christ’s per- 
son. The very first sentence speaks of Him as “the 
Son of God.” 


These words, “‘the Son of God,” conveyed far more - 


to Jewish minds than they do to ours. They were 
nothing less than an assertion of our Lord’s divinity. 
They were a declaration that Jesus was Himself very 
God, and “equal with God.” (John v. 18.) 


There is a beautiful fitness in placing this truth in the 


very beginning of a Gospel. The divinity of Christ is 
the citadel and keep of Christianity. Here lies the 
infinite value of the satisfaction He made upon the cross. 
Here lies the peculiar merit of His atoning death for 
sinners. That death was not the death of a mere man, 


* “St, Mark has the special gift of terse brevity, and of graphic paint- 
ing in wonderful combination, While on every occasion he com- 
presses the discourse, works, and history into the simplest possible 
kernel, he on the other hand, unfolds the scenes more clearly than St. 
Matthew does, who excels in the discourses. Not only do single inci- 
dents become in his hands complete pictures, but even when he is very 

- brief, he often gives, with one pencil stroke, something new and pecu- 
liarly his own ”"—Ster’s Words of the Lord Jesus, 


MARK, CHAP. I, 3 


like ourselves, but of one who is “over all, God blessed 
for ever.” (Rom. ix. 3.) We need not wonder that the 
sufferings of one person were a sufficient propitiation for 
the sin of a world, when we remember that He who 
suffered was the “Son of God.” 

Let believers cling to this doctrine with jealous watch- 
fulness. With it, they stand upon arock, Without it, 
they have nothing solid beneath their fect. Our hearts 
are weak. Our sins are many. We need a Redeemer 
who is able to save to the uttermost, and deliver from the 
wrath to come. We have such a Redeemer in Jesus 
Christ. He is “the mighty God.” (Isaiah ix. 6.) 

Let us observe, in the second place, how the beginning 
of the Gospel was a fulfilment of Scripture. John the 
Baptist began his ministry, “as it is written in the 
prophets.” 

There was nothing unforeseen and suddenly contrived in 
the coming of Jesus Christ into the world. In the very 
beginning of Genesis we find it predicted that “‘ the seed 
of the woman should bruise the serpent’s head.” (Gen. iii. 
15.) All through the Old Testament we find the same 
event foretold with constantly increasing clearness. It 
was a promise often renewed to patriarchs, and repeated 
by prophets, that a Deliverer and Redeemer should one 
day come. His birth, His character, His life, His death, 
His resurrection, His forerunner, were all prophesied of, 
long before He came. Redemption was worked out and 
accomplished in every step, just “as it was written.” 

We should always read the Old Testament with a desire 
to find something in it about Jesus Christ. We study this 
portion of the Bible with little profit, if we can see in it 


4 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


nothing but Moses, and David, and Samuel, and the 
prophets. Let us search the books of the Old Testa- 
ment more closely. It was said by Him whose words 
can never pass away, “these are they which testify of 
me.” (John v. 40.) 

Let us observe, in the third place, how great were the — 
effects which the ministry of John the Baptist produced 
for atime on the Jewish nation. We are told that “there 
went out to him all the land of Judea, and they of 
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of 
Jordan.” or 

The fact here recorded is one that is much overlooked. 
We are apt to lose sight of him who went before the 
face of our Lord, and to see nothing but the Lord Him- 
self. . We forget the morning star in the full blaze of the 
Sun. And yet it is clear that John’s preaching arrested 
the attention of the whole Jewish people, and created an 
excitement all over Palestine. It aroused the nation © 
from its slumbers, and prepared it for the ministry of our 
Lord, when He appeared. Jesus Himself says, ‘‘ He was 
a burning and a shining light :—ye were willing to re- 
joice for a season in his light.” (John v. 35.) 

We ought to remark here how little dependence is to 
be placed on what is called “ popularity.” Ifever there 
was one who was a popular minister for a season, John 
the Baptist was that man. Yet of all the crowds who 
came to his baptism, and heard his preaching, how few, 
it may be feared, were converted ! Some, we may hope, 
like Andrew, were guided by John to Christ. But the 
vast majority, in all probability, died in their sins. Let 
us remember this whenever we see a crowded church 


MARK, CHAP. I. 5 


A great congregation no doubt isa pleasing sight. But 
the thought should often come across our minds, “ How 
many of these people will reach heaven at last ?” It is 
not enough to hear and admire popular preachers. It is 
no proof of our conversion that we always worship in a 
place where there is a crowd. Let us take care that we 
hear the voice of Christ Himself, and follow Him. 

Let us observe, in the last place, what clear doctrine 
characterized John the Baptist’s preaching. He exalted 
Christ : ‘‘ There cometh one mightier than I after me.” 
He spoke plainly of the Holy Ghost: ‘ Heshall baptize 
you with the Holy Ghost.” 

These truths had never been so plainly proclaimed be- 
fore by mortal man. More important truths than these 
are not to be found in the whole system of Christianity 
at this day. The principal work of every faithful min- 
ister of the Gospel, is to set the Lord Jesus fully before 
His people, and to show them His fulness and His power 
to save—The next great work He has to do, is to set 
before them the work of the Holy Ghost, and the need 
of being born again, and inwardly baptized by His grace. 
—These two mighty truths appear to have been fre- 
quently on the lips of John the Baptist. It would be 
well for the church and the world, if there were more 
ministers like him. 

Let us ask ourselves, as we leave the passage, ‘‘ How 
much we know by practical experience of the truths 
which John preached ?” What think we of Christ ? 
Have we felt our need of Him, and fled to Him for 
peace? Is He king over our hearts, and all things to 
our souls —What think we of the Holy Ghost ? Has 


6 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


He wrought any work in our hearts ? Has He renewed, 


and changed them ? 
Divine nature ? 
these questions. 
Christ he is none of his.” 


Has He made us partakers.of the 
Life or death depend on our answer to 
“Tf any man have not the Spirit of 
(Rom. viii. 9.) 


MARK I. 9—20. 


9 And it came to pass in those days, 
that Jesus came from Nazareth of 
Galilee, and was baptized of John in 
Jordan. 

10 And straightway coming up out 
of the water, he saw the heavens 
opened, and the Spirit like a dove de- 
scending upon him: 

11 And there came a voice from 
heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved 
Son, in whom [am well pleased. 

12 And immediately the Spirit dri- 
veth him into the wilderness. 

18 And he was there in the wilder- 
ness forty days, tempted of Satan; 
and was with the wild beasts; and 
the angels ministered unto him. 

14 Now after that John was put in 
prison, Jesus came into Galilee, 
preaching the Gospel of the kingdom 
of God, 


THis passage is singularly full of matter. 





15 And saying, The time is fulfilled, 
and the kingdom of God is at hand: 
repent ye, and believe the Gospel. 

16 Now as he walked by the sea of 
Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew 
his brother casting anet into the sea: 
for they were fishers. 

17 And Jesus said unto them, Come 
ye after me, and I will make you to 
become fishers of men. : 

18 And straightway they forsook 
their nets, and followed him. 

19 And when he had gone a little 
farther thence, he saw James the son 
of Zebedee, and John his brother, 

ho also were in the ship mending 
their nets. 

20 Andstraightway he called them: . 
and they left their father Zebedee in 
the ship with the hired servants, and 
went after him. 


It is a strik- 


ing instance of that brevity of style, which is the pecu- 
liar characteristic of Mark’s Gospel. The baptism of our 
Lord, His temptation in the wilderness, the commence- 
ment of his preaching, and the calling of His first disci- 
ples are related here in eleven verses. 

Let us notice, in the first place, the voice from heaven 
which was heard at our Lord’s baptism. We read, “ There 
came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my be- 
loved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” 


That voice was the voice of God the Father. It 


MARK, CHAP. I. 7 


declared the wondrous and ineffable love which has 
existed between the Father and the Son from all eter- 
‘nity. ‘The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all 
things into His hand.” (John iii. 35.) It proclaimed 
the Father’s full and complete approbation of Christ’s 
mission to seek and save the lost. It announced the 
Hather’s acceptance of the Son as the Mediator, Substi- 
tute, and Surety of the new covenant. 

There is a rich mine of comfort, in these words, for all 
Christ’s believing members. In themselves, and in their 
own doings, they see nothing to please God. They are 
daily sensible of weakness, shortcoming, and imperfection 
in all their ways. But let them recollect that the Father 
regards them asmembers of His beloved Son Jesus 
Christ. He sees no spotin them. (Cant. iv. 7.) He’ 
beholds them as “in Christ,” clothed in His righteous- 
ness, and invested with His merit. They are “ accepted 
in the Beloved,” and when the holy eye of God looks at 
them, He is “ well pleased.” 

Let us notice, in the second place, the nature of Christ’s 
preaching. We read that he came saying, “ Repent ye, 
and believe the Gospel.” 

This is that old sermon which all the faithful witnesses 
of God have continually preached, from the very begin- 
ning of the world. From Noah down to the present 
day the burden of their address has been mgt the 
saine—‘“‘ Repent and believe.” 

The apostle Paul told the Hphesian elders, when he 
left them for the last time, that the substance of his 
teaching among them had been “ repentance towards 
God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ.” (Acts, 


ee EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


xx. 21.) He had the best of precedents for such teach- 
ing. The Great Head of the Church had given him a 
pattern. Repentance and faith were the foundation 
stones of Christ’s ministry—Repentance and faith must 
always be the main subjects of every faithful minister’s 
instruction. 

We need not wonder at this, if we consider the ne- 
cessities of human nature. All of us are by nature born 
in sin and children of wrath, and all need to repent, be 
converted, and born again, if we would see the kingdom 
of God.—All of us are by nature guilty and condemned 
before God, and all must flee to the hope set before #s 
in the Gospel, and believe in it, if we would be saved. 
All of us, once penitent, need daily stirring up to deeper 
repentance. All of us, though believing, need constant 
exhortation to increased faith. 

Let us ask ourselves what we know of this repentance 
and faith, Have we felt our sins, and forsaken them? ~ 
Have we laid hold on Christ, and believed ? We may 
reach heaven without learning, or riches, or health, or 
worldly greatness. But we shall never reach heaven, 
if we die impenitent and unbelieving. A new heart, 
and a lively faith ina Redeemer, are absolutely needful 
to salvation, May we never rest till we know them by 
experience, and can call them our own! With them all 
true Christianity begins in the soul. In the exercise 
of them consists the life of religion. It is only through 
the possession of them that men have peace at the last. 
Church-membership and priestly absolution alone save 
noone. They only die in the Lord who “ repent and 
believe.” 


MARK, CHAP. I. 9 


' Let us notice, in the third place, the occupation of those 
who were first called to be Christ’s disciples. We read 
that our Lord called Simon and Andrew, when they 
were “ casting a net into the sea,” and James and John 
while they were ‘‘ mending their nets.” 

It is clear, from these words, that the first followers 
of our Lord were not the great of this world. They 
were men who had neither riches, nor rank, nor power. 
But the kingdom of Christ is not dependent on such 
things as these. His cause advances in the world, “ not 
by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the 
Lord of hosts.” (Zech. iv. 6.) The words of St. Paul 
will always be found true: ‘‘ Not many wise men after 
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. 
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to 
confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak 
things of the world to confound the things which are 
mighty.” (1 Cor. i. 26, 27.) The church which began 
with a few fishermen, and yet overspread half the world, 
must have been founded by God. 

“We must beware of giving way to the common notion, 
that there is anything disgraceful in being poor, and in 
working with our own hands. The Bible contains many 
instances of special privileges conferred on working men. 
Moses was keeping sheep, when God appeared to him in 
the burning bush. Gideon was thrashing wheat, when 
the angel brought him a message from heaven. Elisha 
was ploughing, when Elijah called him to be prophet in 
his stead. The apostles were fishing, when Jesus called 
them to follow Him. It is disgraceful to be covetous, or 


proud, ora cheat, ora gambler, or adrunkard, ora glutton, 
Sere . 


LO». EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


or unclean. But itis no disgrace to be poor. The laborer 
who serves Christ faithfully is far more honorable in 
God’s eyes, than the nobleman who serves sin. 

Let us notice, in the last place, the office to which our 
Lord called His first disciples. We read that He said, 
“Come ye after me, and I will make you to become 
fishers of men.” 

The meaning of this expression is clear and unmis- 
takeable. The disciples were to become fishers for souls 
They were to labor to draw men out of darkness into 
light, and from the power of Satan to God. They were 
to strive to bring men into the net of Christ’s church, 
that so they might be saved alive, and not perish ever- 
lastingly. 

We ought to mark this expression well. It is full of 
instruction. It is the oldest name by which the minis- 
terial office is described in the New Testament. It lies 
deeper down than the name of bishop, elder, or deacon. 
It is the first idea which should be before a minister’s 
mind. . He is not to be a mere reader of forms, or ad- 
ministrator of ordinances, He is to be a “ fisher” of 
souls. The minister who does not strive to live up to 
this name has mistaken his calling. 

Does the fisherman strive to catch fish ? Does he use 
all means, and grieve if unsuccessful ? The minister 
ought to do the same.—Does the fisherman have pa- 
tience ? Does he toil on day after day, and wait, and 
work on in hope? Let the minister do the same.— 
Happy is that man, in whom the fisher’s skill, and dili- 
gence, and patience, are all combined ! 

Let us resolve to pray much for ministers, Their office 


ad 


MARK, CHAP. I. 11 


is no light one if they do their duty. They need the 
help of many intercessions from all praying people. 
They have not only their own souls to care for, but the 
souls of others. No wonder that St. Paul cries, ‘‘ Who 
is sufficient for these things ?” (2 Cor. ii. 16.) If we 
never prayed for ministers before, let us begin to do it 


this day. 





MARK I. 21—84. 


21 And they went into Capernaum; 
and straightway on the sabbath day 
he entered into the synagogue, an 
taught. 

22 And they were astonished at his 
doctrine: for he taught them as one 
that bad authority, and not as the 
Scribes. 

23 And there was in their syna- 
gogus aman with an unclean spirit ; 
and he cried out, 

24 Saying, Let ws alone; what have 
we to do with thee, thou Jesus of 
Nazareth ? art thou come to destroy 
us? I know thee who thou art, the 
Holy One of God. : 

25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, 
oa thy peace, and come out of 


26 And when the unclean spirit 
had torn him, and cried with a loud 
voice, he came out of him. 

27 And they were all amazed, in- 
somuch that they questioned among 
themselves, saying, What thing is 
this ? what new doctrine is this? for 
with authority commandeth he even 





Sead unclean spirits, and they do obey 


28 And immediately his fame 
spread abroad throughout all the 
region round about Galilee. 

29 And forthwith, when they were 
come out of the synagogue, they en- 
tered into the house of Simon and 
Andrew, with James and John. 

30 But Simon’s wife’s mother la 
sick of a fever, and anon they te 
him of her. 

31 And he came and took her by 
the hand, and lifted her up; and im- 
mediately the fever left her, and she 
ministered unto them. 

32 And at even, when the sun did 
set, they brought unto him all that 
were diseased, and them that were 
possessed with devils. 

33 And all the city was gathered 
together at the door. 

34 And he healed many that were 
sick of divers diseases, and cast out 
many devils; and suffered not the 
devils to speak, because they knew 
him. 


THESE verses begin the long list of miracles which St. 


Mark’s Gospel contains. 


They tell us how our Lord 


cast out devils in Capernaum, and healed Peter’s wife’s 


mother of a fever. 


We learn, in the first place, from these verses, the use- 


lessness of a mere intellectual knowledge of religion. 


Twice 


we are specially told that the unclean spirits know our 


12 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Lord. In one place it says, “they knew Him.” fa 
another, the devil cries out, ‘‘ I know thee who thou art, 
the Holy One of God.” They knew Christ, when Scribes 
were ignorant of Him, and Pharisees would not acknow- 
ledge Him. And yet their knowledgé was not unto 
salvation. 

The mere belief of the facts and doctrines of Chris- 
tianity will never save our souls. Such belief is no better 
than the belief of devils. They all believe and know 
that Jesus is the Christ. They believe that he will one 
day judge the world, and cast them down to endless 
torment in hell. It is a solemn and sorrowful thought, 
that on these points some professing Christians have 
even less faith than the devil. There are some who 
doubt the reality of hell and the eternity of punishment. 
Such doubts as these find no place except in the hearts 
of self-willed men and women. There is no infidelity 
among devils. ‘‘ They believe and tremble.” (James ii. 19.) 

Let us take heed that our faith be a faith of the heart 
as well as of the head. Let us see that our knowledge 
has a sanctifying influence on our affections and our lives. 
Let us not only know Christ but love Him, from a sense 
of actual benefit received from Him. Let us not only 
believe that he is the Son of God and the Saviour of 
the world, but rejoice in Him, and cleave to Him with 
purpose of heart. Let us not only be acquainted with 
Him by the hearing of the ear, but by daily personal 
application to Him for mercy and grace. ‘The life of 
Christianity,” says Luther, ‘consists in possessive pro- 
nouns.” It is one thing to say “ Christ is a Saviour.” 
It is quite another to say “He is my Saviour and my 


MARK, CHAP. I. 13 


Lord.” The devil can say the first. The true Christian 
alone can say the second.* 

We learn, in the second place, to what remedy a Chris- 
tian ought to resort first, in time of trouble. He ought to 
follow the example of the friends of Simon’s wife’s 
tnother. We read that when she “lay sick of a fever,” 
they “ told Jesus of her.” 

There is no remedy like this. Means are to be used 
diligently, without question, inany time of need. Doctors 
are to be sent for,in sickness, Lawyers are to be consulted. 
when property or character needs defence. The help of 
friends is to besought. But still, after all, the first thing to 
be done, is to cry to the Lord Jesus Christ for help. None 
can relieve us so effectually as He can. None is so com- 
passionate, and so willing to relieve. When Jacob was 
in trouble he turned to his God first: ‘‘ Deliver me, I 
pray thee, from the hand of Esau.” (Gen, xxxii. 11.) 
When Hezekiah was in trouble, he first spread Senna- 
cherib’s letter before the Lord: ‘I beseech thee, save 
thou us out of his hand.” (2 Kings xix. 19.) When 
Lazarus fell sick, his sisters sent immediately to Jesus : 
“Lord,” they said, ‘‘he whom thou lovest is sick.” 
(John xi. 2.) Now let us do likewise. “Cast thy 
burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee.” ‘ Cast- 
ing all your care upon Him.” In everything by prayer 

* “Rest not in an historical knowledge of faith. Ifthou do, it will 
not save thee; for if it would it would save the devils: for they have 
their literal knowledge and general belief of the word. Dost thou 
think it enough to know and believe that Christ lived and died for sin- 
ners? The devil and his angels know and believe as much. Labor 
then to outstrip them, and to get a better faith than is in them.” —Pet- 
ter on Mark. 1661. 


14 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be 
made known to God.” (Psa. lv. 22; 1 Pet. v..7; Phil. 
iv. 6.) 

Let us not only remember this rule, but practise it too. 
We live in a world of sin and sorrow. The days of 
darkness in a man’s lifearemany. It needs no prophet’s 
eye to foresee that we shall all shed many a tear, and 
feel many a heart-wrench, before we die. Let us be 
armed with a receipt against despair, before our troubles 
come. Let us know what to do, when sickness, or bereave- 
ment, or cross, or loss, or disappointment breaks in upon 
us likean armed man. Let us do as they did in Simon’s 
house at Capernaum. Let us at once “ tell Jesus.” 

We learn, in the last place, from these verses, what a 
complete and perfect cure the Lord Jesus makes, when He 
heals. He takes the sick woman by the hand, and lifts 
her up, and “immediately the fever left her.’ But this — 
was not all. A greater miracle remained behind. At 
once we are told “she ministered unto them.” That 
weakness and prostration of strength which, as a general 
rule, a fever leaves behind it, in her case was entirely 
removed. The fevered woman was not only made well 
in a moment, but in the same moment made strong and 
able to work.* 


* Let us not fail to observe here, that Peter, one of our Lord’s prin- 
_ cipal apostles, had a wife. Yet he was called to be a disciple, and 
afterwards chosen to be an apostle. More than this, we find Paul 
speaking of him as a married man, in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 
many years after this. (1 Cor. ix.5.) 
How this fact can be reconciled with the compulsory celibacy of the 
elergy, which the Church of Rome enforces and requires, it is for the 
friends and advocates of the Roman Catholic Church to explain. Toa 


MARK, CHAP, I. 15 


We may see in this case a lively emblem of Christ’s 
dealing with sin-sick souls. That blessed Saviour not 
only gives mercy and forgiveness ;—He gives renewing 
grace besides. To as many as receive Him as their 
Physician, He gives power to become the sons of God. 
He cleanses them by His Spirit, when He washes them 
in His precious blood. Those whom He justifies, He also 
sanctifies. When He bestows an absolution, He also 
bestows a new heart. When He grants free forgiveness 
for the past, He also grants strength to ‘ minister” to 
Him for the time to come. The sin-sick soul is not 
merely cured, and then left to itself It is also supplied 
with a new heart and a right spirit, and enabled so to 
live as to please God. 

There is comfort in this thought for all who feel a 
desire to serve Christ, but at present are afraid to begin. 
There are many in this state of mind, They fear that 
if they come forward boldly, and take up ‘the cross, they 
shall by and bye fall away. They fear that they shall 
not be able to persevere, and shall bring discredit on 
their profession. Let them fear no longer. Let them 
know that Jesus is an Almighty Saviour, who never for- 
sakes those who once commit themselves to Him. Once 
raised by His mighty hand from the death of sin, and 
washed in His precious blood, they shall go on “ minister- 
ing to Him” to their life’s end. They shall have power 


plain reader, it seems a plain proof that it is not wrong for ministers to ~ 
be married men. And when we add to this striking fact, that Paul, 
when writing to Timothy, says, that “a bishop should be the husband 
of one wife” (1 Tim. iii. 2), it is clear that the whole Romish doctrine 
of clerical celibacy is utterly opposed to holy Scripture. 


16 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to overcome the world, and crucify the flesh, and resist 
the devil. Only let them begin, and they shall go on. 
Jesus knows nothing of half-cured cases and half-finished 
work. Let them trust in Jesus and go forward. The 
pardoned soul shall always be enabled to serve Christ. 

There is comfort here for all who are really serving 
Christ, and are yet cast down by a sense of their own 
infirmity. There are many in such case. They are 
oppressed by doubts and anxieties. They sometimes 
think they shall never reach heaven after all, but be cast 
away in the wilderness. Let them fearnolonger. Their 
strength shall be according to their day. The difficulties 
they now fear shall vanish out of their path. The lion 
in the way which they now dread, shall prove to be 
chained. The same gracious hand which first touched 
and healed, shall uphold, strengthen, and lead them to 
the last. The Lord Jesus will never lose one of His 
sheep. Those whom He loves and pardons, He loves © 
unto the end. Though sometimes cast down, they shall 
never be cast away. The healed soul shall always go 
on “‘ ministering to the Lord.” Grace shall always lead 
to glory. 


MARK I, 85—89. 


85 And in the morning, rising up | thee. 
a great while before day, he went out| 88 And he said unto them, Let us 
and departed into asolitary place, and| go into the next towns, that I may 


there prayed. reach there also: for therefore came 
86 And Simon and they that were | I forth. 
With him followed after him. 39 And he preached in their syna- 


87 And when they had found him, | gogues throughout all Galilee, and 
they said unto him, All men seek for | cast out devils. 


Every fact in our Lord’s life on earth, and every word 
which fell from His lips, ought to be deeply interesting 


MARK, CHAP. I. 17 


to a true Christian. We see a fact and a saying in the 
passage we have just read, which deserve close atten- 
tion. 

We see, for one thing, an example of our Lord Jesus 
Christ's habits about private prayer. We are told, that 
‘in the morning, rising up a great while before day, He 
went out and departed into a solitary place, and there 
prayed.” 

We shall find the same thing often recorded of our 
Lord in the Gospel history. When He was baptized, 
we are told that He was “ praying.” (Luke iii. 21.) 
When. He was transfigured, we are told, that “as He 
prayed, the fashion of His face was altered.” (Luke ix. 
29.) Before He chose the twelve apostles, we are told 
that “ He continued all night in prayer to God.” (Luke 
vi. 12.) When all men spoke well of Him, and would 
fain have made Him a King, we are told that “‘ He went 
up into a mountain apart to pray.” (Mark xiv. 23.) 
When tempted in the garden of Gethsemane, He said, 
“Sit ye here, while I shall pray.” (Mark xiv. 34.) In 
short, our Lord prayed always, and did not faint. Sinless 
as He was, He set us an example of diligent communion 
with His Father. His Godhead did not render Him 
independent of the use of all meansas a man. His very 
perfection was a perfection kept up through the exercise 
of prayer. 

We ought to see in all this the immense importance 
of private devotion. If He who was “holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners,” thus prayed con- 
tinually, how much more ought we who are compassed 
with infirmity ? If He found it needful to offer up suppli- 


18 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


cations with strong crying and tears, how much more 
needful is it for us, who in many things offend daily P 

What shall we say to those who never pray at all, in 
the face of such a passage as this P There are many such, 
it may be feared, in the list of baptized people—many 
who rise up in the morning without prayer, and without 
prayer lie down at night—many who never speak one 
word to God. Are they Christians ? It is impossible to 
say so. A praying Master, like Jesus, can have no prayer- 
less servants. The Spirit of adoption will always make 
aman call upon God. To be prayerless is to be Christ- 
less, Godless, and in the high road to destruction. 

What shall we say to those who pray, yet give but 
little time to their prayers? We are obliged to say 
that they show at present very little of the mind of 
Christ. Asking little, they must expect to have little. 
Seeking little, they cannot be surprised if they possess 
little. It will always be found that when prayers are - 
few, grace, strength, peace, and hope are small.* 

We shall do well to watch our habits of prayer witha 
holy watchfulness. Hereis the pulse of our Christianity. 
Here is the true test of our state before God. Here true 
religion begins in the soul, when it does begin. Here it 

* “Ministers must pray much, if they would be successful. The 
apostles spent their time this way (Acts vi. 3). Yea, our Lord Jesus 
preached all day, and continued all night alone in prayer to God. Min- 
isters should be much in prayer. They use to reckon how many hours 
they spend in reading and study. It were far better both for ourselves 
and the Church of God, if more time was spent in prayer. Luther's 
spending three hours daily in secret prayer, and Bradford’s studying 
on his knees, and other instances of men in our time, are talked of 
rather than imitated.”"—Traill. 1696. 


MARK, CHAP. I. 19> 


decays and goes backward, when a man backslides from 
God. Let us walk in the steps of our blessed Master in 
this respect as well as in every other. Like Him, let us 
be diligent in our private devotion. Let us know what 
it is to “depart into solitary places and pray.” 

We see, for another thing, in this passage, a remark- 
able saying of our Lord as to the purpose for which He came 
into the world. We find Him saying, “let us go into 
the next towns, that I may preach there also : for there- 
fore came I forth.” 

_ The meaning of these words is plainand unmistakeable. 
Our Lord declares that He came on earth to be a preacher ~ 
and a teacher. He came to fulfil the prophetical office, 
to be the “ prophet greater than Moses,” who had been so 
long foretold. (Deut. xvii. 15.) He left the glory which 
He had from all eternity with the Father, to do the work 
of an evangelist. He came down to earth to show to man 
the way of peace, to proclaim deliverance to the captives, 
and recovering of sight to the blind. One principal part 
of His work on earth, was to go up and down and publish 
glad tidings, to offer healing to the broken-hearted, light 
to them that sat in darkness, and pardon to the chief of 
sinners. ‘ Therefore,’ He says, ‘‘ came I forth.” 

We ought to observe here, what infinite honor the 
Lord Jesus puts on the office of the preacher. It isan 
office which the eternal Son of God Himself undertook. 
He might have spent his earthly ministry in instituting 
and keeping up ceremonies, like Aaron. He might have 
ruled and reigned as a king, like David. But He chose 
a different calling. Until the time when He died as a 
sacrifice for our sins, His daily, and almost hourly work 
was to preach. “ Therefore,” He says, “came I forth.” 


20 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let ug never be moved by those who cry down the 
preacher’s office, and tell us that sacraments and other 
ordinances are of more importance than sermons. Let us 
give to every part of God’s public worship its proper place 
and honor, but let us beware of placing any part of it 
above preaching. By preaching, the Church of Christ 
was first gathered together and founded, and by preaching, 
it has ever been maintained in health and prosperity. By 
preaching, sinners are awakened. By preaching, inquir- 
ers are led on. By preaching, saints are built up. By 
preaching, Christianity is being carried to the heathen 
world.—There are many now who sneer at missionaries, 
and mock at those who go out into the high-ways of 
our own land, to preach to crowds in the open air. But 
such persons would do well to pause, and consider calmly 
what they are doing. The very work which they ridi- 
cule is the work which turned the world upside down, 
and cast heathenism to the ground. Above all, itis the - 
very work which Christ Himself undertook, The King 
of kings and Lord of lords Himself was once a preacher. 
For three long years He went to and fro proclaiming the 
Gospel. Sometimes we see Him in a house, sometimes 
on the mountain side, sometimes in a Jewish synagogue, 
sometimes in a boat on the sea. But the great work 
He took up was always one and the same. He came 
always preaching and teaching. ‘‘Therefore,” He says, 
“came I forth.” 

Let us leave the passage with a solemn resolution 
never to “‘ despise prophesying.” (1 Thess. v. 20.) The 
minister we hear may not be highly gifted. The sermons 
that we listen to may be weak and poor. But after all, 


* . 


MARK, CHAP. I. 21 


preaching is God’s grand ordinance for converting and 
saving souls. The faithful preacher of the Gospel is 
handling the very weapon which the Son of God was not 
ashamed to employ. This is the work of which Christ 


has said, ‘‘ Therefore came I forth.” 





MARK I. 40—45. 


40 And there came a leper to him, 
beseeching him, and kneeling down 
to him, and saying unto him, If thou 
wilt, thou canst make me clean. 

41 And Jesus, moved with compas- 
sion, put forth his hand, and touched 
him, and saith unto him, I will; be 
thou clean. 

42 And as soon as he had spoken, 
immediately the leprosy departed 
from him, and he was cleansed. 

43 And hestraitly charged him, and 
forthwith sent him away; 





44 And he saith unto him, See thou 
say nothing to any man: but go thy 
way, shew thyself to the Priest, and 
offer for thy cleansing those things 
which Moses commanded, for a testi- 
mony unto them. 

45 But he went out and began to 
publish 7¢ much, and to blaze abroad 
the matter, insomuch that Jesus could 
no more openly enter into the city, 
but was without in desert places: 
and they came to him from every 
quarter. 


WE read in these verses how our Lord Jesus Christ 
healed a leper. Of all our Lord’s miracles of healing 
none were probably more marvellous than those per- 
formed on leprous people. Two cases only have been 
fully described in the Gospel history. Of these two, the 
case before us is one. 

Let us try to realize, in the first place, the dreadful 
nature of the disease which Jesus cured. 

Leprosy is a complaint of which we know little or 
nothing in our northern climate, In Bible lands it is far 
more common. It is a disease which is utterly incurable. 
It is no mere skin affection, as some ignorantly suppose. 
It is a radical disease of the whole man. It attacks, not 
merely the skin, but the blood, the flesh, and the bones, 
until the unhappy patient begins to lose his extremities, 


22, EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and to rot by inches.—Let us remember beside this, 
that, amongst the Jews, the leper was reckoned unclean, 
and was cut off from the congregation of Israel and the 
ordinances of religion. He was obliged to dwell in a 
separate house. None might touch him or minister to 
him. Let us remember all this, and then we may have 
some idea of the remarkable wretchedness of a leprous 
person. To use the words of Aaron, when he interceded 
for Miriam, he was “as one dead, of whom the flesh is 
half consumed.” (Numbers xii. 12.) 

But is there nothing like leprosy among ourselves ? 
Yes! indeed thereis. There isa foul soul-disease which 
is engrained into our very nature, and cleaves to our bones 
and marrow with deadly force. That.disease is the 
plague of sin. Like leprosy, it is a deep-seated disease, 
infecting every part of our nature, heart, will, conscience, 
understanding, memory, and affections. Like leprosy, 
it makes us loathsome and abominable, unfit for the — 
company of God, and unmeet for the glory of heaven. 
Like leprosy, it is incurable by any earthly physician, and 
is slowly but surely dragging us down to the second death. 
And, worst of all, far worse than leprosy, it is a disease 
from which no mortal man is exempt. “ Weare all,” in 
God’s sight, “as an unclean thing.” (Isaiah lxiv. 6.): 

Do we know these things ? Have we found them out ? 
Have we discovered our own sinfulness, guilt, and corrup- 
tion ? Happy indeed is that person who has been really 
taught to feel that he is a “ miserable sinner,” and that 
there is “‘no health in him!” Blessed indeed is he who 
has learned that he is a spiritual leper, and a bad, wicked, 
sinful creature !_ To know our disease is one step towards 


MARK, OHAP. I. 23 


a cure. It is the misery and the ruin of many souls that 
they never yet saw their sins and their need. 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 
the wondrous and almighty power of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Weare told that the unhappy leper came to our Lord, 
“beseeching Him, and kneeling down,” and saying, “ It 
thou wilt, thou canst make me clean.” We are told that 
“ Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth His hand and 
touched him, and said to him, I will, be thou clean.” 
At once the cure was effected. That very instant the 
deadly plague departed from the poor sufferer, and he 
was healed. It was but a word, and a touch, and there 
stands before our Lord, not a leper, but a sound and 
healthy man. 

Who can conceive the greatness of the change in the 
feelings of this leper, when he found himself: healed ? 
The morning sun rose upon him, a miserable being, more 
dead than alive, his whole frame a mass of sores and 
corruption, his very existence a burden. The evening 
sun saw him full of hope and joy, free from pain, and fit 
for the society of his fellow-men. Surely the change 
_ must have been like life from the dead. 

Let us bless God that the Saviour with whom we have 
to do is almighty. It is a cheering and comfortable 
thought that with Christ nothing is impossible. No 
heart-disease is so deep-seated but He is able to cure it. 
No plague of soul is so virulent but our Great Physician 
can heal it. Let us never despair of any one’s salvation, 
so long as he lives. The worst of spiritual lepers may 
yet be cleansed. No cases of spiritual leprosy could be 
worse than those of Manasseh, Saul, and Zaccheeus, yet 


24 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


they were all cured ;—Jesus Christ made them whole. 
The chief of sinners may yet be brought nigh to God by 
the blood and Spirit of Christ. Men are not lost, be- 
cause they are too bad to be saved, but because they 
will not come to Christ that He may save them. 

Let us learn, in the last place, from these verses, that 
there is a time to be silent about the work of Christ, as well 
as atime to speak. 

This is a truth which is taught us in a remarkable 
way. We find our Lord strictly charging this man to 
tell no one of his cure, to ‘‘say nothing to any man.” 
We find this man in the warmth of his zeal disobeying 
this injunction, and publishing and “blazing abroad” 
his cure in every quarter. And we are told that the re- 
sult was that Jesus ‘‘ could no more enter into the city, 
but was without in desert places.” 

There is a lesson in all this of deep importance, how- 
ever difficult it may be to use it rightly. It is clear that. 
there are times when our Lord would have us work 
for Him quietly and silently, rather than attract public 
attention by a noisy zeal. There is a zeal which is “‘ not 
according to knowledge,” as well as a zeal which is 
righteous and praiseworthy. Everything is beautiful in 
its season. Our Master’s cause may on some occasions 
be more advanced by quietness and patience, than in 
any other way. We are not to “give that which is holy 
to dogs,” nor “ cast pearls before swine.” By forgetful- 
ness of this we may even do more harm than good, and 
retard the very ‘cause we want to assist. 

The subject is a delicate and difficult one, without 
doubt. Unquestionably the majority of Christians are far 


MARK, CHAP. I. 25 


more inclined to be silent about their glorious Master 
than to confess Him before men—and do not need the 
bridle so much as the spnr. But still it is undeniable 
that there is a time for all things ; and to know the time 
should be one great aim of a Christian. There are good 
men who have more zeal than discretion, and even help 
the enemy of truth by unseasonable acts and words.* 
Let us all pray for the Spirit of wisdom and of a sound 
mind. Let us seek daily to know the path of duty, and 
ask daily for discretion and good sense. Let us be bold 
as a lion in confessing Christ, and not be afraid to “speak 
of Him before princes,” if need be. But let us never for- 
get that ‘“‘ Wisdom is profitable to direct” (Kccles. x. 11), 
and let us beware of doing harm by an ill-directed zeal, 


* It would not be wise for a speaker at an English public meeting 
to proclaim the names of the families in Italy where the Bible is read, 
and to point out the streets and houses where these families resided. 
Such a speaker might be well-meaning, and full of zeal. He might 
really desire to glorify Christ, and publish the triumphs of His grace. 
But he would be guilty of a sad indiscretion, and show great igno- 
rance of the very lesson which the verses before us contain. The 
words of an old commentator on this subject deserve notice: 

“Tn that our Saviour forbids this leper to publish this miracle at this 
unseasonable time, we learn that all truths are not to be professed 
or uttered at alltimes. Though we must never deny any truth, being 
demanded of it, or lawfully enjoined to profess it, yet there is a wise 
concealment of the truth, which is sometimes to be used. (Heel. iii. 7.) 

“When are we to conceal the truth? 1. When the case stands so, 
that the uttering of it may bring hurt to the truth itself, as here, the 
publishing of this miracle was like to stop Christ’s ministry. 2. 
When we are in the company of such persons as are more likely to 
cavil and scoff at the truth, than to make any good use of it. 3. 
When we are in the company of malicious enemies of the truth.” 
(Matth.-yii. 6.)— Petter on Mark. 1661. 


26 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK II, 1—12. 


1 And again he entered into Caper- 
naum after some days; and it was 
noised that he was in the house. 

2 And straightway many were ga- 
thered together, insomuch that there 
was no room to receive them, no, not 
s0 much as about the door: and he 
preached the word unto them. 

3 And they came unto him, bring- 
ing one sick of the palsy, which was 
borne of four. 

4 And when they could not come 
nigh unto him for the press, they un- 
covered the roof where he was: and 
when they had broken ¢¢ up, they Jet 
down the bed wherein the sick of the 
palsy lay. 

5 When Jesus saw their faith, he 
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, 
thy sins be forgiven thee. 

6 But there were certain of the 
Scribes sitting there, and reasoning 
in their hearts, 

7 Why doth this man thus speak 


blasphemies? who can forgive sins 
but God only ? 

8 And immediately when Jesus 
perceived in his spirit that they so 
reasoned within themselves, he said 
unto them, Why reason ye these 
things in your hearts ? 

9 Whether is it easier to say to the 
sick of the palsy, Ziy sins be for- 
given thee; or to say, Arise, and 
take up thy bed, and walk? 

10 But that ye may know that the 
Son of man hath power on earth to 
forgive sins, (he saith to the sick of 
the palsy, ) 

11 I say unto thee, Arise, and take 
up thy bed, and go thy way into thine 
house. 

12 And immediately he arose, took 
up the bed, and went forth before 
them all; insomuch that they were 
all amazed, and glorified God, say- 
ing, We never saw it on this fash- 
ion. 


Tus passage shows our Lord once more at Capernaum. 
Once more we find Him doing His accustomed work, 
preaching the word, and healing those that were sick. 
We see, in these verses, what great spiritual privileges 
some persons enjoy, and yet make no use of them. 
This is a truth which is strikingly illustrated by the 


history of Capernaum. No city in Palestine appears to 
have enjoyed so much of our Lord’s presence, during His 
earthly ministry, as did this city. It was the place 
where He dwelt, after He left Nazareth. (Matt. iv. 13.) 
It was the place where many of His miracles were 
worked, and many of His sermons delivered. But 
nothing that Jesus said or did seems to have had any 
effect on the hearts of the inhabitants. They crowded 
to hear Him, as we read in this passage, “‘ till there was 
no room about the door.” They were amazed. They 


MARK, CHAP. IL. QT 


were astonished. They were filled with wonder at His 
mighty works, But they were not converted. They 
lived in the full noon-tide blaze of the Sun of Right- 
eousness, and yet their hearts remained hard. And they 
drew from our Lord the heaviest condemnation that He 
ever pronounced against any place, except Jerusalem : 
“Thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, 
shalt be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works, 
which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, 
it would have remained until this day. But I say unto 
you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of So- 
dom in the day of judgment, than for thee.” (Matt. xi. 
23, 24.) 

It is good for us all to mark well this case of Ca- 
pernaum. Weare all to apt to suppose that it needs 
nothing but the powerful preaching of the Gospel to con- 
vert people’s souls, and that if the Gospel is only brought 
into a place everybody must believe. We forget the 
amazing power of unbelief, and the depth of man’s 
enmity against God. We forget that the Capernaites 
heard the most faultless preaching, and saw it confirmed 
by the most surprising miracles, and yet remained dead 
in trespasses and sins, We need reminding that the 
same Gospel which is the savor of life to some, is the 
savor of death to others, and that the same fire which 
softens the wax will also harden the clay. Nothing, in 
fact, seems to harden man’s heart so much, as to hear 
the Gospel regularly, and yet deliberately prefer the ser- 
vice of sin and the world. Never was there a people so 
highly favored as the people of Capernaum, and never 
was there a people who appear to have become so hard, 


28 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us beware of walking in their steps. We ought often 
touse the prayer of the Litany, “ From hardness of 
heart, Good Lord, deliver us.” 

We see, in the second place, from these verses, how 
great a blessing affliction may prove to a man’s soul. 

We are told that one sick of the palsy was brought to 
our Lord, at Capernaum, in order to be healed. Help- 
less and impotent, he was carried in his bed by four kind 
friends, and let down into the midst of the place where 
Jesus was preaching. At once the object of the man’s 
desire was gained. The great Physician of soul and 
body saw him, and gave him speedy relief. He restored 
"him to health and strength. He granted him the far 
greater blessing of forgiveness of sins. In short, the man 
who had been carried from his house that morning weak, 
dependent, and bowed down both in body and soul, re- 
turned to his own house rejoicing. 

Who can doubt that to the end of his days this man 
would thank God for this palsy ? Without it he might 
probably have lived and died in ignorance, and never 
seen Christ at all. Without it, he might have kept his 
sheep on the green hills of Galilee all his life long, and 
never been brought to Christ, and never heard these 
blessed words, ‘thy sins be forgiven thee.” That palsy 
was indeed a blessing. Who can tell but it was the be- 
ginning of eternal life to his soul ? 

How many in every age can testify that this palsied 
man’s experience has been their own! They have 
learned wisdom by affliction. Bereavements have proved 
mercies. Losses have proved real gains. Sicknesses 
have led them to the great Physician of souls, sent them 


MARK, CHAP. II. _ a 


to the Bible, shut out the world, shown them their own 
foolishness, taught them to pray. Thousands can say like 
David, “It is good for me that I was afflicted, that I 
might learn thy statutes.” (Psal. cxix. 71.) 

Let us beware of murmuring under affliction. We may 
be sure there is a needs-be for every cross, and a wise 
reason for every trial. very sickness and sorrow is a 
gracious message from God, and is meant to call us 
nearer to Him. Let us pray that we may learn the les- 
son that each affliction is appointed to convey. Let us 
see that we ‘‘ refuse not Him that speaketh.” 

We see, in the last place, in these verses, the priestly 
power of forgiving sins, which is possessed by our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

We read that our Lord said to the sick of the palsy, 
‘Son, thy sins be forgiven thee.” He said these words 
with a meaning. He knew the hearts of the Scribes by 
whom He was surrounded. He intended to show them 
that He laid claim to be the true High Priest, and to 
have the power of absolving sinners, though at present 
the claim was seldom put forward. But that He had the 
power He told them expressly. He says, “the Son of 
man hath power on earth to forgive sins.” In saying, 
“‘ thy sins be forgiven thee,” He had only exercised His 
rightful office. 

- Let us consider how great must be the authority 
of Him, who has the power to forgive sins! This 
is the thing that none can do but God. No angel 
in heaven, no man upon earth, no church in council, 
no minister of any denomination, can take away from 
the sinner’s conscience the load of guilt, and give him 


30 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


peace with God. They may point to the fountain open 
for all sin. They may declare with authority whose sins 
God is willing to forgive. But they cannot absolve by 
their own authority. They cannot put away transgressions. 
This is the peculiar prerogative of God, and a prerogative 
which He has put in the hands of His Son Jesus Christ. 

Let us think for a moment how great a blessing it is, 
that Jesus is our great High Priest, and that we know 
where to go for absolution ! We must havea Priest and 
a sacrifice between ourselves and God. Conscience de- 
mands an atonement for our many sins. God’s holiness 
makes it absolutely needful. Without an atoning Priest 
there can be no peace of soul. Jesus Christ is the very 
Priest that we need, mighty to forgive and pardon, ten- 
der-hearted and willing to save. 

And now let us ask ourselves whether we have yet 
known the Lord Jesus as our High Priest ? Have we 
applied to Him ? Have we sought absolution ? If not, 
we are yet in our sins. May we never rest till the Spirit 
Witnesses with our spirit that we have sat at the feet of 
Jesus and heard his voice, saying, “‘ Son, thy sins be for- 
given thee.” 





MARK II. 18—22. 


13 And he went forth again by the 
sea side; and all the multitude re- 
sorted unto him, and he taught them. 

14 And as he passed by, he saw 
Levi the son of Alpheeus sitting at the 
receipt of custom, and said unto 
him, Follow me. And he arose and 
followed him. 

15 And it came to pass, that, as Je- 
sus sat at meat in his house,many Pub- 
licans and sinners sat also together 


with Jesus and his disciples: for there 
were many, and they followed him. 
16 And when the Seribes and Pha- 
risees saw him eat with Publicans 
and sinners, they said unto his dis- 
ciples, How is it that he eateth and 
drinketh with Publicans and sinners? 
17 When Jesus heard @, he saith 
unto them, They that are whole have 
no need of the physician, but they 
that are sick: I came not to call the 


MARK, CHAP. II. 


righteous, but sinners to repentance. 
“18 And the disciples of John and 
of the Pharisees used to fast: and 
they come and say unto him, Why do 
the disciples of John and of the Pha- 
risees fast, but thy disciples fast not ? 

19 And Jesus said unto them, Can 
the children of the bridechamber fast, 
while the bridegroom is with them ? 


31 


from them, and then shall they fast 
in those days. 

21 No man also seweth a piece of 
new cloth on anold garment: else the 
new piece that filled it up taketh away 
from the old, and the rent is made 
worse, ; 

22 And no man putteth new wine 
into old bottles: else the new wine 


as long as they have the bridegroom | doth burst the bottles, and the wine 
with them, they cannot fast. | is spilled, and the bottles will be mar- 

20 But the days will come, when} red: but new wine must be put into 
the bridegroom shall be taken away new bottles. 


[; THE person who is called Levi, at the beginning of 
this passage, is the same person who is called Matthew 
in the first of the four Gospels. Let us not forget this. 
It is no less than an apostle and an evangelist, whose 
early history is now before our eyes. 

We learn from these verses the power of Christ to call 
men out from the world, and make them His disciples. 
We read that he said to Levi, when “sitting at the 
receipt of custom, Follow me.” And at once ‘he arose 
and followed him.” From a publican he became an 
apostle, and a writer of the first book in the New Tes- 
tament, which is now known all over the world. 

This is a truth of deep importance. Without a divine 
call no one can be saved. We are all so sunk in sin, 
and so wedded to the world, that we should never turn to 
God and seek salvation, unless He first called us by His 
grace. God must speak to our hearts by His Spirit, be- 
fore we shall ever speak to Him. Those who are sons 
of God, says the 17th Article, are “called: according to 
God’s purpose by His Spirit working in due season.” 
Now how blessed is the thought that this calling of sin- 
ners is committed to so gracious a Saviour as Christ ! 

When the Lord Jesus calls a sinner to be His servant, 


32 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


He acts as a Sovereign ; but He acts with infinite mercy. 
He often chooses those who seem most unlikely to 
do His will, and furthest off from His kingdom. He 
draws them to Himself with almighty power, breaks the 
chains of old habits and customs, and makes them new 
creatures. As the loadstone attracts the iron, and the 
south wind softens the frozen ground, so does Christ’s 
calling draw sinners out from the world, and melt the 
hardest heart. ‘‘ The voice of the Lord is mighty in 
operation.” Blessed are they, who, when they hear it, 
harden not their hearts! 

We ought never to despair entirely of any one’s salva- 
tion, when we read this passage of Scripture. He who call- 
ed Levi, still lives and still works. The age of miracles 
is not yet past. The love of money is a powerful prin- 
ciple, but the call of Christ is more powerful. Let us 
not despair even about those who “sit at the receipt of 
custom,” and enjoy abundance of this world’s good things. 
‘The voice which said to Levi, “Follow me,’ may yet 
reach their hearts. We may yet see them arise, and take 
up their cross, and follow Christ. Let us hope continu- 
ally, and pray for others. "Who can tell what God may 
be going to do for any one around us? No one is too 
bad for Christ to call, Let us pray for all. 

We learn, for another thing, from these verses, that 
one of Christ's principal offices is that of a Physician. 
The Scribes-and Pharisees found fault with Him for 
eating and drinking with publicans and sinners. But 
“when Jesus heard it, He saith unto them, They that 
are whole have no need of the physician, but they that 
are sick,” 


MARK, CHAP. II. 33 


The Lord Jesus did not come into the world, as some 
suppose, to be nothing more than a law-giver, a king, 
a teacher, and an example. Had this been all the pur- 
pose of His coming, there would have been small com- 
fort for man. Diet-tables and rules of living are all 
very well for the convalescent, but not suitable to the 
man laboring under a mortaldisease. A teacher and an 
example might be sufficient for an unfallen being like 
Adam in the garden of Eden. But fallen sinners like 
ourselves want healing first, before we can value rules. 

The Lord Jesus came into the world .to be a physician 
as well asa teacher. He knew the necessities of human 
nature. He saw us all sick of a mortal disease, stricken 
with the plague of sin, and dying daily. He pitied us, 
and came down to bring divine medicine for our relief. 
He came to give health and cure to the dying, to heal 
the broken hearted, and to offer strength to the weak. 
No sin-sick soul is too far gone for Him. It is His 
glory to heal and restore to life the most desperate cases. 
For unfailing skill, for unwearied tenderness, for long 
experience of man’s spiritual ailments, the great Physi- 
cian of souls stands alone. There is none like Him. £ . 

But what do we know ourselves of this special office 
of Christ ? Have we ever felt our spiritual sickness and 
applied to him for relief? We are never right in the 
sight of God until we do. We know nothing aright in 
religion, if we think the sense of sin should keep us 
back from Christ. To feel our sins, and know our sick- 
ness is the beginning of real Christianity. ‘To be sen- 
sible of our corruption and abhor our own transgressions, 
is the first symptom of spiritual health. Happy indeed 

o% 


34 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


are they who have found out their soul’s disease! Let 
them know that Christ is the very Physician they re- 
quire, and let them apply to Him without delay. = 

We learn, in the last place, from these verses, that in 
religion it vs worse than useless to attempt to mix things 
which essentially differ. ‘‘ No man,” He tells the Phari- 
sees, “‘seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment.” 
“No man putteth new wine into old bottles.” 

These words, we must of course see, were a parable. 
They were spoken with a special reference to the question 
which the Pharisees had just raised: “‘ Why do the 
disciples of John fast, but thy disciples fast not ?” Our 
Lord’s reply evidently means, that to enforce fasting 
among His disciples would be inexpedient and unseason- 
able. His little flock was as yet young in grace, and 
weak in faith, knowledge, and experience. They must 
be led on softly, and not burdened at this early stage 
with requirements which they were not able to bear. 
Fasting, moreover, might be suitable to the disciples of 
him who was only the Bridegroom’s friend, who lived 
in the wilderness, preached the baptism of repentance, 
was clothed in camel’s hair, and ate locusts and wild 
honey. But fasting was not equally suitable to the dis- 
ciples of Him, who was the Bridegroom Himself, brought 
glad tidings to sinners, and came living like other men. 
In short, to require fasting of his disciples at present, 
would be putting “ new wine into old bottles.” It would 
be trying to mingle and amalgamate things that essen- 
tially differed. 

The principle laid down in these little parables is one 
of great importance. It is a kind of proverbial saying, 


MARK, CHAP. I. 35 


and admits of a wide application. Forgetfulness of it 
has frequently done great harm in the Church. The 
evils that have arisen from trying to sew the new patch 
on the old garment, and put the new wine into old 
bottles, have neither been few nor small. 

How was it with the Galatian Church ? It is recorded 
in Paul’s epistle. Men wished in that Church to re- 
concile Judaism with Christianity, and to circumcise as 
well as baptize. They endeavored to keep alive the 
law of ceremonies and ordinances, and to place it side 
by side with the Gospel of Christ. In fact they would 
fain have put the ‘‘ new wine into old bottles.” Andin 
so doing they greatly erred. 

How was it with the early Christian Church, after 
the apostles were dead ? We have it recorded in the pages 
of Church history. Some tried to make the Gospel more 
acceptable by mingling it with Platonic philosophy. 
Some labored to recommend it to the heathen by bor- 
rowing forms, processions, and vestments from the tem- 
ples of heathen gods. In short, they “sewed the new 
patch on the old garment.” And in so doing they 
scattered broadcast the seeds of enormous evil. They 
paved the way for the whole Romish apostacy. 

How is it with many professing Christians in the pre- 
sent day ? We have only to look around us and see. 
There are thousands who are trying to reconcile the 
service of Christ and the service of the world, to have 
the name of Christian and yet live the life of the un- 
godly—to keep in with the servants of pleasure and 
sin, and yet be the followers of the crucified Jesus at 
the same time. In a word, they are trying to enjoy the 
‘new wine,” and yet to cling to the “old bottles,’ 


36 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


They will find one day that they have attempted that 
which cannot be done. 

Let us leave the passage in a spirit of serious self- 
inquiry. It is one that ought to raise great searchings 
of heart in the present day. Have we never read what 
the Scripture says ? ‘ No man can serve two masters.” 
“Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” Let us place side 
by side with these texts the concluding words of our 
Lord in this passage, ‘‘ New wine must be put into new 
bottles.” * 





MARK II. 23—28. 


238 And it came to pass, that he 


26 How he went into the house of 
went through the corn fields on the 


God in the days of Abiathar the High 


sabbath day ; and his disciples began, 
as they went, to pluck the ears of corn, 
24. And the Pharisees said unto him, 
Behold, why do they on the sabbath 
day that which is not lawful ? 
25 And he said unto them, Have 
e never read what David did, when 
e had need, and was an hungered, 
he, and they that were with him ? 


THESE verses set before us 





Priest, and did eat the shewbread, 
which is not lawful to eat but for the 
Priests, and gave also to them which 
were with him ? 

27 And he said unto them, The 
sabbath was made for man, and not 
man for the sabbath: 

28 Therefore the Son of man is 
Lord also of the sabbath. 


a remarkable scene in our 


Lord Jesus Christ’s earthly ministry. We see our blessed 
Master and His disciples going “ through the corn fields 
on the Sabbath day.’ We are told that His disciples, 
“as they went, began to pluck the ears of corn.” At 
once we hear the Pharisees accusing them to our Lord, 
as if they had committed some great moral offence. 
“Why do they on the Sabbath day that which is not 
lawful ?” They received an answer full of deep wisdom, 


* Tt must always be remembered that the “ bottle” here spoken of 
was not a bottle of glass or of earthenware, but ofleather. Unless this 
is kept in view, the parable is unintelligible to an English mind. A 
similar remark applies to David’s words, “ Iam become like a bottle in 
the smoke.” (Psal. cxix. 83.) 


MARK, CHAP. II. 37 


which all should study well, who desire to understand 
the subject of Sabbath observance. 

We see from these verses, what extravagant importance 
ws attached to trifles by those who are mere formalists in re- 
ligion. 

The Pharisees were mere formalists, if there ever were 
any in the world. They seem to have thought exclu- 
sively of the outward part, the husk, the shell, and the 
ceremonial of religion. They even added to these exter- 
nals by traditions of their own. Their godliness was 
made up of washings, and fastings, and peculiarities in 
dress, and will-worship, while repentance, and faith, and 
holiness were comparatively overlooked. 

The Pharisees would probably have found no fault, if 
the disciples had been guilty of some offence against the 
moral law. They would have winked at covetousness, 
or perjury, or extortions, or excess, because they were 
sins to which they themselves were inclined. But no 
sooner did they see an infringement on their man-made 
traditions about the right way of keeping the Sabbath, 
than they raised an outcry, and found fault. 

Let us watch and pray, lest we fall into the error of 
the Pharisees. There are never wanting Christians who 
walk in their steps. There are thousands at the present 
day who plainly think more of the mere outward cere- 
monial of religion than of its doctrines. They make 
more ado about keeping saints’ days, and turning to the 
east in the creed, and bowing at the name of Jesus, 
than about repentance, or faith, or separation from the 
world. Against this spirit let us ever be on our guard. 
It can neither comfort, satisfy, nor save. 

It ought to be a settled principle in our minds, that 


38 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


a man’s soul is in a bad state, when he begins to regard 
man-made rites and ceremonies, as things of superior 
importance, and exalts them above the preaching of the 
Gospel. It is a symptom of spiritual disease. There is 
mischief within. It is too often the resource of an 
uneasy conscience. The first steps of apostacy from 
Protestantism to Romanism have often been in this 
direction. No wonder that St. Paul said to the Gala- 
tians, “ Ye observe days, and months, and times, and 
years. Iam afraid of you, lest I have bestowed on you 
labor in vain.” (Gal. iv. 10, 11.) 

We see, in the second place, from these verses, the 
value of a knowledge of holy Scripture. 

Our Lord replies to this accusation of the Pharisees by 
a reference to holy Scripture. He reminds His enemies 
of the conduct of David, when he “had need and was 
an hungered.” ‘‘ Have ye never read what David did ?” 
They could not. deny that the writer of the book of - 
Psalms, and the man after God’s own heart, was not 
likely to set a bad example. They knew in fact that he 
had not turned aside from God’s commandment, all the 
days of his life, “‘save only in the matter of Uriah the 
Hittite.” (1 Kings xv. 5.) Yet what had David done ? 
He had gone into the house of God, when pressed by 
hunger, and eaten “the shewbread, which is not lawful 
to eat but for the priests.”’* He had thus shown that 


* There is some difficulty in this passage in the mention of Abia- 
thar as “the High Priest.” In the book of Samuel it appears that 
Abimelech was the High Priest, when the circumstance here referred 
to took place. (1 Sam. xxi. 6.) 

The explanations of this difficulty are various. They are as follows— 

1, Beza says that both Abiathar and Abimelech had each two 


t 


MARK, CHAP. Il. 39 


some requirements of God’s laws might be relaxed in 
case of necessity. To this Scripture example our Lord 
refers his adversaries. They found nothing to reply to 


names, and that Abiathar was frequently called Abimelech, and 
Abimelech Abiathar. (See in proof of this, 2 Sam. viii. 17; 1 Chron. 
vil. 16, and xxiv. 3.) 

2. Lightfoot would translate the words, “In the days of Abiathar, 
the son of the High Priest,” and says he is named rather than his father 
because he brought the Ephod to David, and by him inquiry was made 
by Urim and Thummim. He also says, that the Jews by “ Abiathar” 
understood the Urim and Thummim, and to say that the thing was done 
“under Abiathar” would show that it was done by divine direction. 

3. Whitby thinks that by “the High Priest” here, we are not to 
understand him who was strictly so called, but only one who was an 
eminent man of the order. He quotes as examples, Matt. ii. 4, xxvi. 
3, xxvil. 62; John xi. 47; Mark xiv. 10, 43. 

4, Some think that both Abimelech and Abiathar officiated as 
High Priests at the same time. That there was nothing altogether 
unusual in there being two Chief Priests at once, is shown by 1 Sam. 
viii. 17, where two names are given as “the Priests.” 

5. Some think that there has been a mistake made in transcribing 
the original words of St. Mark in this place, and some words have 
been inserted or wrongly written. Beza’s manuscript omits the words 
translated, ‘in the time of Abiathar the High Priest,” altogether. 
The St. Gall manuscript and the Gothic version have the word 
“ Priest” simply, and not “ High Priest.” The Persian version has 
“ Abimelech” instead of “ Abiathar.” However, it is only fair to say 
that the evidence of the great majority of manuscripts and versions is 
in favor of the text as it stands. 

Some of these solutions of the difficulty are evidently more probable 
than others. But any one of them is far more reasonable and desery- 
ing of belief than to suppose, as some have asserted, that St. Mark 
made a blunder! Such a theory destroys the whole principle of the 
inspiration of Scripture. Transcibers of the Bible have possibly made 
occasional mistakes. The original writers were inspired in the writ- 
ing of every word, and therefore could not err. 


40 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


it. The sword of the Spirit was a weapon which they — 
could not resist. They were silenced and put to shame. 
Now the conduct of our Lord on this occasion ought to 
be a pattern to all His people. Our grand reason for our 
faith, and practice, should always be, “‘ Thus it is written 
in the Bible.” ‘ What saith the Scripture?” We 
should endeavor to have the word of God on our side 
in all debateable questions. We should seek to be able 
to give a scriptural answer for our behavior in all mat- 
ters of dispute. We should refer our enemies to the 
Bible as our rule of conduct. We shall always find a plain 
text the most powerful argument we can use. In a world 
like this we must expect our opinions to be attacked, if 
we serve Christ, and we may be sure that nothing si- 
lences adversaries so soon as a quotation from Scripture. 
Let us however remember, that if we are to use the 
Bible as our Lord did, we must know it well, and be 
acquainted with its contents. We must read it diligently, 
humbly, perseveringly, prayerfully, or we shall never find 
its texts coming to our aid in the time of need. To use 
the sword of the Spirit effectually, we must be familiar 
with it, and have it often in our hands. There is no 
royal road to the knowledge of the Bible. It does not 
come to man by intuition, The book must be studied, 
pondered, prayed over, searched into, and not left always 
lying on a shelf, or carelessly looked at now and then. 
It is the students of the Bible, and they only, who will 
find it a weapon ready to hand in the day of battle. 
We see, in the last place, from these verses, the true 
principle by which all questions about the observance of the 
Sabbath ought to be decided. ‘“ The Sabbath,” says our 


MARK, CHAP. I. 4] 


Lord, “was made for man, and not man for the Sab- 
bath.” 

There is a mine of deep wisdom in those words. They 
deserve close attention, and the more so because they 
are not recorded in any Gospel but that of St. Mark. 
Let us see what they contain. 

“The Sabbath was made for man.” God made it for 
Adam in Paradise, and renewed it to Israel on Mount 
Sinai. It was made for all mankind, not for the Jew 
only, but for the whole family of Adam. It was made 
for man’s benefit and happiness. It was for the good of 
his body, the good of his mind, and the good of his soul. 
It was given to him as a boon and a blessing, and not as 
a burden. This was the original institution. 

But “man was not made for the Sabbath.” The ob- 
servance of the day of God was never meant to be so 
enforced as to be an injury to his health, or to interfere 
with his necessary wants. The original command to “keep 
holy the Sabbath day,” was not intended to be so inter- 
preted as to do harm to his body, or prevent acts of mercy 
to his fellow-creatures. This was the point that the 
Pharisees had forgotten, or buried under their traditions. 

There is nothing in all this to warrant the rash asser- 
tion of some, that our Lord has done away with the 
fourth commandment. On the contrary, He manifestly 
speaks of the Sabbath day as a privilege and a gift, and 
only regulates the extent to which its observance should 
be enforced. He shows that works of necessity and 
mercy may be done on the Sabbath day ; but He says 
not a word to justify the notion that Christians need not 
‘remember the day to keep it holy.” 

Let us be jealous over our own conduct in the matter 


49, EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS 


of observing the Sabbath. There is little danger of the 
day being kept too strictly in the present age. There is 
far more danger of its being profaned and forgotten 
entirely. Let us contend earnestly for its preservation 
among us in all its integrity. We may rest assured that 
national prosperity and personal growth in grace, are 
intimately bound up in the maintenance of a holy Sab- 
bath.* 


* The concluding words of the passage now expounded are re- 
markable. ‘The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.” They 
have received some rather strange interpretations, which it may be 
well to notice. 

1. Chrysostom, Grotius, Calovius, and others, think that the “son 
of man” in this place means “any man,” any one naturally born of the 
family of Adam, and not Christ Himself. To say nothing of the ob- 
jections that might be brought against the doctrine involved in sucha 
sense, it is an unanswerable objection that the expression “son of 
man” is never used in this way in the New Testament. Whitby says 
that it occurs elghty-eight times, and always applies to Christ. 

2. Others say that our Lord’s meaning is, to assert His own right 
to dispense with the observance of the fourth commandment. This 
however seems a very unsatisfactory interpretation. Our Lord de- 
clares plainly in one place, that He came “not to destroy the law but 
to fulfil.” He challenges the Jews in another place to convict him of 
any breach of the law: “which of you convinceth me of sin?” His 
enemies, when they brought Him at last before Caiaphas, did not 
charge Him with breaking the fourth commandment. No doubt 
they would have done so had he given them occasion, either by His 
teaching or practice. 

The true meaning appears to be, that our Lord claims the right to 
lspense with all the traditional rules, and man-made laws about the 
Sabbath, with which the Pharisees had overloaded the day of rest. 
As Son of man, who came not to destroy but to save, He asserts His 
power to set free the blessed Sabbath from the false and superstitious 
notions with which the Rabbins had clogged and poisoned it, and to 


MARK, CHAP. III. 


43 


werny MARK TI. 1—12. 


1 And he entered again into the 
Synagogue; and there was a man 
there which had a withered hand. 

2 And they watched him, whether 
he would heal him on the sabbath 
day; that they might accuse him. 

3 And he saith unto the man which 
had the withered hand, Stand forth. 

4 And he said unto them, Is it law- 
fal to do good on the sabbath days 
or to do evil? to save life, or to kill } 
But they held their peace. 

5 And when he had looked round 
about on them with anger, being 
grieved for the hardness of their 
hearts, he saith unto the man, Stretch 
forth thine hand. And he stretched 
it out: and his hand was restored 
whole as the other. 

6 And the Pharisees went forth, 
and straightway took counsel with 
the Herodians against him, how they 
might destroy him. 


7 But Jesus withdrew himself with 
his disciples to the sea: and a great 
multitude from Galilee followed him, 
and from Judea, 

8 And from Jerusalem, and from 
Idumea, and from beyond Jordan; 
and they about Tyre and Sidon, a 
great multitude, when they had 
heard what great things he did, came 
unto him. 

9 And he spake to his disciples, 
that a small ship should wait on him 
because of the multitude, lest they 
should throng him. 

10 For he had healed many ; inso- 
much that they pressed upon him for 
to touch him, as many as had plagues. 

11 And unclean spirits, when they 
saw him, fell down before him, and 
cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. 

12 And he straitly charged them 
that they should not make him 
known. 


THESE verses show us our Lord again working a miracle. 
He heals a man in the synagogue, “ which had a withered 
hand.” Always about His Father’s business—always 
doing good—doing it in the sight of enemies as well as 


restore it to its proper meaning and use. He declares that the Sab- 
bath is His day—His by creation and institution, since He first gave 
it in Paradise and at Sinai—and proclaims His determination to de- 
fend and purify His day from Jewish imposition, and to give it to His 
disciples as a day of blessing, comfort, and benefit, according to its 
original intention. 

Two things are implied in our Lord’s words. One is His own 
divinity. The “Lord of the Sabbath day” could be no less than God 
Himself. It is like the expression, “ In this place is one greater than 
the temple.” (Matt. xii. 6.) The other is His intention of altering 
the day of rest from the seventh day of the week to the first. At 
the time that He spoke, neither of these things doubtless were appa- 
rent to the Jews, and probably not to His disciples. After his as- 
cension they “ would remember his words.” 

A passage in Mayer’s Commentary is worth reading. “It is cer- 
tain that Christ being a perfect pattern of doctrine in all things, dis 


44 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of friends—such was the daily tenor of our Lord’s 
earthly ministry. And He “left us an example that we 
should follow His steps.” (1 Peter ii. 21.) Blessed 
indeed are those Christians who strive, however feebly, 
to imitate their Master ! 

Let us observe.ja these verses, how our Lord Jesus 
Christ was waichee by His enemies, We read that “ they 
watched Him, whether He would heal him on the Sab- 
bath day, that they might accuse Him.” 

What a melancholy proof we have here of the wicked- 
ness of human nature! It was the Sabbath day, when 
these things happened. It was in the synagogue, where 
men were assembled to hear the word and worship God. 
Yet even on the day of God, and at the time of wor- 
shipping God, these wretched formalists were plotting 
mischief against our Lord. The very men who pre- 
tended to such strictness and sanctity in little things, 
were full of malicious and angry thoughts in the midst — 
of the congregation. (Prov. v. 14.) 

Christ’s people must not expect to fare better than 
their Master. They are always watched by an il- 
natured and spiteful world. Their conduct is scanned 
with a keen and jealous eye. Their ways are noted and 
diligently observed. They are marked men. They can 
do nothing without the world’s noticing it. Their dress, 
their expenditure, their employment of time, their con- 


not transgress, or maintain any transgression against any law of God. 
Wherefore it is to be held that all His speech here tended to nothing 
else but to convince the Pharisees of blindness and ignorance touch- 
ing the right keeping of the Sabbath according to the commandment, 
it being never required to rest so strictly as they thought.”——Meyer’s 
Commentary. 1631. 


MARK, CHAP. III. 45 


duct in all the relations of life, are all rigidly and closely 
remarked. Their adversaries wait for their halting, and 
if at any time they fall into an error, the ungodly rejoice. 

It is good for all Christians to keep this before their 
minds. Wherever we go, and whatever we do, let us 
remember that, like our Master, we are “ watched.” The 
thought should make us exercise a holy jealousy over all 
our conduct, that we may do nothing to cause the enemy 
to blaspheme. It should make us diligent to avoid even 
the “ appearance of evil.” Above all, it should make us 
pray much, to be kept in our tempers, tongues, and daily 
public demeanor. That Saviour who was “ watched” 
Himself, knows how to sympathize with his people, and 
to supply grace to help in time of need. 

Let us observe, in the second place, the great principle 
that our Lord lays down about Sabbath observance. He 
teaches that it is lawful “‘ to do good” on the Sabbath. 

This principle is taught by a remarkable question. 
He asks those around Him, whether it was “‘ lawful to do 
good or evil on the Sabbath days, to save life, or to kill ?” 
Was it better to heal this poor sufferer before Him with 
the withered hand, or to leave him alone P Was it more 
sinful to restore a person to health on the Sabbath, than 
to plot murder, and nourish hatred against an innocent 
person, as they were doing at that moment against Him- 
self ? Was He to be blamed for saving a life on the 
Sabbath ? Were they blameless who were desirous to 
kill ? No wonder that before such a question as this, 
our Lord’s enemies “held their peace.” 

It is plain from these words of our Lord, that no 
Christian need ever hesitate to do a really good work on 
the Sunday. A real work of mercy, such as ministering 


46 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to the sick, or relieving pain, may always be done with- 
out scruple, The holiness with which the fourth com- 
mandment invests the Sabbath day, is not in the least 
degree invaded by anything of this kind. 

But we must take care that the principle here laid down 
by our Lord, is not abused and turned to bad account. 
We must not allow ourselves to suppose that the per- 
mission to “‘ do good,” implied that every one might find 
his own pleasure on the Sabbath. The permission to “ do 
good” was never meant to open the door to amusements, 
worldly festivities, travelling, journeying, and sensual 
gratification, It was neverintended to license the Sunday 
railway train, or the Sunday steamboat, or the Sunday 
exhibition. These things do good to none, and do certain 
harm to many. They rob many aservant of his seventh 
day’s rest. They turn the Sunday of thousands into a 
day of hard toil. Let us beware of perverting our Lord’s 
words from their proper meaning. Let us remember: 
what kind of “doing good” on the Sabbath His blessed 
example sanctioned. Let us ask ourselves whether 
there is the slightest likeness between our Lord’s works 
on the Sabbath, and those ways of spending the Sabbath 
for which many contend, who yet dare to appeal to our 
Lord’s example. Let us fall back on the plain méaning 
of our Lord’s words, and take our stand on them. He 
gives us a liberty to “do good” on Sunday, but for 
feasting, sight-seeing, party-giving, and excursions, He 
gives no liberty at all. 

Let us observe, in the last place, the feelings which the 
conduct of our Lord’s enemies called forth in His heart. 
We are told that “‘ He looked round about on them with 
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts.” 


MARK, CHAP. II. 47 


' This expression is very remarkable, and demands 
special attention. It is meant to remind us that our 
Lord Jesus Christ was aman like ourselves in all things, 
sin only excepted. Whatever sinless feelings belong to 
the constitution of man, our Lord partook of, and knew 
by experience. We read that He “ marvelled,” that He 
“rejoiced,” that He “ wept,” that He “loved,” and here 
we read that He felt “ anger.” 

It is-plain from these words that there is an “ anger” 
which is lawful, right, and not sinful. There is an 
indignation which is justifiable, and on some occasions 
may be properly manifested. The words of Solomon and 
St. Paul both seem to teach the same lesson. ‘The 
north wind driveth away rain, so doth an angry counte- 
nance a backbiting tongue.” “ Be ye angry and sin not.” 
(Prov. xxv. 28. Hphes. iv. 26.) 

Yet it must be confessed that the subject is full of dif- 
ficulty. Of all the feelings that man’s heart experiences, 
there is none perhaps which so soon runs into sin as the 
feeling of anger. There is none which once excited seems 
less under control. There is none which leads on to so 
much evil. The length to which ill-temper, irritability, 
and passion, will carry even godly men, all must know. 
The history of “the contention” of Paul and Barnabas 
at Antioch, and the story of Moses being provoked till he 
“snake unadvisedly with his lips,” are familiar to every 
Bible reader. The awful fact that passionate words are 
a breach of the sixth commandment, is plainly taught 
in the Sermon on the Mount. And yet here we see that 
there is anger which is lawful. 

Let us leave this subject with an earnest prayer, that 
we may all be enabled to take heed to our spirit in the 


48 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


matter of anger. We may rest assured that there is no 
human feeling which needs so much cautious guarding 
as this. A sinless wrath is a very rare thing. The 
wrath of man is seldom for the glory of God. In every 
case a righteous indignation should be mingled with 
grief and sorrow for those who cause it, even as it 
was in the case of our Lord. And this, at all events, we 
may be sure of—it is better never to be angry, than to 
be angry and sin,* 


MARK III. 13—21. 


13 And he goeth up into a moun- 
tain, and calleth wnto him whom he 
would; and they came unto him. 

14 And he ordained twelve, that 
they should be with him, and that he 
might send them forth to preach, 

15 And to have power to heal sick- 
nesses, and to cast out devils: 

16 And Simon he surnamed Peter ; 

17 And James the son of Zebedee 
and John the brother of James ; and 
he surnamed them Boanerges, which 
is, The sons of thunder: 

18 And Andrew, and Philip, and 


Bartholomew, and Matthew, and 
Thomas, and James the son of Al- 
pheus, and Thaddeus, and Simon 
the Canaanite 

19 And Judas Iscariot, which also 
betrayed him: and they went into 
an house. > 

20 And the multitude cometh to- 
gether again, so that they could not 
so much as eat bread. 

21 And when his friends heard 
of it, they went out to lay hold on 
ning : for they said, He is beside him- 
self. 


THE beginning of this passage describes the appoint- 
ment of the twelve apostles. It is an event in our Lord’s 
earthly ministry, which should always be read with deep 
interest. What avast amount of benefit these few men 


* In connection with this subject, Bishop Butler’s Sermon on Re- 
sentment deserves perusal. He says at the conclusion of it: “ That 
passion, from whence men take occasion to run into the dreadful sins 
of malice and revenge, even that passion, as implanted in our nature 
by God, is not only innocent but a generous movement of mind. It 
is in itself, and in its original, no more than indignation against injury 
and wickedness—that which is the only deformity in the creation, 
and the only reasonable object of abhorrence and dislike.’ —Bishog 
Butler. 


MARK, CHAP. II. 49 


have conferred on the world ! The names of a few Jewish 
fishermen are known and loved by millions all over the 
globe, while the names of many kings and rich men are 
lost and forgotten. It is they who do good to souls who 
are had “in everlasting remembrance.” (Psalm cxii. 6.) 

Let us notice in these verses, how many of the twelve 
who are here named, had been called to be disciples before 
they were ordained apostles. 

There are six, at least, out of the number, whose first 
call to follow Christ is specially recorded. These six 
are Peter and Andrew, James and John, Philip and 
Matthew. In short, there can be little doubt that eleven 
of our Lord’s apostles were converted before they were 
ordained. 

It ought to be the same with all ministers of the Gos- 
pel. They ought to be men who have been first called 
by the Spirit, before they are set apart for the great 
work of teaching others. The rule should be the same 
with them as with the apostles—“ first converted, then 
ordained,” 

It is impossible to overrate the importance of this to 
the interests of true religion. Bishops and presbyteries 
can never be too strict and particular in the enquiries 
they make about the spiritual character of candidates 
for orders, An unconverted minister is utterly unfit for 
his office. How can he speak experimentally of that 
grace which he has never tasted himself ? How can he 
commend that Saviour to his people whom he himself 
only knows by name? - How can he urge on souls the 
need of that conversion and new birth, which he him- , 
self has not experienced ? Miserably mistaken are those 

4 


50 EXPOSITORY. THOUGHTS. 


parents who persuade their sons to become clergymen, 
in order to obtain a good living, or follow a respectable 
profession | What is it but persuading them to say what 
is not true, and to take the Lord’s name in vain ? 
None do such injury to the cause of Christianity, as 
unconverted, worldly ministers. They are a support to 
the infidel, a joy to the devil, and an offence to 
God. 

Let us notice, in the second place, the nature of the 
office to which the apostles were ordained. They were to 
“be with Christ.” They were to be “sent forth to 
preach.” They were to have ‘‘ power.to heal sicknesses.” 
They were to “ cast out devils.” 

These four points deserve attention. They contain 
much instruction. Our Lord’s twelve apostles, beyond 
doubt, were a distinct order of men. They had no 
successors when they died. Strictly and literally speak- 
ing, there is no such thing as apostolical succession. No- 
man can be really called a “‘ successor of the apostles,” 
unless he can work miracles, and teach infallibly, as they 
did. But still, in saying this, we must not forget, that 
in many things the apostles were intended to be patterns 
and models for all ministers of the Gospel. Bearing 
this in mind, we may draw most useful lessons from 
this passage, as to the duties of a faithful minister. 

Like the apostles, the faithful minister ought to keep 
up close communion with Christ. He should be much 
“with Him.” His fellowship should be “ with the Son.” 
(1 Johni. 3.) He should abide in Him. He should be 
. Separate from the world, and daily sit, like Mary, at 
Jesus’ feet, and hear His word. He should study Him, 
copy Him, drink into His Spirit, and walk in His steps. 


MARK, CHAP, III. 51 


He should strive to be able to say, when he enters the 
pulpit, ‘that which we have seen and heard declare we 
unto you.” (1 John i. 3.) 

Like the apostles, the faithful minister ought to be a 
preacher. This must ever be his principal work, and 
receive the greatest part of his thoughts. He must place 
it above the administration of the sacraments. (1 Cor. 
1.17.) He must exalt it above the reading of forms. 
An unpreaching minister is of little use to the church 
of Christ.. He is a lampless light-house, a silent trum- 
peter, a sleeping watchman, a painted fire. 

Like the apostles, the faithful minister must labor to 
do good in every way. Though he cannot heal the sick, 
he must seek to alleviate sorrow, and to increase happi- 
ness among all with whom he has to do. He must strive 
to be known as the comforter, the counsellor, the peace- 
maker, the helper, and the friend of all. Men should 
know him, not as one who rules and domineers, but as 
one who is “‘ their servant for Jesus’ sake.” (2 Cor. iv. 5.) 

Like the apostles, the faithful minister must oppose 
every work of the devil. Though not called now to cast 
out evil spirits from the body, he must be ever ready to 
resist the devil’s devices, and to denounce his snares for 
the soul. He must expose the tendency of races, theatres, 
balls, gambling, drunkenness, Sabbath-profanation, and 
sensual gratifications. Every age has its own peculiar 
temptations. Many are the devices of Satan. But 
whatever be the direction-in which the devil is most 
busy, there ought the minister to be, ready to confront 
and withstand him. 

How great is the responsibility of ministers! How 
heavy their work, if they do their duty! How much 


52 EXPOSITORY : THOUGHTS. 


they need the prayers of all praying people, in order to 
support and strengthen their hands! No wonder that 
St. Paul says so often to the churches, “ Pray for us.” 

Let us notice, in the last place, how our Lord Jesus 
Ohrist’s zeal was misunderstood by His enemies. We are 
told that they “went out to lay hold of him, for they 
said, he is beside himself.” 

There is nothing in this fact that need surprise us. The 
prophet who came to anoint Jehu was called a “mad fel- 
low.” (2 Kings ix. 11.) Festus told Paul that he was 
“mad.” Few things show the corruption of human na- 
ture more clearly, than man’s inability to understand zeal 
in religion. Zeal about money, or science, or war, or com- 
merce, or business, is intelligible to the world. But zeal 
about religion is too often reckoned foolishness, fanati- 
cism, and the sign of a weak mind. If a man injures 
his health by study, or excessive attention to business, 
no fault is found :—“ He 1s a diligent man.”—But if he- 
wears himself out with preaching, or spends his whole 
time in doing good to souls, the cry is raised, “‘ He is an 
enthusiast and righteous over-much.” The world is not 
altered. The “things of the Spirit” are always “ fool- 
ishness to the natural man.” (1 Cor. ii. 14.) 

Let it not shake our faith, if we have to drink of the 
saine cup as our blessed Lord. Hard as it may be to 
flesh and blood to be misunderstood by our relations, we 
must recollect it is no new thing. Let us call to mind 
our Lord’s words, “‘ He that-loveth father and mother 
more than me is not worthy of me.” Jesus knows the 
bitterness of our trials. Jesus feels for us. Jesus will 
give us help. : 


MARK, CHAP. II. 53 


Let us bear patiently the unreasonableness of uncon- 
verted men, even as our Lord did. Let us pity their 
blindness and want of knowledge, and not love them 
one whit the less. Above all, let us pray that God would 
change their hearts. Who can tell but the very per- 
sons who now try to turn us away from Christ, may one 
day become new creatures, see all things differently, and 
follow Christ themselves ? 


MARK III. 22—80. 


22 And the Scribes which came 
down from Jerusalem said, He hath 
Beelzebub, and by the prince of the 
devils casteth he out devils. 

- 23 And he called them wnto him, 
and said unto them in parables, How 
ean Satan cast out Satan ? 

24 And if a kingdom be divided 
against itself, that kingdom cannot 
stand. 

25 And ifa house be divided against 
itself, that house cannot stand. 

26 And if Satan rise up against 
himself, and be divided, he cannot 
stand, but hath an end. 





27 No man can enter into a strong 
man’s house, and*spoil his goods, ex- 
cept he will first bind the strong man ; 
and then he will spoil his house. 

28 Verily I say unto you, All sins 
shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, 
and blasphemies wherewith soever 
they ais eee F 

29 But he that shall blaspheme 
against the Holy Ghost hath never 
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal 
damnation : 

30 Because they said, He hath an 
unclean spirit. 


We all know how painful it is to have our conduct 
misunderstood and misrepresented, when we are do- 
ing right. It isa trial which our Lord Jesus Christ had 
to endure continually, all through His earthly ministry. 
We have an instance in the passage before us. The 
“Scribes which came down from Jerusalem” saw the 
miracles which He worked. They could not deny their 
reality. What then did they do? They accused our 
blessed Saviour of being in league and union with the 
devil. They said, “‘He hath Beelzebub, and by the 
prince of the devils casteth he out devils,” 


54 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


In our Lord’s answer to this wicked accusation, there 
are expressions which deserve special attention. Let us 
see what lessons they contain for our use. 

We ought to notice, in the first place, how great is the 
evil of dissensions and divisions. 

This is a lesson which is strongly brought out in the 
beginning of our Lord’s reply to the scribes. He shows 
the absurdity of supposing that Satan would “ cast out 
Satan,” and so help to destroy his own power. He 
appeals to the notorious fact, which even his enemies 
must allow, that there can be no strength where there 
is division. “Ifa kingdom be divided against itself, 
that kingdom cannot stand.” 

This truth is one which does not receive sufficient con- 
sideration. On no point has the abuse of the right of 
private judgment produced so much evil. The divisions 
of Christians are one great cause of the weakness of the 
visible church. They often absorb energy, time, and 
power, which might have been well bestowed on better 
things. They furnish the infidel with a prime argument 
against the truth of Christianity. They help the devil. 
Satan indeed is the chief promoter of religious divisions 
If he cannot extinguish Christianity, he labors to make 
Christians quarrel with one another, and to set every 
man’s hand against his neighbor. None knows better 
than the devil, that ‘‘ to divide is to conquer.” 

Let us resolve, so far as in us lies, to avoid all differ- 
ences, dissensions, and disputes in religion. Let us loathe 
and abhor them as the plague of the churches. We 
cannot be too jealous about all saving truths. But it is 
easy to mistake morbid scrupulosity for conscientiousness, 


MARK, CHAP. III. 55 


and zeal about mere trifles for zeal about the truth, 
Nothing justifies separation from a church but the sepa- 
ration of that church from the Gospel. Let us be ready 
to concede much, and make’ many sacrifices for the sake 
of unity and peace. 

We ought to notice, in the second place, what a glori- 
ous declaration our Lord makes in these verses about the 
Jorgwveness of sins. He says, “all sins shall be forgiven 
to the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever 
they shall blaspheme.” 

These words fall lightly on the ears of many persons. 
They see no particular beauty in them. But to the man 
who is alive to his own sinfulness and deeply sensible of his 
need of mercy, these words are sweet and precious. ‘“ All 
sins shall beforgiven.” The sins of youth and age—the 
sins of head, and hand, and tongue, and imagination— 
the sins against all God’s commandments—the sins of 
persecutors, like Saul—the sins of idolaters, like Ma- 
nasseh—the sins of open enemies of Christ, like the Jews 
who crucified Him—the sins of backsliders from Christ, 
like Peter—all, all may be forgiven. The blood of 
Christ can cleanse allaway. The righteousness of Christ 
can cover all, and hide all from God’s eyes. 

The doctrine here laid down is the crown and glory of 
the Gospel. The very first thing it proposes to man is 
free pardon, full forgiveness, complete remission, without 
money and without price. “Through this man is 
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins ; and by Him all 
that believe are justified from all things.” (Acts xiii. 39.) 

Let us lay hold on this doctrine without delay, if we 
never received it before. It is for us, as well as for others. 
We too, this very day, if we come to Christ, may be 


56 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


completely forgiven. ‘‘ Though our sins have been as 
scarlet, they shall be white as snow.” (Isaiah i, 18.) 

Let us cleave firmly to this doctrine, if we have re- 
ceived it already. We may sometimes feel faint, and 
unworthy, and cast down, But if we have really come 
to Jesus by faith, our sins are clean forgiven. They are 
cast behind God’s back—blotted out of the book of His 
remembrance—sunk into the depths of the sea. Let us 
believe and not be afraid. 

We ought to notice, in the last place, that, i zs possible 
for a man’s soul to be lost for ever in hell. 'The words of 
our Lord are distinct and express. He speaks of one 
who “hath never forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal 
damnation.” 

This is an awful truth, beyond doubt. But it is a 
truth, and we must not shut our eyes against it. We 
find it asserted over and over again in Scripture. Figures 
of all kinds are multiplied, and language ef every sort is’ 
employed, in order to make it plain and unmistakeable. 
In short, if there is no such thing as ‘ eternal damna- 
tion,” we may throw the Bible aside, and say that words 
have no meaning at all. 

We have great need to keep this awful truth steadily 
in view in. these latter days. Teachers have risen up, 
who are openly attacking the doctrine of the eternity of 
punishment, or laboring hard to explain it away. Men’s 
ears are being tickled with plausible sayings about “ the 
love of God,” and the impossibility of a loving God per- 
mitting an everlasting hell. The eternity of punishment 
is spoken of as a mere “speculative question,” about 
which men may believe anything they please—In the 
midst of all this flood of false doctrine, let us hold firmly 


MARK, CHAP, III. 57 


the old truth. Let us not be ashamed to believe that 
there is an eternal God—an eternal heaven—and an 
eternal hell. Let us recollect that sin is an infinite evil. 
It needed an atonement of infinite value to deliver the 
believer from its consequences —and it entails an infinite 
loss on the unbeliever who rejects the remedy provided 
for it. Above all, let us fall back on plain scriptural 
statements, like that before us this day. One plain text 
is worth a thousand abstruse arguments, 

Finally, if it be true that there is an “ eternal damna- 
tion,” let us give diligence that we ourselves do not fall 
into it. Let us escape for our lives, and not linger. (Gen. 
xix. 16,17.) Let us flee for refuge to the hope set before us 
in the Gospel, and never rest till we know and feel that we 
are safe. And never, never let us be ashamed of seeking 
safety. Of sin, worldliness, and the love of pleasure, we 
may well be ashamed. But we never need be ashamed 
of seeking to be delivered from an eternal hell.* 


* There is an expression in the passage now expounded, which 
appears to demand special notice. It is confessedly one of the hard 
things of Scripture, and has often troubled the hearts of Bible readers. 
I refer to the saying of our Lord, “ He that blasphemeth against the 
Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness.” It seems that there is such a 
thing as an wnpardonable sin. 

Some interpreters have endeavored to cut the knot of the diffi- 
culty, by maintaining that the sin here referred to was entirely con- 
fined to the time when our Lord was on earth. They say that when 
the Scribes and Pharisees saw the evidence of our Lord’s miracles, 
and yet refused to believe in Him as the Messiah, they committed 
the unpardonable sin. Their assertion that our Lord worked miracles 
through Beelzebub, was blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. 

There nfight be something in this view, if the passage under con- 
sideration stood entirely alone—though even then he would be a 

‘bold man who would assert that there were no hardened Scribes and 
Pharisees among the three thousand converted and forgiven on the 
3% 


58 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK III. 31—35. 


31 There came then his brethren | Who is my mother, or my brethren # 
and his mother, and, standing without, | 34 And he looked round about on 
sent unto him, calling him, them which sat about him, and said, 

32 And the multitude sat about|Behold my mother and my breth- 
him, and they said unto him, Behold, | ren! : 
thy mother and thy brethren without| 85 For whosoever shall do the will 
seek for thee. of God, the same is my brother, and 

33 And he answered them, saying, | my sister, and mother. 


In the verses which immediately precede this passage, 
we see our blessed Lord accused by the Scribes of being 
in league with the devil. They said, “ He hath Beelze- 
bub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils.” 

In the verses we have now read, we find that this 
absurd charge of the Scribes was not all that Jesus had 
to endure at this time. We are told that “‘ his brethren 


day of Pentecost. But, unfortunately for this theory, the doctrine 
here laid down is to be found in other places of Scripture beside this. 
I allude of course to the well-known passages, Heb. vi. 4-6; Heb. 
x. 26, and 1 John v.17. In all these places there seems a reference 
to a sin which is not forgiven. ; 

What then is the unpardonable sin? It must be frankly confessed 
that its precise nature is nowhere defined in holy Scripture. The 
most probable view is, that it is a combination of clear intellectual 
knowledge of the Gospel, with deliberate rejection of it, and wilful 
choice of sin. It is a union of light in the head, and hatred in the 
heart. Such was the case of Judas Iscariot. We must not flatter 
ourselves that none have walked in his steps. In the absence of any 
definition in Scripture, we shall probably not get much nearer to the 
mark than this. Yet even this view must be carefully handled. The 
limits which knowledge combined with unbelief must pass, in order 
to become the unpardonable sin, are graciously withheld from us. It. 
is mercifully ordered of God, that man can never decide pasitively of 
any brother, that he has committed a sin which cannot be forgiven. 

But although it is difficult to define what the unpardonable sin is, 
it is far less difficult to point out what it is not. A few words on 
this point may possibly help to relieve tender consciences. 

We may lay it down as nearly certain, that those who are troubled 
with fears that they have sinned the unpardonable sin, are the very 
people who haye not sinned it, The very fact that they are afraid 


MARK, OHAP. IIL. 59 


and his mother came, and, standing without, sent unto 
him, calling him.” They could not yet understand the 
beauty and usefulness of the life that our Lord was living. 
Though they doubtless loved Him well, they would fain 
have persuaded him to cease from His work, and “ spare 
himself.” Little did they know what they were doing ! 
Little had they observed or understood our Lord’s words 
when He was only twelve years old, “wist ye not that I 
must be about my Father’s business ?”* (Luke u, 49.) 


and anxious about it, is the strongest possible evidence in their favor. 
A troubled conscience—an anxiety about salvation, and a dread of 
being cast away—a concern about the next world, and a desire to 
escape from the.wrath of God—will probably never be found in the 
heart of that person who has sinned the sin for which there is no for= 
giveness. It is far more probable that the general marks of such a 
person will be utter hardness of conscience—a seared heart—an ab- 
sence of any feeling—a thorough insensibility to spiritual concern. 
The subject may safely be left here. There is such a thing as a sin 
which is never forgiven. But those who are troubled about it, are 
most unlikely to have committed it. 

The following quotation from Thomas Fuller deserves attention: 

“The sin against the Holy Ghost is ever attended with these two 
symptoms—absence of all contrition, and of all desire of forgiveness. 
Now, if thou canst truly say that thy sins are a burden to thee—that 
thou dost desire forgiveness, and wouldst give anything to attain it, 
be of good comfort; thou hast not yet, and, by God’s grace, never 
shall, commit that unpardonable offence. I will not define how near 
thou hast been unto it. As David said to Jonathan, ‘there is but a 
step between me and death’—so, may be, thou hast missed it very 
narrowly; but assure thyself thou art not as yet guilty thereof.”— 
Fuller’s Cause and Cure of a Wounded Conscience. 

* The remarks of Scott on the conduct of our Lord’s mother on 
this occasion, are worth quoting: “It is plain that many of these in- 
timations were suited, and doubtless prophetically intended, to be a 
Scriptural protest against the idolatrous honor, to this day, by vast 
multitudes, rendered to Mary the mother of Jesus. She was, no 
doubt, an excellent and honorable character, but evidently not per- 
fect. She is entitled to great estimation, and high yeneration, but 


60 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


It is interesting to remark the quiet, firm perseverance 
of our Lord, in the face of all discouragements. None 
of these things moved Him. Theslanderous suggestions 
of enemies, and the well-meant remonstrances of ignorant 
friends, were alike powerless to turn Him from His course. 
He had set His face as a flint towards the cross and the 
crown. He knew the work He had come into the 
world to do. He had a baptism to be baptized, and was 
straitened till it was accomplished. (Luke xii. 50.) _ 

So let it be with all true servants of Christ. Let 
nothing turn them for a nioment out of the narrow way, 
or make them stop and look back. Let them not heed 
the ill-natured remarks of enemies. Let them not give 
way to the well-intentioned but mistaken entreaties of 
unconverted relations and friends. Let them reply in the 
words of Nehemiah, “I am doing a great work, and I 
cannotcome down.” (Neh. vi. 3.) Let them say, “I have 
taken up the cross, and I will not cast it. away.” 
surely not to religious confidence and worship.” It is difficult to men- 
tion any doctrine more completely destitute of Scriptural founda- 
tion, than the Romish doctrine of the efficacy of the Virgin Mary’s 
intercession, or the utility of addressing our prayers to her. As 
to the doctrine of the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, 
which has been lately accredited by the Romish Church, it is a mere 
man-made figment, without a single word of Scripture to support 
it. Holy and full of grace as the Virgin Mary was, it is plain that 
she regarded herself as one “born in sin,” and needing a Saviour. 
We have her own remarkable words in evidence of this last point: 
“My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.” (Luke i.’47.) 

As to the opinion of the Fathers on the conduct of the mother of 
our Lord in this place, Whitby has collected some curious expres- 
sions:—“ Theophylact taxes her with vain-glory and guilt, in en- 
deayoring to draw Jesus from teaching the word. Tertullian pro- 
nounceth her guilty of incredulity—Chrysostom of vain-glory, in- 
. firmity and madness, for this very thing.” 


MARK, CHAP, III. 61 


We learn from these verses one mighty lesson, We 
learn, who they are that are reckoned the relations of Jesus 
Christ. They are they who are His disciples, and “ do 
the will of God.” Of such the great Head of the 
Church says, ‘‘ the same is my brother, and sister, and 
mother.” 

How much there is in this single expression !_ What 
a rich mine of consolation it opens to all true be- 
lievers! Who can conceive the depth of our Lord’s 
love towards Mary the mother that bare Him, and on 
whose bosom He had been nursed ? Who can imagine 
the breadth of His love towards His brethren according 
to the flesh, with whom the tender years of his child- 
hood had been spent ? Doubtless no heart ever had 
within it such deep well-springs of affection as the heart 
of Christ. Yet even He says, of all who “do the will 
of God,” that each “is his brother, and sister, and 
mother.” 

Let all true Christians drink comfort out of these 
words. Let them know that there is One at least, who 
knows them, loves them, cares for them, and reckons 
them as His own family, What though they be poorin 
this world ? They have no cause to be ashamed, when 
they remember that they are the brethren and sisters of 
the Son of God.—What though they be persecuted and 
ill-treated in their own homes because of their religion? 
They may remember the words of David, and apply 
them to their own case, “‘ When my father and mother 
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.” (Psal. 
xxvii. 10.) 

Finally, let all who persecute and ridicule others be- 


62 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


cause of their religion, take warning by these words, and 
repent ? Whom are they persecuting and ridiculing ? 
The relations of Jesus the Son of God! The family of 
the King of kings and Lord of lords !—Surely they 
would do wisely to hold their peace, and consider well 
what they are doing. These whom they persecute have 
a mighty Friend : “ Their redeemer is mighty ; he shall 
plead their cause.” (Prov. xxii. 11.) 


MARK IV. 1—20. 


1 And he began again to teach by 
the sea side: and there was gathered 
unto him a great multitude, so that 
he entered into a ship, and sat in the 
sea; and the whole multitude was by 
the sea on the land. 

2 And he taught them many things 
by parables, and said unto them in 
his doctrine, 

3 Hearken; Behold, there went out 
a sower to s0w: 

4 And it came to pass, as he sowed, 
some fell by the way side, and the 
fowls of the air came and devoured 
it up. 

5 And some fell on stony ground, 
where it had not much earth; and 
immediately it sprang up, because it 
had no depth of earth: 

6 But when the sun was up, it was 
scorched ; and because it had no root, 
it withered away. 

7 And some fell among thorns, and 
the thorns grew up, and choked it, 
and it yielded no fruit. 

8 And other fell on good ground, 
and did yield fruit that sprang up and 
increased; and brought forth, some 
thirty, and some sixty, and some an 
hundred. 

9 And he said unto them, He that 
hath ears to hear, let him hear. 

10 And when he was alone, they 
that were about him with the twelve 
asked of him the parable. 

11 And he said unto them, Unto 
you it is given to know the mystery 
of the kingdom of God: but unto 





them that are without, all these 
things are done in parables : 

12 That seeing hes may see, and 
not perceive ; and hearing they may 
hear, and not understand ; lest at any 
time they should be converted, and 
their sins should be forgiven them. 

18 And he said unto them, Know 
ye not this parable? and how then 
will ye know all parables ? 

14 The sower soweth the word. 

15 And these are they by the way 
side, where the word is sown; but 
when they have heard, Satan cometh 
immediately, and taketh away the 
word that was sown in their hearts. 

16 And these are they likewise 
which are sown on stony ground; 
who, when they have heard the word, 
immediately receive it with gladness ; 

17 And have no root in themselves, 
and so endure but for a time: after- 
ward, when affliction or persecution 
ariseth for the word’s sake, immedi- 
ately they are offended. 

18 And these are they which are 
sown among thorns; such as hear 
the word, 

19 And the cares of this world, and 
the deceitfulness of riches, and the 
lusts of other things entering in, 
choke the word, and it beecometh un- 
fruitful. ; 7 

20-And these are they which are 
sown on good ground ; such as hear 
the word, and receive ¢¢, and bring 
forth fruit, some thirty-fold, some 
sixty, and some an hundred. 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 63 


THESE verses contain the parable of the sower. Of all 
the parables spoken by our Lord, none is probably so 
well-known as this. There is none which is so easily 
understood by all, from the gracious familiarity of the 
figures which it contains.* There is none which is ot 
such universal and perpetual application. So long as 
there is a Church of Christ anda congregation of Chris- 
tians, so long there will be employment for this parable. 

The language of the parable requires no explanation. 
To use the words of an ancient writer, “‘ it needs appli- 
cation, not exposition.” Let us now see what it teaches. 

We are taught, in the first place, that there are some 
hearers of the Gospel, whose hearts are like the way-side in 
a field. 

These are they who hear sermons, but pay no atten- 
tion to them. They go to a place of worship, for form 
or fashion, or to appear respectable before men. But 
they take no interest whatever in the preaching. It 
seems to them a mere matter of words and names, and 


* “ Our Saviour borroweth his comparisons from easy and familiar 
things, such as the sower, the seed, the ground, the growth, the with- 
ering, the answering or failing of the sower’s expectations, all of them 
things well-known, and by all these would teach us some spiritual in- 
struction. For there isno earthly thing which is not fitted to put us 
in mind of some heavenly. Christ cannot look upon the sun, the 
wind, the fire, water, a hen, a little grain of mustard seed—nor upon 
ordinary occasions, as the penny given for the day’s worl, the wed- 
ding garment and ceremonies of the Jews about it, nor the waiting 
of servants at their master’s table, or children asking bread and fish 
at their father’s table, but he applies all to some special use of edifi- 
cation in grace. 

“ Barthly things must remind us of heavenly. We must translate 
the book of nature into the book of grace.”—Zhomas Taylor on the 
Parable of the Sower. 1634. 


64 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


unintelligible talk. It is neither money, nor meat, nor 
drink, nor clothes, nor company ; and as they sit under 
the sound of it, they are taken up with thinking of other 
things. It matters nothing whether it is Law or Gospel. 
It produces no more effect on them than water on a 
stone, And at the end they go away, knowing no more 
than when they came in. 

There are myriads of professing Christians in this state 
of soul. There is hardly a church or chapel, where 
scores of them are not to be found. Sunday after Sun- 
day they allow the devil to catch away the good seed 
that is sown on the face of their hearts. Week after 
week they live on, without faith, or fear, or knowledge, 
or grace—feeling nothing, caring nothing, taking no more 
interest in religion, than if Christ had never died on the 
cross at all. And in this state they often die and are 
buried, and are lost for ever in hell. This is a mourn- . 
ful picture, but only too true. 

We are taught, in the second place, that there are 
some hearers of the Gospel whose hearts are like the stony 
ground in a field. 

These are they on whom preaching produces tem- 
porary impressions, but no deep, lasting, and abiding 
effect. They take pleasure in hearing sermons in which 
the truth is faithfully set forth. They can speak with 
apparent joy and enthusiasm about the sweetness of the 
Gospel, and the happiness which they experience in lis- 
tening to it. They can be moved to tears by the appeals 
of preachers, and talk with apparent earnestness of their 
own inward conflicts, hopes, struggles, desires, and fears. 
But unhappily there is no stability about their religion. 
“They have no root in themselves, and so endure but for 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 65 


atime.” There is no real work of the Holy Ghost with- 
in their hearts. Their impressions are like Jonah’s gourd, 
which came up in a night and perished in a night. 
They fade as rapidly as they grow. No sooner does 
“affliction and persecution arise for the word’s sake,” 
than they fall away. Their goodness proves as “ the 
morning cloud, and the early dew.” (Hosea vi. 4.) Their 
religion has no more life in it than the cut flower. It 
has no root, and soon withers away. 

There are many in every congregation which hears the 
Gospel, who are just in this state of soul. They are not 
careless and inattentive hearers, like many around them, 
and are therefore tempted to think well of their own con- 
dition. They feel a pleasure in the preaching to which 
they listen, and therefore flatter themselves they must 
have grace in their hearts. And yet they are thoroughly 
deceived. Oldthings have not yet passed away. There 
is no real work of conversion in their inward man. With 
all their feelings, affections, joys, hopes, and desires, they 
are actually on the high road to destruction.* 

We are taught, in the third place, that there are some 
hearers of the Gospel, whose hearts are like the thorny ground 
in a field. 

These are they who attend to the preaching of Christ’s 
truth, and to a certain extent obey it. Their under- 
standing assents to it. Their judgment approves of it. 

* All who wish to understand the character of the “stony ground 
hearers,” should study the treatise of Jonathan Hdwards, on the Re- 
ligious Affections. Few Christians, who have not looked into the 
subject, have any idea of the lengths to which a person may go in 
religious feelings, while he is at the same time utterly destitute of tha 
grace of God. 


~~ 
66 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Their conscience is affected by it. Their affections are 
in favor of it. They acknowledge that it is all right, 
and good, and worthy of all reception. They even 
abstain from many things which the Gospel condemns, 
and adopt many habits which the Gospel requires. But 
here unhappily they stop short. Something appears to 
chain them fast, and they never get beyond a certain point 
in their religion. And the grand secret of their condi- 
tion is the world. “The cares of the world, and the 
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things,” 
prevent the word having its full effect on their souls. 
With everything apparently that is promising and favor- 
able in their spiritual state, they stand still. They never 
come up to the full standard of New Testament Chris- 
tianity. They bring no fruit to perfection. 

There are few faithful ministers of Christ who could 
not point to cases like these. Of all cases they are the 
most melancholy. T'o go so far and yet go no further— 
to see so much and yet not see all—to approve so much 
and yet not give Christ the heart, this is indeed most 
deplorable ! And there is but one verdict that can be 
given about such people. Without a decided change 
they will never enter the kingdom of heaven. Christ 
will have all our hearts. ‘ If any man will be a friend 
of the world, he is the enemy of God.” (James iv. 4.) 

We are taught, in the last place, that there are some 
hearers of the Gospel, whose hearts are like the good ground 
in a field. 

These are they who really receive Christ’s truth into 
the bottom of their hearts, believe it implicitly, and obey 
it thoroughly. In these the fruits of that truth will be 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 67 


seen—uniform, plain, and unmistakeable results in heart 
and life. Sin will be truly hated, mourned over, resisted, 
and renounced, Christ will be truly loved, trusted in, 
followed, loved, and obeyed. Holiness will show itself 
in all their conversation, in humility, spiritual-minded- 
ness, patience, meekness, and charity. There will be 
something that can be seen. The true work of the Holy 
Ghost cannot be hid. 

There will always be some persons in this state of 
soul, where the Gospel is faithfully preached. Their 
numbers may very likely be few, compared to the worldly 
around them. Their experience and degree of spiritual 
attainment may differ widely, some bringing forth thirty, 
some sixty, and some a hundred-fold. But the fruit of 
the seed falling into good ground will always be of the 
same kind. There will always be visible repentance, 
visible faith in Christ, and visible holiness of life. With- 
out these things, there is no saving religion. 

And now let us ask ourselves, What are we ? Under 
which class of hearers ought we to be ranked ? With 
what kind of hearts do we hear the word ?—Never, 
never may we forget, that there are three ways of hear- 
ing without profit, and only one way of hearing aright ! 
Never, never may we forget that there is only one in- 
fallible mark of being a right-hearted hearer! That 
mark is to bear fruit. To be without fruit, is to be in 
the way to hell. 


MARK IY. 21—25. 


21 And he said unto them, Is a| bushel, or under a bed? and not to be 
candle brought to be put under a|set on a candlestick ? 


68 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


92, For there is nothing hid, which | ye mete, it shall be measured to you: 
shall not be manifested ; neither was | and unto you that hear shall more be 
anything kept secret, but that it| given. 


should come abroad. 25 For he that hath, to him shall 
923 If any man have ears to hear, | be given: and he that hath not, from 
let him hear. him shall be taken even that which 


24 And he saith unto them, Take | he hath. 
heed what ye hear: with what measure 


THESE verses seem intended to enforce the parable of the 
sower on the attention of those who heard it. They are 
remarkable for the succession of short, pithy, proverbial 
sayings which they contain. Such sayings are eminently 
calculated to arrest an ignorant hearer. They often 
strike, and stick in the memory, when the main subject 
of the sermon is forgotten.* 

We learn, from these verses, that we ought not only to 
receive knowledge, but to impart wt to others. 

A candle is not lighted in order to be hidden and 
concealed, but to be set on a candlestick and used. Re- 
ligious light is not given to a man for himself alon®, but 
for the benefit of others. We are to try to spread and 
diffuse our knowledge. We are to display to others the 
precious treasure that we have found, and persuade 
them to seek it for themselves, We are to tell them of 

* The passage now under consideration is one among many proofs 
that our Lord used the same words and the same ideas on many dif- 
ferent occasions. The proverbial saying about the “ candlestick under 
a bushel,” will be found in the Sermon on the Mount. So also the 
saying, “there is nothing hid that shall not be manifested’”—and the 
saying “with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured unto you 
again”—are both to be found in the Gospel of Matthew, but in both 
cases in an entirely different connexion from the passage in St. Mark 
now before us. (Matth. x. 26, and Matth. vii. 2.) 

The subject is one that deserves attention. The needless difficul- 
ties that have been created by attempting to harmonize the Gospels, 


and to make out that our Lord never said the same thing more than 
once, are neither few nor small. 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 69 


the good news that we have heard, and endeavor to 
make them believe and value it themselves. 

We shall all have to give account of our use of know- 
ledge one day. The books of God in the day of judg- 
ment will show what we have done. If we have buried 
our talent in the earth—if we have been content with a 
lazy, idle, do-nothing Christianity, and cared nothing 
what happened to others, so long as we went to heaven 
ourselves—there will be a fearful exposure at last: 
“ There is nothing hid, which shall not be manifested.” 

Tt becomes all Christians to lay these things to heart. 
It is high time that the old tradition, that the clergy 
alone ought to teach and spread religious knowledge, 
should be exploded and cast aside for ever. To do good 
and diffuse light is a duty for which all members of 
Christ’s Church are responsible, whether ministers or 
laymen. Neighbors ought to tell neighbors, if they 
have found an unfailing remedy in time of plague. 
Christians ought to tell others that they have found 
medicine for their souls, if they see them ignorant, and 
dying for want of it. What saith the apostle Peter ? 
“¢ As every man hath received the gift, even so minister 
the same one to another.” (1 Peteriv. 10.) They will 
be happy days for the Church when that text is obeyed. 

We learn, in the second place, from these verses, the 
‘mportance of hearing, and of considering well what we hear. 

This is a point to which our Lord evidently attaches 
great weight. We have seen it already brought out in 
the parable of the sower. We see it here enforced in 
two remarkable expressions. “‘If any man have an ear 
to hear, let him hear.” ‘Take heed what ye hear.” 


70 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Hearing the truth is one principal avenue through which 
grace is conveyed to the soul of man. “Faith cometh by 
hearing.” (Rom. x. 17.) One of the first steps towards 
conversion is to receive from the Spirit a hearing ear, 
Seldom are men brought to repentance and faith in 
Christ without “hearing.” The general rule is that of 
which St. Paul reminds the Ephesians, “ ye also trusted, 
after that ye heard the word of truth.” (Hph. 1. 13.) 

Let us bear this in mind when we hear preaching 
decried as a means of grace. There are never wanting 
men who seek to cast it down from the high place which 
the Bible gives it. There are many who proclaim loudly 
that it is of far more importance to the soul to hear litur- 
gical forms read, and to receive the Lord’s Supper, than to 
hear God’s wordexpounded. Ofall such notions let us be- 
ware. Let it be a settled principle with us that “ hearing 
the word,” is one of the foremost means of grace that God 
has given to man. Let us give to every other means and | 
ordinance its proper value and proportion. But never 
let us forget the words of Paul, “ despise not prophesy- 
ings,” and his dying charge to Timothy, “ Preach the 
word.”* (1 Thess. v. 20; 2 Tim. iv. 2.) 


* “Public and continual preaching of God’s word is the ordinary 
means and instrument of the salvation of mankind. St. Paul calleth 
it the ministry of reconciliation of man unto God. By preaching of 
God’s word, the glory of God is enlarged, faith is nourished, and char- 
ity increased. By it the ignorant is instructed, the negligent exhorted 
and invited, the stubborn rebuked, the weak conscience comforted, 
and to all those that sin of malicious wickedness, the wrath of God is 
threatened. By preachmg, due obedience to Christian princes and 
magistrates is planted in the hearts of subjects: for obedience pro- 
oeedeth of conscience, conscience is grounded upon the word of God, 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 1 


We learn, in the last place, from these verses, the im- 
portance of a diligent use of religious privileges. What 
says our Lord? ‘Unto you that hear shall more be 
~ given. He that hath, to him shall be given: and he 
that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which 
he hath.” 

This is a principle which we find continually brought 
forward in Scripture. All that believers have is un- 
doubtedly of grace. Their repentance, faith, and holi- 
ness, are all the gift of God. But the degree to which 
a believer attains in grace, is ever set before us as closely 
connected with his own diligence in the use of means, 
and his own faithfulness in living fully up to the light 
and knowledge which he possesses. Indolence and lazi- 
ness are always discouraged in God’s word. Labor 
and pains in hearing, reading, and prayer, are always 
represented as bringing their own reward. “‘ The soul 
of the diligent shall be made fat.” (Prov, xiii. 4.) “An 
idle soul shall suffer hunger.” (Prov. xix. 15.) 

Attention to this great principle is the main secret of 
spiritual prosperity. The man who makes rapid progress 
in spiritual attainments—who growsvisiblyin grace, and 
knowledge, and strength, and usefulness—will always be 
found te be a diligent man. He leaves no stone un- 
turned to promote his soul’s well-doing. He is diligent 
over his Bible, diligent in his private devotions, diligent 
as a hearer of sermons, diligent in his attendance at the 
Lord’s table. And he reaps according as he sows. Just 


the word of God worketh his effect by preaching. So as generally 
when preaching wanteth, obedience faileth.”—Archbishop Grindal’s 
Letter to Queen Hlizabeth. 


72 EXPOSITURY THOUGHTS. 


as the muscles of the body are strengthened by regular 
exercise, so are the graces of the soul increased by dili- 
gence in using them. : ae 

Do we wish to growin grace? Do we desire to have 
stronger faith, brighter hope, and clearer knowledge ? 
Beyond doubt we do, if we are true Christians. Then 
let us live fully up to our light, and improve every op- 
portunity. Let us never forget our Lord’s words in thas 
passage. ‘‘ With what measure we mete” to our souls, 
“it shall be measured to us again.” The more we do for 
our souls, the more shall we find God does for them. 


MARK IV. 26—29. 

26 And ‘he said, So is the kingdom | fruit of herself; first the blade, then 
of God, as if a man should cast seed | the ear, after that the full corn in the 
into the ground ; ear. 

27 Andshould sleep, andrise night; 29 But when the fruit is brought 
and day, and the seed should spring | forth, immediately he putteth in the 
and grow up, he knoweth not how. | sickle, because the harvest is come. ~ 

28 For the earth bringeth forth . 

Tux parable contained in these verses is short, and only 
recorded in St. Mark’s Gospel. Butit is one that ought 
to be deeply interesting to all who have reason to hope 
that they are true Christians. It sets before us the 
history of the work of grace in an individual soul. It 
summons us to an examination of our own experience in 
divine things, 

There are some expressions in the parable which we 
must not press too far, Such are the “sleeping and rising” 
of the husband-man, and the “ night and day.” In this, 
as in many of our Lord’s parables, we must carefully keep 


in view the main scope and object of the whole story, and 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 73 


not lay too much stress on lesser points. In the case be- 
fore us the main thing taught is the close resemblance 
between some familiar operations in the culture of corn, 
and the work of grace in theheart. To this let us rigidly 
confine our attention. 

We are taught, firstly, that, as in the growth of corn, 
so in the work of grace, there must be a sower. 

_ The earth, as we all know, never brings forth corn of 
itself. It is a mother of weeds, but not of wheat. The 
hand of man must plough it, and scatter the seed, or else 
there would never be a harvest. 

The heart of man, in like manner, will never of itself 
turn to God, repent, believe, and obey. It is utterly bar- 
ren of grace. It is entirely dead towards God, and una- 
ble to give itself spiritual life. The Son of man must 
break it up by His Spirit, and give it anew nature. He 
must scatter over it by the hand of his laboring minis- 
ters the good seed of the word. 

Let us mark this truth well. Grace in the heart of 
man is an exotic. It is a new principle from without, 
sent down from heaven and implanted in his soul. Left 
to himself, no man living would ever seek God. And yet 
in communicating grace, God ordinarily works by means. 
To despise the instrumentality of teachers and preachers, 
is to expect corn where no seed has been sown. 

We are taught, secondly, that, as in the growth of 
corn, so in the work of grace, there is much that ts beyond 
man’s comprehension and control. 

The wisest farmer on earth can never explain all that 
takes place in a grain of wheat, when he has sown it. 
He knows the broad fact that unless he puts it into the 

4 


74. EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


land, and covers it up, there will not be an ear of corn 
in time of harvest. But he cannot command the pros- 
perity of each grain. He cannot explain why some grains 
come up and others die. He cannot specify the hour or 
the minute when life shall begin to show itself. He can- 
not define what that life is. These are matters he must 
leave alone. He sows his seed, and leaves the growth 
to God. “God giveth the increase.”* (1 Cor. ili. 7.) 
The workings of grace in the heart in like manner, are 
utterly mysterious and unsearchable. We cannot explain 
why the word produces effects on one person in a congre- 
gation, and not uponanother. We cannot explain why, 
in some cases—with every possible advantage, and in 
spite of every entreaty—people reject the word, and 
continue dead in trespasses and sins. We cannot explain 
why in other cases—with every possible difficulty, and 
with no encouragement—people are born again, and be- 
come decided Christians. We cannot define the manner- 
in which the Spirit of God conveys life to a soul, and 
the exact process by which a believer receives a new 
nature. All these are hidden things to us. We see 
certain results, but we can go no further. “ The wind 
* “A prain of corn, committed to the ground by the hand of man, 
will sprout and shoot; the shoot will disclose the stem, the stem the 
ear, and the ear the fruit; and were the most illiterate and unphilo- 
sophical person to be asked why all this should necessarily follow from 
the mere act of burying a seed in the earth, he might be disposed to 
laugh at the apparent simplicity of the question. Yet no human 
wisdom was ever able to return the answer to this question—no hu- 
man sagacity ever yet could penetrate into the true causes of this 
effect; and no human knowledge, upon such subjects, has ever gone 
further than the mere discovery, by a regular and constant experi- 


ence, that such and such consequences will uniformly follow from such 
and such previous acts.” —Greswell on the Parables. Vol. ii.; p, 182. 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 75 


bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound 
thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither 
it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.” 
(John iii. 10.) 

Let us mark this truth also, for itis deeply instructive. 
It is humbling no doubt to ministers, and teachers of 
others. The highest abilities, the most powerful preach- 
ing, the most diligent working, cannot command success. 
God alone can give lite. But it is a truth at the same 
time, which supplies an admirable antidote to over- 
carefulness and despondency. Our principal work is to 
sow the seed. That done, we may wait with faith and 
patience for the result. ‘“‘ We may sleep, and rise night 
and day,” and leave our work with the Lord. He alone 
can, and, if He thinks fit, He will give success. 

We are taught, thirdly, that, as in the growth of corn, 
so in the work of grace, life manifests itself gradually. 

There is a true proverb which says, “‘ Nature does 
nothing at a bound.” ‘The ripe ear of wheat does not 
appear at once, as soon as the seed bursts forth into life, 
The plant goes through many stages, before it arrives at 
perfection—“ first the blade, then the ear, then the full 
corn in the ear.” But in all these stages one great thing 
is true about it—even at its weakest, it is a living plant. 

The work of grace, in like manner, goes on in the heart 
by degrees. The children of God are not born perfect 
in faith, or hope, or knowledge, or experience. Their be- 
ginning is generally a “ day of small things.” They see 
in part their own sinfulness, and Christ’s fulness, and the 
beauty of holiness. But for all that, the weakest child 
in God’s family is a true child of God. With all his 


76 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


weakness and infirmity he is alive. The seed of grace 
has really come up in his heart, though at present it be 
only in the blade. He is “‘alive from the dead.” And 
the wise man says, ‘‘ a living dog is better than a dead 
lion.” (Hccles. ix. 4.) anys 

Let us mark this truth also, for itis full of consolation. 
Let us not despise grace, because it is weak, or think 
people are not converted, because they are not yet as 
strong in the faith as St. Paul. Let us remember that 
grace, like everything else, must have a beginning. The 
mightiest oak was once an acorn. The strongest man 
was once a babe. Better a thousand times have grace 
in the blade than no grace at all. 

We are taught, lastly, that, as in the growth of corn, 

so in the work of grace, there is no harvest till the seed ts 
ripe. 

No farmer thinks of cutting his wheat when it is green. 
He waits till the sun, and rain, and heat, and cold, have - 
done their appointed work, and the golden ears hang 
down. Then, and not till then, he puts in the sickle, 
and gathers the wheat into his barn. 

God deals with His work of grace exactly in the same 
way. He never removes His people from this world till 
they are ripe and ready. He never takes them away till 
their work is done. They never die at the wrong time, 
however mysterious their deaths appear sometimes to 
man. Josiah, and James the brother of John were both, 
cut off in the midst of usefulness. Our own King Edward 
the Sixth was not allowed to reach man’s estate. But 
we shall see in the resurrection morning that there was a 
needs-be. All was done well about their deaths, as well 


MARE, CHAP. IV. vf 


as about their births. The Great Husbandman never 
cuts His corn till it is ripe. 

Let us leave the parable with this truth on our minds, 
and take comfort about the death of every believer. Let 
us rest satisfied, that there is no chance, no accident, no 
mistake about the decease of any of God’s children. 
They are all “God’s husbandry,” and God knows best 
when they are ready for the harvest. 


MARK IV. 30—34. 


30 And he said, Whereunto shall 
we liken the kingdom of God? or 
with what comparison shall we com- 
pare it ? 

81 Z ds like a grain of mustard 
seed, which, when it is sown in the 
earth, is less than all the seeds that 
be in the earth : 

32 But when itis sown, it groweth 


herbs, and shooteth out great branch- 
es; 80 that the fowls of the air may 
lodge under the shadow of it. 

33 And with many such parables 
Spake he the word unto them, as they 
were able to hear é. 

34 But without a parable spake he 
not unto them: and when they were 
alone, he expounded all things to his 


up, and becometh greater than all { disciples. 


Tue parable of the mustard seed is one of those para- 
bles which partake of the character both of history and 
prophecy. It seems intended to illustrate the history of 
Christ’s visible church on earth, from the time of the 
first advent down to the judgment day. The seed cast 
into the earth, in the preceding parable, showed us the 
work of grace in a heart. The mustard seed shows us 
the progress of professing Christianity in the world. 
We learn, in the first place, that, like the grain of 
mustard seed, Ohrist’s visible church was to be small and 
weak in its beginnings. 
_A grain of mustard seed was a proverbial expression 
among the Jews for something very small and insignifi- 


78 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


cant. Our Lord calls it “less than all the seeds that be 
in the earth.” Twice.in the Gospels we find our Lord 
using the figure as a word of comparison, when speaking 
of a weak faith. (Matt. xvii 20; Luke xvii.6.) The 
idea was doubtless familiar to a Jewish mind, however 
strange it may sound to us. Here, as in other places, 
the Son of God shows us the wisdom of using language 
familiar to the minds of those whom we may address. 

It would be difficult to find an emblem which more 
faithfully represents the history of the visible church of 
Christ than this grain of mustard seed. 

Weakness and apparent insignificance were undoubt- 
edly the characteristics of its beginning. How did its 
Head and King come into the world? He came as a 
feeble infant, born in a manger at Bethlehem, without 
riches, or armies, or attendants, or power.—Who were 
the men that the Head of the Church gathered round 
Himself, and appointed His apostles P They were poor. 
and unlearned persons—fishermen, publicans, and men 
of like occupations, to all appearance the most unlikely 
people to shake the world—What was the last public 
act of the earthly ministry of the great Head of the 
Church ? He was crucified, ike a malefactor, between 
two thieves, after having been forsaken by nearly all His 
disciples, betrayed by one, and denied by another— What 
was the doctrine which the first builders of the Church 
went forth from the upper chamber in Jerusalem to 
preach to mankind ? It was a doctrine which to the Jews 
was a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks foolishness. 
It was a proclamation that the great Head of their new 
. religion had been put to death on a cross, and that 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 73 


notwithstanding this, they offered life through His death 
to the world !—In all this the mind of man can perceive 
nothing but weakness and feebleness. Truly the emblem 
of a grain of mustard seed was verified and fulfilled to 
the very letter. To the eyes of man the beginning of 
the visible church was contemptible, insignificant, pow- 
erless, and small. 

We learn, in the second place, that, like the mustard 
seed, the visible church, once planted, was to grow and 
greatly increase. 

“The grain of mustard seed,” says our Lord, ‘‘ when 
it is sown, groweth up and becometh greater than all 
herbs.” These words may sound startling to an English 
ear. Weare not accustomed to such a growth in our 
cold northern climate. But to those who know eastern 
countries, there is nothing surprising init. The testimony 
of well-informed and experienced travellers is distinct, 
that such an increase is both possible and probable.* 

No figure could be chosen more strikingly applicable 
to the growth and increase of Christ’s visible church in 
the world. It began to grow from the day of Pentecost, 
and grew with a rapidity, which nothing can account for 


* To show the size to which the mustard plant wil! grow in east- 
ern countries, Lightfoot quotes the following passage from Rabbini- 
cal writers. “There was a stalk of mustard in Sichim, from which 
sprang out three boughs, one of which was broken off, and covered 
the tent of a potter, and produced three cabs of mustard.” Rabbi 
Simeon Ben Chalapta said, “a stalk of mustard seed was in my field, 
into which I was wont to climb, as men are wont to climb into a 
fig-tree.” 

The enormous size to which the rhododendron, the heath, and the 
fern will grow, in some climates which suit them better than ours, 
should be remembered by an English reader of this parable. 


80 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


but the finger of God. It grew wonderfully when three 
thousand souls were converted at once, and five thousand 
more in a few days afterwards. It grew wonderfully, 
when at Antioch, and Ephesus, and Philippi, and Corinth, 
and Rome, congregations were gathered together, and 
Christianity firmly established. It grew wonderfully, 
when at last the despised religion of Christ overspread 
the greater part of Europe, and Asia Minor, and North 
Africa, and, in spite of fierce persecution and opposition, 
supplanted heathen idolatry, and became the professed 
creed of the whole Roman empire. Such growth must 
have been marvellousin the eyes of many. But it was 
only what our Lord foretold in the parable before us. 
“The kingdom of God is like a grain of mustard seed.” 

The visible church of Christ has not yet done growing. 
Notwithstanding the melancholy apostacy of some of its 
branches, and the deplorable weakness of others, it is still 
extending and expanding over the world. New branches . 
have continually been springing up in America, in India, 
in Australia, in Africa, in China, in the Islands of the 
South Seas, during the last fifty years. Evils undoubt- 
edly there are many. False profession and corruption 
abound. But still, on the whole, heathenism is waning, 
wearing out, and melting away. In spite of all the pre- 
dictions of Voltaire and Paine, in spite of foes without 
and treachery within, the visible church progresses— 
the mustard plant still grows. 

And the prophecy, we may rest assured, is not yet 
exhausted, A day shall yet come, when the great Head 
of the church shall take to Himself His power, and 
reign, and put down every enemy under His feet. The 


MARK, CHAP, IV. 81 


earth shall yet be filled with the knowledge of God, as 
the waters cover the sea. (Isai. ii. 2.) Satan shall yet be 
bound. The heathen shall yet be our Lord’s inheritance, 
and the utmost parts of the earth His possession. And 
then this parable shall receive its full accomplishment. 
The little seed shall become “a great tree,” and fill the 
whole earth. - (Dan. iii. 35.) 
Let us leave the parable with a resolution never to 
despise any movement or instrumentality in the church 
of Christ, because at first it was weak and small. Let us: 
remember the manger of Bethlehem, and learn wisdom. 
The name of Him who lay there, a helpless infant, is 
now known all over the globe. The little seed which 
was planted .in the day when Jesus was born, has become 
a great tree, and we ourselves are rejoicing under its 
shadow. Let it be a settled principle in our religion, 
never to, “ despise the day of small things.” (Zech. iv. 10.) 
One child may be the beginning of a flourishing school 
—one conversion the beginning of a mighty church—one 
word the beginning of some blessed Christian enterprise— 
one seed the beginning of a rich harvest of saved souls.* 
* Tt is fair to say that the view which I have adopted of the meaning 
of this parable, is not the view which is held by some interpreters. 
Some think that the parable is intended to show the progress of 
the work of grace in the heart of an individual believer. I am not 
prepared to say that this may not have been in our Lord’s mind, in 
speaking the parable. I think it quite possible that the parable ad- 
mits of a double interpretation; for the experience of a believer and 
the experience of the whole church, are much the same, My prin- 
cipal objection to this view is, that it does not appear to suit the lan- 
guage of the parable so well as that which I have maintained. 
Some few interpreters think that the mustard seed signifies the 


principle of evil and corruption, and that the main object of the par- 
able is to show how insidiously apostacy would begin in the church, 
4* 


82 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK IV. 35—41. 


85 And the same day, when the 
even was come, he'saith unto them, 
Let us pass over unto the other side. 

86 And when they had sent away 
the multitude, they took him even as 
he was in the ship. And there were 
also with him other little ships. 

87 And there arose a great storm of 
wind, and the waves beat into the 
ship, so that it was now full. 

88 And he was in the hinder part 
of the ship, asleep on a pillow: and 
they awake him, and say unto him, 





Master, carest thou not that we 
perish ¢ 

89 And he arose, and rebuked the 
wind, and said unto the sea, Peace. 
be still. And the wind ceased, and 
there was a great calm. 

40 And he said unto them, Why 
are ye so fearful? how is it that ye 
have no faith ? 

41 And they feared exceedingly, 
and said one to another, What manner 
of man is this, that even the wind 
and the sea-obey him # 


THESE verses describe a storm on the sea of Galilee, 
when our Lord and His disciples were crossing it, and a 
miracle performed by our Lord in calming the storm in a 
moment. Few miracles recorded in the Gospel were so 
likely to strike the minds of the apostles as this. Four 
of them at least were fishermen. Peter, Andrew, James, 
and John, had probably known the sea of Galilee, and 
its storms, from their youth. Few events in our Lord’s 


and how completely it would at last overgrow and fill the whole body. 
I own that I cannot for a moment see the soundness of this inter- — 
pretation. To say nothing of other reasons, there seems an exces- 
sive harshness in this sense, when we consider the opening words of 
the parable, “ Wherewith shall we liken the kingdom of God?” One 
would rather expect the question to have been ‘‘ Wherewith shall we 
liken the kingdom of the devil?” if the whole parable is occupied 
with describing the progress of evil. 

I confess that: I think the meaning of “the fowls of the air,” isa 
point which admits of some question. Many think that it signifies 
the number of converts to Christianity, who, as the church increased, 
joined themselves to it, and came “as doves to the windows.” 
(Isaiah lx. 8.) Some think that it signifies the number of worldly 
and false professors who joined the church from mere carnal motives, 
when it began te be great and prosperous, as in the days of Constan- 
tine. When we remeber that the “fowls of the air,” in the para- 
ble of the sower (Mark iv. 4-15), are declared by our Lord Himself 
tomean “Satan,” we must admit that there is considerable force in 
this interpretation. 


MARK, CHAP. Iv. 83 


journeyings to and fro upon earth, contain more rich in- 
struction than the one related in this passage. 

Let us learn, in the first place, that Christ’s service 
does not exempt His servants from storms. Here were 
the twelve disciples in the path of duty. They were 
obediently following Jesus, wherever he went. They 
_ were daily attending on His ministry, and hearkening to 
His word. They were daily testifying to the world, that, 
whatever Scribes and Pharisees might think, they be- 
lieved on Jesus, loved Jesus, and were not ashamed to 
give up all for His sake. Yet here we see these men in 
trouble, tossed up and down by a tempest, and in dan- 
ger of being drowned. 

Let us mark well this lesson. If we are true Chris- 
tians, we must not expect everything smooth in our 
journey to heaven. We must count it no strange thing, 
if we have to endure sicknesses, losses, bereavements, 
and disappointments, just like other men. Free pardon 
and full forgiveness, grace by the way and glory at the 
end—all this our Saviour has promised to give. But He 
has never promised that we shall have no affliction. He 
loves us too well to promise that. By affliction He teaches 
us mnany precious lessons, which without it we should 
never learn. By affliction He shows us our emptiness 
and weakness, draws us to the throne of grace, purifies 
our affections, weans us from the world, makes us long 
for heaven. In the resurrection morning, we shall all 
say, ‘‘ It is good for me that I was afflicted.” We shall 
thank God for every storm. 

Let us learn, in the second place, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ was really and truly man. We are told in these 


84 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


verses, that when the storm began, and the waves beat 
over the ship, he was in the hinder part “asleep.” He 
had a body exactly like our own-—a body that could 
hunger, and thirst, and feel pain, and be weary, and need 
rest. No wonder that His body needed repose at this 
time. He had been diligent in His Father’s business all 
the day. He had been preaching to a great multitude 
in the open air. No wonder that ‘“‘ when the even was 
come,” and His work finished, he fell ‘ asleep.” 

Let us mark this lesson also attentively. The Saviour 
in whom we are bid to trust, is as really a man as He is 
God. He knows the trials of a man, for He has 
experienced them, He knows the bodily infirmities of a 
man, for He has felt them. He can well understand 
what we mean, when we cry to Him for help in this 
world of need. He is just the very Saviour that men 
and women, with weary frames and aching heads, in a 
weary world, require for their comfort every morning - 
and night. ‘“‘ We have not an high priest which can- 
not be touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” 
(Heb. iv. 15.) 

Let us learn, in the third place, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ, as God, has almighty power. We see Him in 
these verses doing that which is proverbially impossible. 
He speaks to the winds, and they obey him. He speaks 
to the waves and they submit to His command. He 
turns the raging storm into a calm with a few words— 
** Peace, be still.” Those words were the words of Him 
who first created all things. The elements knew the 
voice of their Master, and, like obedient servants, were 
quiet at once, 


MARK, CHAP. IV. 85 


Let us mark this lesson also, and lay it up in our 
minds. With the Lord Jesus Christ nothing is impos- 
sible. No stormy passions are so strong but He can tame 
them. No temper is so rough and violent but He-can 
change it. No conscience is so disquieted, but He 
can speak peace to it, and make it calm. No man 
ever need despair, if He will only bow down his pride, 
and come asa humbled sinner to Christ. Christ can 
do miracles upon his heart.—No man ever need de- 
spair of reaching his journey’s end, if he has once com- 
mitted his soul to Christ’s keeping. Christ will carry 
him through every danger. Christ will make him con- 
queror over every foe—What though our relations op- 
pose us? What though our neighbors laugh us to 
scorn? What though our place be hard? What 
though our temptations be great ? It is all nothing, if 
Christ-is on our side, and we are in the ship with Him. 
Greater is He that is for us, than all they that are 
against us. 

Finally, we learn from this passage, that our Hie 
Jesus Christ is exceedingly patient and pitiful in dealing 
with His own people. We see the disciples on this occa- 
sion showing great want of faith, and giving way to most 
unseemly fears. They forgot their Master’s miracles 
and care for them in days gone by. They thought of 
nothing but their present peril. They awoke our Lord 
hastily, and cried, ‘‘ Carest thou not that we perish ?” 
We see our Lord dealing most gently and tenderly with 
them. He gives them no sharp reproof. He makes no 
threat of casting them off, because of their unbelief. He 


86 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


simply asks the touching question, ‘‘ Why are ye so fear- 
ful? How is it that ye have no faith ?” 

Let us mark well this lesson. The Lord Jesus is 
very pitiful and of tender mercy. “ As a father pitieth 
his children, even so the Lord pitieth them that fear 
Him.” (Psalm ciii. 13.) He does not deal with be- 
lievers according to their sins, nor reward them accord- 
ing to their iniquities. He sees their weakness. He 
is aware of their short-comings. He knows all the 
defects of their faith, and hope, and love, and courage. 
And yet He will not cast them off. He bears with them 
continually. He loves them even to the end. He raises 
them when they fall. He restores them when they err. 
His patience, like His love, isa patience that passeth 
knowledge. When He sees a heart right, it is His 
glory to pass over many a short-coming. 

Let us leave these verses with the comfortable recol- 
lection that Jesus is not changed. His heart is still the © 
same that it was when He crossed the sea of Galilee and 
stilled the storm. High in heaven at the right hand of 
God, Jesus is still sympathizing—still almighty—still 
pitiful and patient towards His people.—Let us be more 
charitable and patient towards our brethren in the faith. 
They may err in many things, but if Jesus has received 
them and can bear with them, surely we may bear with 
them too—Let us be more hopeful about ourselves. 
We may be very weak, and frail, and unstable ; but if 
we can truly say that we do come to Christ and believe 
on Him, we may take comfort. The question for con- 
science to answer is not, “ Are we like the angels ? are 
we perfect as we shall be in heaven? The question is, 


MARK, CHAP. V. 


87 


“Are we real and true in our approaches to Christ ? 
Do we truly repent and believe ?”* 





MARK YV. 1—17. 


1 And they came over unto the 
other side of the sea, into the country 
of the Gadarenes. 

2 And when he was come out of the 
ship, immediately there met him out 
of the tombs a man with an unclean 
spirit 
8 Who had his dwelling among the 
tombs; and no man could bind him, 
no, not with chains: 

4 Because that he had been often 
bound with fetters and chains, and the 
chains had been plucked asunder by 
him, and the fetters broken in pieces: 
neither could any man tame him. 

5 And always, night and day, he 
was in the mountains, and in the 
tombs, crying, and cutting himself 
with stones. 

6 But when he saw Jesus afar off, 
he ran and worshipped him, 

7 And cried with a loud voice, and 
said, What have I to do with thee, 
Jesus, thou Son of the most high 
God? TI adjure thee by God, that 
tou torment me not. 

8 For he said unto him, Come out 
of the man, ¢how unclean spirit. 

9 And he asked him, What zs thy 
name? And he answered, saying, My 
name is Legion: for we are many. 








10 And he besought him much that 
he would not send them away out of 
the country. 

11 Now there was there nigh unto 
the mountains a great herd of swine 
feeding. 

12 And all the devils besought him, 
saying, Send us into the swine, that 
we may enter into them. 

18 And forthwith Jesus gave them 
leave. And the unclean spirits went 
out, and entered into the swine: and 
the herd ran bier é down a steep 
place into the sea, (they were about 
two thousand ;) and were choked in 
the sea. 

14 And they that fed the swine fled, 
and told 7 in the city, and in the 
country. And they went out to see 
what it was that was done. 

15 And they come to Jesus, and see 
him that was possessed with the devil, 
and had the legion, sitting, and cloth- 
ed, and in his right mind: and they 
were afraid. 

16 And they that saw 2 told them 
how it befel to him that was possessed 
with the devil, and also concerning 
the swine. 

17 And they began to pray him to 
depart out oftheir coasts. 


T'HEsE verses describe one of those mysterious miracles 
which the Gospels frequently record—the casting out of 
Of all the cases of this kind in the New Testa- 
Of all the 


a devil. 
ment, none is so fully described as this one, 


* The sea of Galilee, or Tiberias, on which the circumstance re- 
corded in this passage took place, is an inland lake, through which 
the river Jordan flows, about fifteen miles long and six broad. It 
lies in a deep valley, much depressed below the level of the sea—its 
surface being six hundred and fifty-two feet below that of the Medi- 
terranean—and is surrounded on most sides by steep hills. Owing 


88 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


three evangelists who relate the history, none gives it so 
fully and minutely as St. Mark. 

We sce, in the first place, in these verses, that the 
possession of a man’s body by the devil, was a real and true 
thing in the time of our Lord's earthly minstry. 

It is a painful fact, that there are never wanting 
professing Christians who try to explain away our Lord’s 
miracles. They endeavor to account for them by natural 
causes, and to show that they were not worked by any 
extraordinary power. Of all miracles, there are none 
which they assault so strenuously as the casting out of 
devils. They do not scruple to deny Satanic possession 
entirely. They tell us that it was nothing more than 
lunacy, or frenzy, or epilepsy, and that the idea of the 
devil inhabiting a man’s body is absurd. 

The best and simplest answer to such sceptical ob- 


to these last circumstances, sudden squalls or storms are reported by - 
all travellers to be very common on the lake. 

The sea of Galilee and the country surrounding it, were favored 
with more of our blessed Lord’s presence, during His earthly ministry, 
than any other part of Palestine. Capernaum, Tiberias, Bethsaida, 
and the country of the Gergesenes were all on its shores, or in the 
immediate neighborhood of this lake. It was on the sea of Galilee 
that our Lord walked. It was on its shore that He appeared to His 
disciples after His resurrection. Sitting in a boat on its waters and 
in a house hard by, He delivered the seven parables recorded in the 
thirteenth chapter of St. Matthew. On its banks, He called Peter, and 
Andrew, James and John. From it, He commanded His disciples 
to draw the miraculous draught of fishes. Within sight of it, He 
twice fed the multitude with a few loaves and fishes. On its shore, 
He healed the man possessed with devils; and into it the two thou- 
sand swine plunged headlong after that miracle had been wrought. 

Few localities in the Holy Land were so immediately connected 
with our Lord’s ministry as the sea of Galilee and the country round it. 


MARK, CHAP. V. 89 


jections, is a reference to the plain narratives of the Gos- 
pels, and especially to the one before us at this moment. 
The facts here detailed are utterly inexplicable, if we do 
not believe Satanic possession. It is notorious that 
lunacy, and frenzy, and epilepsy are not infectious com- 
plaints, and at any rate cannot be communicated to 
a herd of swine! And yet men ask us to believe, that 
as soon as this man was healed, two thousand swine 
ran violently down a steep place into the sea, from a 
sudden impulse, without any apparent cause to account 
for their so doing! Such reasoning is the height of 
credulity. When men can satisfy themselves with such 
explanations, they are in a pitiable state of mind. 

Let us beware of a sceptical and incredulous spirit 
in all matters relating to the devil. No doubt there is 
much in the subject of Satanic possession which we do not 
understand, and cannot explain. But let us not therefore 
refuse to believe it. The eastern king who would not 
believe in the possibility of ice, because he lived in a hot 
country, and had never seen it, was not more foolish 
than the man who refuses to believe in Satanic posses- 
sion, because he never saw a case himself, and cannot 
understand it. We may be sure, that upon the subject 
of the devil and his power, we are far more likely to 
believe too little than too much. Unbelief about the 
existence and personality of Satan, has often proved the 
first step to unbelief about God. 

We see, in the second place, in these verses, whot an 
aofully cruel, powerful, and malicious being Satan is, On 
all these three points, the passage before us is full of 
instruction. 


90 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The cruelty of Satan appears in the miserable condition 
of the unhappy man, of whose body he had possession. 
We read that he dwelt ‘among the tombs,” that “no 
man could bind him, no, not with chains’—that no man 
could tame him—and that he was “always night and 
day in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cut- 
ting himself with stones,” naked, and without clothing. 
Such is the state to which the devil would bring us all, 
if he only had the power, He would rejoice to inflict 


upon us the utmost misery, both of body and mind. ~ 


Cases like this are faint types of the miseries of hell. 

The power of Satan appears in the awful words which 
the unclean spirit used, when our Lord asked, ‘‘ What is 
thy name?” He answered, saying “My name. is 
Legion: for we are many.”’ We probably have not the 
faintest idea of the number, subtlety, and activity of 
Satan’s agents. We forget that he is king over an 
enormous host of subordinate spirits who do his will. 
We should probably find, if our eyes were opened to see 
spirits, that they are about our path, and about our bed, 
and observing all our ways, to an extent of which we 
have no conception. In private and in public, in church 
and in the world, there are busy enemies ‘ever near us, 
of whose presence we are not aware. 

The malice of Satan appears in the strange petition, 
“‘send us into the swine.” Cast forth from the man, 
whose body they had so long inhabited and possessed, 
they still thirsted to do mischief. Unable to injure any 
more an immortal soul, they desired leave to injure the 
dumb beasts which were feeding near. Such is the true 
character of Satan. It is the bent of his nature to do 


MARK, CHAP. V. 91 


harm, to kill, and to destroy. No wonder that he is 
called Apollyon, the destroyer. 

Let us beware of giving way to the senseless habit of 
jesting about the devil. It is a habit which furnishes 
awful evidence of the blindness and corruption of human 
nature, and one which is far too common. When it is 
seemly in the condemned criminal to jest about his ex- 
ecutioner, then, and not till then, it will be seemly for 
mortal man to talk lightly about Satan. Well would 
it be for us all, if we strove more to realize the power 
and presence of our great spiritual enemy, and prayed 
more to be delivered from him. It was a true saying of 
an eminent Christian, now gone to rest, ‘No prayer is 
complete which does not contain a petition to be kept 
from the devil.” 

We see, in the last place, from these verses, how com- 
plete is our Lord’s power and authority over the devil. We 
see it in the cry of the unclean spirit, “‘ I adjure thee by 
God, that thou torment me not.” We see it in the com- 
mand, “‘ Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit,” and 
the immediate obedience that followed. Wesee it in the 
blessed change that at once took place in him that was 
possessed : he was found “sitting, and clothed, and in 
his right mind.” We see it in the petition of all the 
devils—‘“‘send us into the swine,” confessing their 
consciousness that they could do nothing without leave. 
All these things show that one mightier than Satan was 
there. Strong as the great enemy of man was, he was 
in the presence of One stronger than he. Numerous 
as his hosts were, he was confronted with One who could 
command more than twelve legions of angels. “ Where 


92 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the word of the king is, there is power.” (Hccles. viii. 4.) 

The truth here taught is full of strong consolation for 
all true Christians. We live in a world full of difficulties 
and snares. We are ourselves weak and compassed 
with infirmity. The awful thought that we have a 
mighty spiritual enemy ever near us, subtle, powerful, 
and malicious as Satan is, might well disquiet us, and 
cast us down. But, thanks be unto God, we have in 
Jesus an almighty Friend, who is “able to save us to the 
uttermost.” He has already triumphed over Satan on 
the cross. He will ever triumph over him in the hearts 
of all believers, and intercede for them that their faith 
fail not. And He will finally triumph over Satan com- 
pletely, when He shall come forth at the second advent, 
and bind him in the bottomless pit. 

And now, Are we ourselves delivered from Satan’s 
power? This after all is the grand question that con- 
cerns our souls.—He still reigns and rules in the hearts of 
all who are children of disobedience. (Eph.u.3.) He is 
still a king over the ungodly. Have we, by grace, broken 
his bonds, and escaped hishand? Have we really renounced. 
him and all his works ? Do we daily resist him and make 
him flee? Do we put on the whole armor of Ged and 
stand against his wiles. May we never rest till we can 
give satisfactory answers to these questions.* 


* The whole subject of the demoniacs, or cases of Satanic posses- 
sion recorded in the New Testament, is unquestionably full of deep 
mystery. The miserable sufferings of the unhappy people possessed 
—their clear knowledge that our Lord was the Son of God—their 
double consciousness, sometimes the spirit speaking, sometimes the 
man—all these are deep mysteries.. And it can hardly be otherwise. 
We know little of beings that we cannot see or touch. We know 
nothing of the manner in which a spirit operates on the mind of a 


MARK, CHAP. V. 93 


MARK VY. 18—20. 


18 And when he was come into the| things the Lord hath done for thee, 
ship, he that had been possessed with| and hath had compassion on thee. 
the devil prayed him that he might| 20 And he departed, and began to 
be with him. ublish in Decapolis how great things 

19 Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, astis had done for him: and all men 
but saith unto him, Go home to thy} did marvel. 
friends, and tell them how great 


THE after-conduct of those whom our Lord Jesus Christ 
healed and cured when upon earth, is a thing which is 
not often related in the Gospels. The story often de- 
scribes the miraculous cure, and then leaves the after 
history of the person cured in obscurity, and passes on 
to other things. 

But there are some deeply interesting cases, in which 
the after-conduct of persons cured is described ; and the 


creature with flesh and bones like ourselves. We can see plainly that 
there were many persons possessed with devils during our Lord’s 
earthly ministry. We can see plainly that bodily possession was 
something distinct from possession of heart and soul. We can con- 
jecture the reason of their permitted possession—to make it plain 
that our Lord came to destroy the works of the devil. But we must 
stop here. We can go no further. 

Let us, however, beware of supposing that Satanic possession was 
entirely confined to our Lord’s time, and that there is no such thing 
in our own days. This would be a rash and unwarrantable conclu- 
sion. Awful as the thought is, there are Sometimes cases in asylums 
for the insane, which, if they are not cases of Satanic possession, ap- 
proach as nearly to it as possible——In short I believe the opinion of 
not a few eminent physicians is clear and decided that Satanic pos- 
session still continues, though cases are exceedingly rare. 

Of course it would be presumption to handle so fearful a doctrine 
lightly, and to pronounce positively of any particular person that 
“he had a devil.” But if such things have been—and the New 
Testament puts this beyond question—no good reason can be assigned 
why they should not be again. Human nature is not changed since 
our Lord wasonearth. Satan is not yet bound. Satanic possession 
is therefore neither impossible nor improbable, though limits may be 
set to the frequency of it, through the mercy of God. 


94. EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


man from whom the devil was cast out in the country of 
the Gadarenes is one. The verses before us tell the story. 
Few as they are, they are full of precious instruction. 

We learn from these verses that the Lord Jesus knows 
better than His people what ts the right position for them to 
bein. We are told that when our Lord was on the point 
of leaving the country of the Gadarenes, the man “ that 
had been possessed with the devil, prayed Him that he 
might be with Him.” We can well understand that re- 
quest. He felt grateful for the blessed change that had 
taken place in himself. He felt full of love towards his 
Deliverer. He thought he could not do better than follow 
our Lord, and go with Him as his companion and disciple. 
He was ready to give up home and country, and go after 
Christ. And yet, strange as it appears at first sight, the 
request was refused. ‘Jesus suffered him not.” Our 
Lord had other work for him to do. Our Lord saw better 
than he did in what way he could glorify God most. | 
“Go home to thy friends,” He says, ‘‘and tell them how 
great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had 
compassion on thee.” 

There are lessons of profound wisdom in these words. 
The place that Christians wish to be in, is not always 
the place which is best for their souls. The position that 
they would choose, if they could have their own way, is 
not always that which Jesus would have them occupy. 

There are none who need this lesson so much as be- 
lievers newly converted to God. Such persons are often 
very poor judges of what is really for their good. Full 
of the new views which they have been graciously 
taught, excited with the novelty of their present posi- 


MARK, CHAP. V. 95 


tion, seeing everything around them in a new light, 
knowing little yet of the depths of Satan and the weak- 
ness of their own hearts—knowing only that a little 
time ago they were blind, and now, through mercy, they 
see—of all people they are in the greatest danger of 
making mistakes. With the best intentions, they are 
apt to fall into mistakes about their plans in life, their 
choices, their moves, their professions. They forget that 
what we like best is not always best for our souls, and 
that the seed of grace needs winter as well as summer, 
cold as well as heat, to ripen it for glory. 

Let us pray that God would guide us in all our ways 
after conversion, and not allow us to err in our choices, 
or to make hasty decisions. That place and position is 
most healthful for us in which we are kept most humble 
—most taught our own sinfulness—drawn most to the 
Bible and prayer—led most to live by faith and not by 
sight. It may not be quite what we like. But if Christ 
by His providence has placed us in it, let us not be ina 
hurry to leave it. Let us therein abide with God. The 
great thing is to have no will of our own, and to be 
where Jesus would have us be.* 

* T cannot help remarking, in connection with our Lord’s words 
in this passage, that it admits of question, whether men do not some- 
times act unadvisedly in giving up a secular calling, in order to enter 
the ministry of the Gospel. In plain words, I doubt whether men, 
who have been suddenly converted to God in the army, the navy, the 
law, or the merchant’s office, do not sometimes forsake their profes- 
sions with undue precipitation, in order to become clergymen. 

It seems to be forgotten that conversion alone is no proof that we 
are called and qualified to become teachers of others. God may be 
glorified as really and truly in the secular calling as in the pulpit. 


Converted men can be eminently useful as landlords, magistrates, 
soldiers, sailors, barristers or merchants. We want witnesses for Christ 


96 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We learn, for another thing, from these verses, that a 
believer’s own home has the first claims on his atiention. 
We are taught that in the striking words which our 
Lord addresses to the man who had been possessed with 
the devil. “Go home,” He says, “to thy friends, and 
tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee.” 
The friends of this man had probably not seen him for 
some years, excepting under the influence of Satan. 
Most likely he had been as one dead to them, or worse 
than dead, and a constant cause of trouble, anxiety, and 
sorrow. Here then was the path of duty. Here was 
the way by which he could mest glorify God. Let him 
go home and tell his friends what Jesus had done for 
him. Let him bea living witness before their eyes of 
the compassion of Christ. Let him deny himself the 
pleasure of being in Christ’s bodily presence, in order to 
do the higher work of being useful to others. 
in all these professions. Colonel Gardiner and Captain Vicars have prob- 
ably done more for the cause of Christ as military men, than they would 
ever have done if they had left the army and become clergymen. 

In steering our course through life, we should carefully look for 
the call of providence as well as the call of inclination. The position 
that we choose for ourselves is often that which is the worst for our 
souls. When two conflicting paths of duty lie before a believer, the 
path which has least of the cross, and is most agreeable to his own 
taste, is seldom the right one. 

I write all this with a due recollection of many eminent Christians 
who began in a secular profession, and left it for the office of the 
minister. John Newton and Edward Bickersteth are instances, But 
I apprehend such cases are exceptions. I apprehend moreover that 
in every such case there will be found to have been a remarkable call 
of providence as well as an inward call of the Holy Ghost, As a gen- 
eral rule, I believe that the rule of St. Paul ought to be carefully ob- 


served: ‘‘ Let every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with 
God.” (1 Cor. vii. 24.) 


MARK, CHAP. V. 97 


How much there is in these simple words of our Lord ! 
What thoughts they ought to stir up in the hearts of all 
true Christians !—‘‘ Go home and tell thy friends,”— 
Homeis the place above all others where the child of God 
ought to make his first endeavors todo good. Home is the 
place where he is most continually seen, and where the 
reality of his grace ought most truly to appear. Home is 
the place where his best affections ought to be concentra- 
ted. Home is the place where he should strive daily to 
witness for Christ. Home is the place where he was daily 
doing harm by his example, so long as he served the world. 
Home is the place where he is specially bound to bea 
living epistle of Christ, so soon as he has been mercifully 
taught to serve God. May we all remember these things 
daily! May it never be said of us, that we are saints 
abroad but wicked by our own fireside—talkers about re-~ 
ligion abroad, but worldly and ungodly at home ! 

But after all, Have we anything to tell others ? Can 
we testify to any work of grace in our hearts ? Have we 
experienced any deliverance from the power of the world, 
the flesh, and the devil? Have we ever tasted the gra- 
ciousness of Christ ? These are indeed serious questions. 
If we have never yet been born again, and made new 
creatures, we can of course have nothing to “ tell.” 

If we have anything to tell others about Christ, let us 
resolve to tell it. Let us not be silent, if we have found 
peace and rest in the Gospel. Let usspeak to our rela- 
tions, and friends, and families, and neighbors, according 
as we have opportunity, and tell them what the Lord has 
done for our souls. All are not called to be ministers. 
All are not intended to preach. But all can walk in the 

5 


98 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


steps of the man of whom we have been reading, and 
in the steps of Andrew, and Philip, and the Samaritan 
woman. (John i. 41, 45, iv. 29.) Happy is he who is 
not ashamed to say to others, ‘‘ Come and hear what the 
Lord hath done for my soul.” (Psal. xvi. 16.) 


MARK VY. 21—34. 


21 And when Jesus was passed over 
again by ship unto the other side, 
much people gathered unto him: 
and he was nigh unto the sea. 

22 And, behold, there cometh one 
of the rulers of the synagogue, Jai- 
rus by name ; and when he saw him, 
he fell at his feet, 

23 And besought him greatly, say- 
ing, My little qeaeiaer lieth at the 
pont of death: J pray thee, come and 

ay thy hands on her, that she may be 
healed ; and she shall live. 

24 And Jesus went with him ; and 
much people followed him, and 
ete hin. 

25 And a certain woman, which 
had an issue of blood twelve years, 

26 And had suffered many things 
of many physicians, and had spent 
all that she had, and was nothing 
bettered, but rather grew worse, 

27 When she had heard of Jesus, 
came in the press behind, and touch- 





ed his garment. 

28 For she said, If I may touch 
but his clothes, I shall be whole. 

29 And straightway the fountain 
of her blood was dried up; and she 
felt in her body that she was healed 
of that plague. 

30 And J esus, immediately know- 
ing in himself thatvirtue had gone out 
of him,turned him about in the press, 
and said, Who touched my clothes ? 

31 And his disciples said unto him, 
Thon seest the multitude thrpoay 
a and sayest thou, Who touche 
me 3 

82 And he looked around about te 
see her that had done this thing. 

83 But the woman fearing and 
trembling, knowing what was done 
in her, came and fell down before ~ 
him, and told him all the truth. 

34 And he said unto her, Daughter, 
thy faith hath made thee whole; go 
in peace and be whole of thy plague. 


THE main subject of these verses is the miraculous 
healing of a sick woman. Great is our Lord’s experience 
in cases of disease! Great is his sympathy with His 
sick and ailing members! The gods of the heathen are 
generally represented as terrible and mighty in battle, 
delighting in bloodshed, the strong man’s patrons, and 
the warrior’s friends. The Saviour of the Christian is 
always set before us as gentle, and easy to be entreated, 
the healer of the broken hearted, the refuge of the weak 
and helpless, the comforter of the distressed, the sick 


MARK, OHAP. V. 99 


man’s best friend. And is not this just the Saviour 
that human nature needs? The world is full of pain 
and trouble. The weak on earth are far more numerous 
than the strong. 

Let us mark, in these verses, what misery sin has 
brought into the world. We read of one who had had a 
most painful disease “ for twelve years.” She had “ suf- 
fered many things of many physicians, and had spent 
all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather 
grew worse.” Means of every kind had been tried in 
vain. Medical skill had proved unable to cure. Twelve 
long weary years had been spent in battling with disease, 
and relief seemed no nearer than at first. ‘‘ Hope de- 
ferred” might well ‘make her heart sick.” (Prov. xiii. 
12.) 

How marvellous it is that we do not hate sin more 
than we do! Sin is the cause of all the pain and dis- 
ease in the world. God did not create man to be an 
ailing and suffering creature. It was sin, and nothing 
but sin, which brought in all the ills that flesh is heir to. 
It was sin to which we owe every racking pain, and 
every loathsome infirmity, and every humbling weakness 
to which our poor bodies are liable. Let us keep this 
ever in mind. Let us hate sin with a godly hatred. 

Let us mark, in the second place, how different are the 
feelings with which people draw near to Christ. We are 
told in these verses that “much people followed” our 
Lord, “and thronged him.” But we are only told of 
one person who “came in the press behind,’ and 
touched Him with faith and was healed. Many followed 
_ Jesus from curiosity, and derived no benefit from Him. 


100 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


One, and only one, followed under a deep sense of her 
need, and of our Saviour’s power to relieve her, and that 
one received a mighty blessing. 

We see the same thing going on continually in the 
Church of Christ at the present day. Multitudes go to 
our places of worship, and fill our pews. Hundreds come 
up to the Lord’s table, and receive the bread and wine. 
But of all these worshippers and communicants, how few 
really obtain anything from Christ! Fashion, custom, 
form, habit, the love of excitement, or an itching ear, 
are the true motives of the vast majority. There are 
but few here and there who touch Christ by faith, and 
go home “in peace.” These may seem hard sayings. 
But they are unhappily too true ! 

Let us mark, in the third place, how immediate and 
instantaneous was the cure which this woman received, No 
sooner did she touch our Lord’s clothes than she was 
healed. The thing that she had sought in vain for. 
twelve years, was done in a moment. The cure that 
many physicians could not effect, was wrought in an in- 
stant of time. ‘‘ She felt in her body that she was healed 
of that plague.” 

We need not doubt that we are meant to see here an 
emblem of the relief that the Gospel confers on souls. 
The experience of many a weary conscience has been 
exactly like that of this woman with her disease. Many 
a man has spent sorrowful years in search of peace with 
God, and failed to find it. He has gone to earthly re- 
medies and obtained no relief. He has wearied himself 
in going from place to place, and church to church, and 
has felt after all “ nothing bettered, but rather worse.” 


MARK, CHAP. V. 101 


But at last he has found rest.— And where has he found 
it ?—He has found it, where this woman found her’s, in 
Jesus Christ. He has ceased from his own works. He 
has given over looking to his own endeavors and doings 
for relief. He has come to Christ Himself, as a humble 
sinner, and committed himself to His mercy. At once 
the burden has fallen from off his shoulders. Heaviness 
is turned to joy, and anxiety to peace.—One touch of 
real faith can do more for the soul than a hundred self- 
imposed austerities. One look at Jesus is more efficacious 
than years of sack-cloth and ashes. May we never forget 
this to our dying day! Personal application to Christ 
is the real secret of peace with God. 

Let us mark, in the fourth place, how much tt becomes 
Christians to confess before men the benefit they receive from 
Christ. We see that this woman was not allowed to go 
home, when cured, without her cure being noticed, 
Our Lord inquired who had touched Him, and ‘ looked 
round about to see her that had done this thing.” No 
doubt He knew perfectly the name and history of the 
woman. He needed not that any should tell Him. But 
He desired to teach her, and all around Him, that healed 
souls should make public acknowledgment of mercies 
received. 

There is a lesson here which all true Christians would 
do well to remember. We are not to be ashamed to 
confess Christ before men, and to let others know what 
He has done for our souls. If we have found peace 
through His blood, and been renewed by His Spirit, 
we must not shrink from avowing it, on every proper 
occasion. It is not necessary to blow a trumpet in the 


102 - EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


streets, and force our experience on every body’s notice 
_ All that is required is a willingness to acknowledge 
Christ as our Master, without flinching from the ridi- 
cule or persecution which by so doing we may bring on 
ourselves. More than this is not required; but less 
than this ought not to content us. If we are ashamed 
of Jesus before men, He will one day be ashamed of us 
before His Father and the angels. 

Let us mark, in the last place, how precious a grace 
as fuith. ‘* Daughter,” says our Lord to the woman who 
was healed, “ thy faith hath made thee whole: go in 
peace.” . 

Of all the Christian graces, none is so frequently men- 
tioned in the New Testament as faith, and none is so 
highly commended.—No grace brings such glory to 
Christ. Hope brings an eager expectation of good things 
‘to come. Love brings a warm and willing heart. Faith 
brings an empty hand, receives everything, and can give 
nothing in return—No grace is so important to the 
Christian’s own soul. By faith we begin. By faith we 
live. By faith we stand. We walk by faith and not by 
sight. By faith we overcome. By faith we have peace. 
By faith we enter into rest.—No grace should be the 
subject of so much self-inquiry. We should often ask 
ourselves, Do I really believe ? Is my faith true, gen- 
uine, and the gift of God ? 

May we never rest till we can give a satisfactory an- 
swer to these questions! Christ is not changed since the 
day when this woman was healed. He is still gracious 
and still mighty tosave. ‘There is but one thing needful 
if we want salvation. That one thing is the hand of 


‘MARK, CHAP. V. 


103 


faith. Let a man only “touch” Jesus, and he shall be 


made whole.* 





MARK V, 35—43. 


85 While he yet spake, there came 
from the ruler of the synagogue’s 
house certain which said, Thy daugh- 
ter is dead: why troublest thou the 
Master any further ? 

36 As soon as Jesus heard the word 
that was spoken, he saith unto the 
ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, 
only believe. 

37 And he suffered no man to follow 
him, save Peter, and James, and John 
the brother of James. 

38 And he cometh to the house of 
the ruler of the synagogue, and seeth 
the tumult, and them that wept and 
wailed greatly. 

39 And when he was come in, he 
saith unto them, Why make ye this 
ado, and weep? the damsel is not 


As GREAT miracle is recorded in these verses. 
Mighty as the “ King of terrors” 


girl is restored to life. 


is, there is One mightier than he. 
are in our Lord Jesus Christ’s hands. 





dead, but sleepeth. 

40 And they laughed him to scorn. 
But when he had put them all out, 
he taketh the father and the mother 
of the damsel, and them that were 
with him, and entereth in where the 
damsel was lying. 

41 And he took the damsel by the 
hand, and said unto her, Talitha 
cumi; which is, being interpreted, 
Damsel, I say unto thee, Arise. 

42 And straightway the damsel 
arose, and walked; for she was of the 
age of twelve years. And they were 
astonished with a great astonishment. 

43 And he charged them straitly 
that no man should know it; and 
commanded that something should 
be given her to eat. 


A dead 


The keys of death 
He will one day 


“swallow up death in victory.” (Isaiah xxv. 8.) 
Let us learn from these verses, that rank places no man 


* Some remarks of Melancthon’s on this woman’s case are worth 


reading. 


We are doubiless to be careful that we do not hastily 


attach an allegorical and mystical sense to the words of Scripture. 
Yet we must not forget the depth of meaning which lies in all the 
acts of our Lord’s earthly ministry; and at any rate there is much 
beauty in the thoughts which the good Reformer expresses. He says, 
“This woman doth aptly represent the Jewish synagogue vexed a 
long time with many mischiefs and miseries, especially tortured with 
unconscionable princes, and unskilful priests, or physicians of the 
soul, the Pharisees and Sadducees; on whom she had wasted all her 
goods, and yet she was not a whit better, but rather much worse, till 
the blessed Lord of Israel in his own person came to ‘visit and redeem 


P39 


her. 


104. - EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


beyond the reach of sorrow. Jairus was a “ruler ;” yet 
sickness and trouble came to his house. Jairus probably 
had wealth, and all the medical help that wealth can 
command ; yet money could not keep death away from 
his child. The daughters of rulers are liable to sickness, 
as well as the daughters of poor men. The daughters 
of rulers must die. a 

It is good for us all to remember this. We are too apt 
to forget it. We often think and talk as if the posses- 
sion of riches was the great antidote to sorrow, and as if 
money could secure us against sickness and death, But 
it is the very extreme of blindness to think so. We 
have only to look around us and see a hundred proofs to 
the contrary. Death comes to halls and palaces, as well 
as to cottages—to landlords as well as to tenants—to 
rich as well as to poor. It stands on no ceremony. It 
“ ¢arries no man’s leisure or convenience. It will not be 
kept out by locks and bars. ‘It is appointed unto men 
once to die, but after this the judgment.” (Heb. ix. 27.) 
All are going to one place, the grave. 

“We may be sure there is far more equality in the por- 
tions appointed to men than at first sight appears. Sick- 
ness isa great leveller. It makes no distinction. Heaven 
is the only place where “‘ the inhabitant shall not say, I 
am sick.” (Isa. xxiii.24.) Happy are they who set their ~ 
affections on things above! They, and they only, have a 
treasure which is incorruptible. Yet a little while, and 
they will be where they shall hear no more evil tidings, 
All tears shall be wiped from their faces. They shall 
put on mourning nomore, Never again shall they hear 
those sorrowful words, “thy daughter—thy son—thy 


MARK, CHAP. V. 105 


wife—thy husband—is dead.” The former things will 
have passed away. 

Let us learn, for another thing, how almighty s the 
power of our Lord Jesus Christ. That message which 
pierced the ruler’s heart, telling him that his child was 
dead, did not stop our Lord for a moment. At once he 
cheered the father’s fainting spirits with these gracious 
words, “ be not afraid, only believe.” He comes to the 
house where many are weeping and wailing, and enters 
the room where the damsel is lying. He takes her by 
the hand, and says, ‘‘ Damsel, I say unto thee Arise.” 
At once the heart begins to beat again, and the breath 
returns to the lifeless body. ‘‘ The damsel arose and 
walked.” No wonder that we read the words, “ they 
were astonished with a great astonishment.” 

Let us think for a moment how wonderful was the 
change which took place in that house. From weeping 
to rejoicing—from mourning to congratulation—from 
death to life—how great and marvellous must have 
been the transition! They only can tell that, who have 
seen death face to face, and had the light of their house- 
holds quenched, and felt the iron entering into their own 
souls. They, and they only, can conceive what the 
family of Jairus must have felt, when they saw their 

“beloved one given back once more into their bosom by 
the power of Christ. There must have been a happy 
family gathering that night ! 

Let us see in this glorious miracle a proof of what 
Jesus can do for dead souls. He can raise our children 
from the death of trespasses and sins, and make them 
walk before Him in newness of life. He can take our 

5* 


106 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


sons and daughters by the hand, and say to them, 
“arise,” and bid them live not to themselves, but to Him 
that died for them and rose again. Have we a dead 
soul in our family ? Let us call on the Lord to come and 
quicken him. (Eph. ii. 1.) Let us send to Him message 
after message, and entreat Him to help. He that came 
to the succor of Jairus is still plenteous in mercy, and 
mighty in power. 

Finally, let us see in this miracle a blessed pledge of 
what our Lord will do in the day of His second appear- 
ing. He will call His believing people from their graves. 
He will give them a better, more glorious, and more 
beautiful body, than they had in the days of their pilgrim- 
age. He will gather together His elect from north, and 
south, and east, and west, to part no more, and die no 
more. Believing parents shall once more see believing 
children. Believing husbands shall once more see be- 
lieving wives. Let us beware of sorrowing like those who 
have no hope, over friends who fall asleep in Christ. 
The youngest and loveliest believer can never die before 
the right time. Let us look forward. There is a glorious 
resurrection morning yet to come. ‘ Them which sleep 
in Jesus will God bring with Him.” (1 Thess. iv. 14.) 
Those words shall one day receive a complete fulfilment, 
“T will ransom them from the power of the grave : I will 
redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues : 
O grave, I will be thy destruction.” (Hosea xiii. 14.) He 
that raised the daughter of Jairus still lives. When He 
gathers His flock around Him at the last day, not one 
lamb shall be found missing. ; 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 


107 


MARK VI. 1—6. 


1 And he went out from thence 
and came into his own country; and 
his disciples follow bim. 

2 And when the sabbath day was 
come, he began to teach in the syna- 
gogue: and many hearing him were 
astonished, saying, From whence hath 
this man these things? and what wis- 
dom is this which is given unto him, 
that even such mighty works are 
wrought by his hands? 

8 Is not this the carpenter, the son 


Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and 
are not his sisters here with us? And 
they were offended at him. 

4 But Jesus said unto them, A pro- 
phet is not without honor, but in his 
own country, and among his own kin, 
and in his own house. 

5 And he could there do no mighty 
work, save that he laid his hands up- 
on a few sick folk, and healed them. 

6 And hemarvelled because of their 
unbelief. And he went round about 





of Mary, the brother of James, and | the villages, teaching. 


THis passage shows us our Lord Jesus Christ in “ his 
own country,” at Nazareth. It is a melancholy illus- 
tration of the wickedness of man’s heart, and deserves 
special attention. 

We see, in the first place, how apt men are to undervalue 
things with which they are familiar. The men of Naza- 
reth “were offended” at our Lord. They could not 
think it possible that one who had lived so many years 
among themselves, and whose brethren and sisters they 
knew, could deserve to be followed as a public teacher. 

Never had any place on earth such privileges as 
Nazareth. Tor thirty years the Son of God resided in 
this town, and went to and fro in its streets. For thirty 
years He walked with God before the eyes of its inhabit- 
ants, living a blameless, perfect life. But it was all lost 
‘upon them. They were not ready to believe the Gospel, 
when the Lord came among them and taught in their 
synagogue. They would not believe that one whose face 
they knew so well, and who had lived so long, eating, 
and drinking, and dressing like one of themselves, had 
any right to claim their attention. They were “offended 
at Him.” 


108 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is nothing in all this that need surprise us. 
The same thing is going on around us every day, in our 
own land. The holy Scriptures, the preaching of the 
Gospel, the public ordinances of religion, the abundant 
means of grace that England enjoys, are continually 
undervalued -by English people. They are so accustomed 
to them, that they do not know their privileges. It is 
an awful truth, that in religion, more than in anything 
else, familiarity breeds contempt. 

There is comfort in this part of our Lord’s experience, 
for some of the Lord’s people. There is comfort for 
faithful ministers of the Gospel, who are cast down by 
the unbelief of their parishioners or regular hearers, 
There is comfort for true Christians who stand alone in 
their families, and see all around them cleaving to the 
world. Let both remember that they are drinking the 
same cup as their beloved Master. Let them remember 
that He too was despised most by those who knew Him 
best. Let them learn that the utmost consistency of con- 
duct will not make others adopt their views and opinions, 
any more than it did the people of Nazareth. Let them 
know that the sorrowful words of their Lord will gener- 
rally be fulfilled in the experience of His servants, “a 
prophet is not without honor, but in his own country, 
and among his own kin, and in his own house.” 

We see, in the second place, how humble was the rank 
of life which our Lord condescended to occupy before He be- 
gan His public ministry. 'The people of Nazareth said of 
Him, in contempt, ‘Is not this the carpenter ?” 

This is a remarkable expression, and is only found in 

the Gospel of St. Mark. It shows us plainly that for the 


MARK, CHAP, VI. 109 


first thirty years of His life, our Lord was not ashamed 
to work with His own hands. There is something mar- 
vellous and overwhelming in the thought! He who 
made heaven, and earth, and sea, and all that therein is 
—He, without whom nothing was made that was made 
—the Son of God Himself, took on Him the form of a 
servant, and ‘‘ in the sweat of His face ate bread,” as a 
working man. This is indeed that “ love of Christ that 
passeth knowledge.” Though He was rich, yet for our 
sakes He became poor. Both in life and death He 
humbled Himself, that through Him sinners might live 
and reign for evermore. 

Let us remember, when we read this passage, that there 
is no sin in poverty. We never need be ashamed of 
poverty, unless our own sins have brought it upon us. 
We never ought to despise others, because they are poor. 
It is disgraceful to be a gambler, or a drunkard, or a 
covetous man, or a liar; but it is no disgrace to work 
with our own hands, and earn our bread by our own 
labor. The thought of the carpenter’s shop at Nazareth, 
should cast down the high thoughts of all who make an 
idol of riches. It cannot be dishonorable to occupy 
the same position as the Son of God, and Saviour of the 
world. 

We see, in the last place, how exceedingly sinful ws the 
sin of unbelief. Two remarkable expressions are used in 
teaching this lesson. One is,-that our Lord “could do 
no mighty work” at Nazareth, by reason of the hardness 
of the people’s hearts. The other is, that “‘ He marvelled 
because of their unbelief.” The one shows us that unbelief 
has a power to rob men of the highest blessings. The other 


110 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


shows that it is so suicidal and unreasonable a sin, that 
even the Son of God regards it with surprise. 

We can never be too much on our guard against un- 
belief, It is the oldest sin in the world. It began in the 
garden of Eden, when Eve listened to the devil’s prom- 
ises, instead of believing God’s words, ‘ye shall die.”— 
It is the most ruinous of all sins in its consequences. It 
brought death into the world. It kept Israel for forty years 
out of Canaan. It is the sin that specially fills hell. ‘ He 
that believeth not shall be damned.”—It is the most fool- 
ish and inconsistent of allsins. It makes a man refuse the 
plainest evidence, shut his eyes against the clearest tes- 
timony, and yet believe lies. Worst of all, it is the com- 
monest sin in the world, Thousands are guilty of it on 
every side. In profession they are Christians. They 
know nothing of Paine and Voltaire. But in practice 
they are feally unbelievers. They do not implicitly be- 
lieve the Bible, and receive Christ as their Saviour. 

Let us watch our own hearts carefully in the matter 
of unbelief. The heart, and not the head, is the seat of 
its mysterious power. It is neither the want of evidence, 
nor the difficulties of Christian doctrine, that make men 
unbelievers. It is want of will to believe. They love sin. 
They are wedded to the world. In this state of mind 
they never lack specious reasons to confirm their 
will. The humble, child-like heart is the heart that 
believes. 

Let us go on watching our hearts, even after we have | 
believed. The root of unbelief is never entirely de- 
stroyed. We have only to leave off watching and pray- 
ing, and a rank crop of unbelief will soon spring up. No 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 


111 


prayer is so important as that of the disciples, “ Lord, 


increase our faith,”* 





MARK VI. 7—18. 


7 And he called unto him the twelve, 

and began to send them forth by two 
and two; and gave them power over 
unclean spirits ; 
8 And commanded them that they 
should take nothing for thei journey, 
save a staff only ; no scrip, no bread, 
no money in ¢heir purse : 

9 But de shod with sandals; and 
not put on two coats. 

10 And he said unto them, In what 
place soever ye enter into an house, 
there abide till ye depart from that 





11 And whosoever shall not receive 
you, nor hear you, when ye depart 
thence, shake off the dust under your 
feet for a testimony against them. 
Verily Isay unto you, It shall be more 
tolerable for Sodon and Gomorrha in 
the day of judgment, than for that 
city. 

12 And they went out, and preached 
that men should repent. 

13 And they cast out many devils, 
and anointed with oil many that were 
sick, and healed them. 


place. 


THESE verses describe the first sending forth of the 
apostles to preach. The great Head of the church made 
proof of His ministers, before He left them alone in the 
world. He taught them to try their own powers of teach- 
ing, and to find out their own weaknesses, while He was 


* There is a peculiar expression in this passage, which deserves 
notice. I refer to the words which say, that our Lord “could do no 
mighty work there, because of their unbelief.” 

This expression of course cannot mean, that it was “impossible” 
for our Lord to do a mighty work there, and that although He had 
the will to do mighty works, He was stopped and prevented by a 
power greater than His own. Such a view would be dishonoring to 
our Lord, and in fact would be a practical denial of His divinity. 
With Jesus nothing is impossible. If He had willed to do works, He 
had the power. 

The meaning evidently must be, that our Lord “ would” not do any 
mighty work there, because of the unbelief that He saw. He was 
prevented by what He perceived was the state of the people’s hearts. 
He would not waste signs and wonders on an unbelieving and hard- 
ened generation. He “could not’ do a mighty work, without de- 
parting from His rule, “according to your faith be it unto you.” He 
had the power in His hands, but He did not will to use it. 

The distinction I have attempted to draw is doubly useful, because 


412 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


yet with them. Thus, on the one hand, He was enabled 
to correct their mistakes. Thus, on the other, they were 
trained for the work they were one day to do, and were 
not novices, when finally left to themselves. Well would 
it be for the church, if all ministers of the Gospel were 
prepared for their duty in like manner, and did not so often 
take up their office untried, unproved, and inexperienced. 

Let us observe, in these verses, how our Lord Jesus 


of the light it throws on another scriptural expression, which is often 
grievously misunderstood. I refer to the expression, “no man can 
come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him.” (John vi. 
44.) The words, “no man can come,” are often much misapprehended. 

The text is a plain declaration of man’s natural corruption and help- 
less impotence. Man is dead in sin. He cannot come to Christ, ex- 
cept the Father draws him. In a word, he is unable to come. But 
what is the precise nature of his inability? This is the very point on 
which misapprehension exists. : 

Once for all, let us clearly understand that man’s inability to come 
to Christ is not physical. It is utterly untrue to say that a man can 
have a strong decided will to come to Christ, and yet be stopped by 
some mysterious physical obstacle—that he can really and honestly 
have a will to come, and yet have no power. Such a doctrine entirely 
overthrows man’s responsibility, and leads, in many cases, to wicked 
continuance insin. Thousands of ignorant people will tell you that 
“they wish to believe, and wish to come to Christ, and wish to be 
saved”—and yet say that “though they have the will, they have not 
the power.” It is a fatal delusion, and ruinous to many souls. 

The truth is, that man’s inability to come to Christ, and impotence 
to that which is good, is moral, and not physical. It is not true that 
he has the will to come to Christ, but is unable. He is unable, doubt- 
less, and has no power; but it is simply because he has no will. His 
will is the principal cause of his unconverted state, and until his will 
is changed by the Holy Ghost, he will never alter. He may not like 
this. But it is true, The fault of his condition is his own will. Say 
what he pleases, the blame lies there. He may pretend to have many 
good wishes, but in reality he has no honest, sincere wit to be bets 
ter. He “will not come to Christ that he may have life.” 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 113 


Christ’ sent forth His apostles “ two and two.” St. Mark 
is the only evangelist who mentions this fact. It is ene 
that deserves especial notice. 

There can be no doubt that this fact is meant to teach 
us the advantages of Christian company to all who work 
for Christ. The wise man had good reason for saying, 
‘Two are better than one.” (Hecles. iv. 9.) Two men 
together will do more work than two men singly. They 
will help one another in judgment, and commit fewer 
mistakes, They will aid one another in difficulties, and 
less often fail of success. They will stir one another up 
when tempted to idleness, and less often relapse into in- 
dolence and indifference. They will comfort one another 
in times of trial, and be less often cast down. ‘‘ Woe to 
him that is alone when he falleth ; for he hath not an- 
other to help him up.” (Eccles. iv. 11.) 

It is probable that this principle is not sufficiently 
remembered in the church of Christ in these latter days. 
The harvest is undoubtedly great all over the world, both 
at home and abroad. The laborers are unquestionably 
few, and the supply of faithful men far less than the 
demand. The arguments for sending out men “one by 
one,” under existing circumstances, are undeniably strong 
and weighty. But still the conduct of our Lord in this 
place is a striking fact. The fact that there is hardly a 
single case in the Acts, where we find Paul or any other 
apostle working entirely alone, is another remarkable cir- 
cumstance. It is difficult to avoid the conclusion, that 
if the rule of going forth “‘ two and two” had been more 
strictly observed, the missionary field would have yielded 


larger results than it has. 
" 


114 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


One thing at all events is clear, and that is the duty 

of all workers for Christ to work together and help one 
another whenever they can. ‘‘As iron sharpeneth iron, 
so doth the countenance of a man his friend.” Ministers 
and missionaries, and district visitors, and Sunday school 
teachers, should take opportunities for meeting, and 
taking sweet counsel together. The words of St. Paul 
contain a truth which is.too much forgotten : ‘‘ Consider 
one another to provoke unto love and good works; not - 
forsaking the assembling of yourselves together.” (Heb. 
x. 24, 25.) 
_ Let us observe, in the second place, what solemn words 
our Lord uses about those who will not receive nor hear His 
ministers. He says, ‘it shall be more tolerable for 
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment than for 
that city.” 

This is a truth which we find very frequently laid 
down in the Gospels. It is painful to think how entirely 
it is overlooked by many. Thousands appear to sup- 
pose, that so long as they go to church, and do not 
murder, or steal, or cheat, or openly break any of God’s 
commandments, they are in no great danger. They 
forget that it needs something more than mere absti- 
nence from outward irregularities to save a man’s soul. 
They do not see that one of the greatest sins a man can 
commit in the sight of God, is to hear the Gospel of 
Christ and not belive it—to be invited to repent and 
believe, and yet to remain careless and unbelieving. In 
short to reject the Gospel will sink a man to the lowest 
place in hell. 

Let us never turn away from a passage like this without 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 115 


asking ‘ourselves, What are we doing with the Gospel ? 
We live in a Christian land. We have the Bible in our 
houses, We hear of the salvation of the Gospel fre- 
quently every year. But have we received it into our 
hearts ? Have we really obeyed it in our lives? Have 
we, in short, laid hold on the hope set before us, taken up 
the cross, and followed Christ ?—If not, we are far worse 
than the heathen, who bow down to stocks and stones. 
We are far more guilty than the people of Sodom and 
Gomorrah. They never heard the Gospel, and therefore 
never rejected it. But as for us, we hear the Gospel, 
and yet will not believe. May we search our own hearts, 
and take heed that we do not ruin our own souls ! 

Let us observe, in the last place, what was the doctrine 
which our Lord’s apostles preached. We read that “ they 
went out and preached that men should repent.” 

The necessity of repentance may seem at first sight a 
very simple and elementary truth. And yet volumes 
might be written to show the fulness of the doctrine, and 
the suitableness of it to every age and time, and to every 
rank and class of mankind. It is inseparably connected 
with right views of God, of human nature, of sin, of 
Christ, of holiness, and of heaven. All have sinned and 
come short of the glory of God. All need to be brought 
to a sense of their sins—to a sorrow for them—to a wil- 
lingness to give them up—and to a hunger and thirst 
after pardon. All, in a word, need to be born again and 
to flee to Christ. This is repentance unto life. Nothing 
less than this is required for the salvation of any man. 
Nothing less than this onght to be pressed on men, by 
every one who professes to teach Bible religion. We 


116 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


must bid men repent, if we would walk in the steps of 
the apostles, and when they have repented, we must bid 
them repent more and more to their last day. 

Have we ourselves repented ? This, after all, is the 
question that concerns us most. It is well to know what 
the apostles taught. It is well to be familiar with the 
whole system of Christian doctrine. But it is far better 
to know repentance by experience and to feel it inwardly 
in our own hearts. May we never rest till we know and 
feel that we have repented! There are no impenitent 
people in the kingdom of heaven. All who enter in there 
have felt, mourned over, forsaken, and sought pardon for 
sin. This must be our experience, if we hope to be saved.* 





MARK VI. 14—29. 


14 And king Herod heard of him;| 15 Others said, That it is Elias. 
(for his name was spread abroad 5) And others said, That it is a prophet, 
and he said, That John the Baptist | or as one of the prophets. 
was risen from the dead, and therefore | 16 But when Herod heard thereof, 
mighty works do shew forth them- | he said, It is John, whom | beheaded: 
selves in him. he is risen from the dead. 

* The concluding verse in this passage, together with one in the 
Epistle of James (James v. 14), is generally quoted by Roman Cath- 
olics, in support of their pretended sacrament of extreme unction. 
A moment’s reflection will show that neither this text nor the other 
referred to, is any proof at all. 

Tn both cases the anointing with oil is expressly connected with 
the healing of those anointed. Extreme unction, on the contrary, is 
an anointing administered to a dying person, when there is no hope 
of his recovery. 

This discrepancy between the anointing of the apostolic times and 
the anointing practised by the Church of Rome, is so glaring, that 
some of the ablest Romish controyersalists have been obliged to ac- 
knowledge, that “extreme unction” is founded on church authority, 
and not on the authority of Scripture. Lombardus, Bonaventura, 
Bellarmine, Jansenius, and Tirinius, are all mentioned by Calovius as 
being of this opinion. 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 


17 For Herod himself had sent forth" 
and laid hold upon John, and bound 
him in prison for Herodias’ sake, his 
brother Philip’s wife: for he had 
married her. 

18 For John had said unto Herod, 
It is not lawful for thee to have thy 
brother’s wife. 

19 Therefore Herodias had a quarrel 
against him, and would have killed 
him ; but she could not: 

20 For Herod feared John, knowing 
that he was a just man and an holy 
and observed him; and when he heard 
him, he did many things, and heard 
him gladly. 

21 And when a convenient day was 
come, that Herod on his birthday 
made a supper to his lords, high cap- 
tains, and chief estates of Galilee ; 

22 And when the daughter of the 
said Herodias came in, and danced, 
and pleased Herod and them that sat 
with him, the king said unto the 
damsel, Ask of me whatsoever thou 
wilt, and I will give 7¢ thee. 

23 And he sware unto her, What- 


7 





117 


soever thou shalt ask of me, I will 
give it thee, unto the half of my 
ingdom. 

24 And she went forth, and said 
unto her mother, What shall I ask ? 
And she said, The head of John the 
Baptist. 

25 And she came in straightway 
with haste unto the king, and asked, 
saying, I will that thou give me by 
and by in a charger the head of John 
the Baptist. 

26 And the king was exceeding 
sorry; yet for his oath’s sake, and for 
their sakes which sat with him, he 
would not reject her. 

27 And immediately the king sent 
an executioner, and commanded his 
head to be brought: and he went and 
beheaded him in prison, 

28 And brought his head in a char- 
ger, and gave it to the damsel: and 
the damsel gave it to her mother. 

29 And when his disciples heard 
of tt, they came and took up his 
corpse, and laid it in a tomb. 


THESE verses describe the death of one of the most emi- 
nent saints of God. They relate the murder of John the 
Baptist. Of all the evangelists none tells this melan- 
choly story so fully as St. Mark. Let us see what prac- 
tical lessons the passage contains for our own souls. 

We see, in the first place, the amazing power of truth 
Herod “ fears’ John the Baptist 
while he lives, and is troubled about him after he dies. 
A friendless, solitary preacher, with no other weapon 
than God’s truth, disturbs and terrifies a king. 

: Every body has a conscience. Here lies the secret of 
a faithful minister’s power. This is the reason why 
Felix “trembled,” and Agrippa was “ almost persuaded,” 
when Paul the prisoner spoke before them. God has 
not left Himself without witness in the hearts of uncon- 
verted people. Fallen and corrupt as man is, there are 


over the conscience. 


118 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


thoughts within him accusirfg or excusing, according as 
he lives—thoughts that will not be shut out—thoughts 
that can make even kings, like Herod, restless and 
afraid. 

None ought to remember this so much as ministers and 
teachers. If they preach and teach Christ’s truth, they 
may rest assured that their work is not in vain. Chil- 

‘dren may seem inattentive in schools. Hearers may seem 
careless in congregrations. But in both cases there is 
often far more going on in the conscience than our eyes 
see. Seeds often spring up and bear fruit, when the 
sower, like John the Baptist, is dead or gone. 

We see, in the second place, how far people may go in 
religion, and yet miss salvation by yielding to one master- 
sin. ‘ 

King Herod went further than many.. He “feared 
John.” He “knew that he was a just man and a holy.” 
He “observed” him. He “ heard him, and did many 
things” in consequence. He even “heard him gladly.” 
But there was one-thing Herod would not do. He would 
not cease from adultery. He would not give up Hero- 
dias. And so he ruined his soul for evermore. 

Let us take warning from Herod’s case. Let us keep 
back nothing—cleave to no favorite vice—spare nothing 
that stands between us and salvation. Let us often 
look within, and make sure that there is no darling lust 
or pet transgression, which, Herodias-like, is murdering 
our souls. Let us rather cut off the right hand, and 
pluck out the right eye, than go into hell-fire. Let us 
not be content with admiring favorite preachers, and 
gladly hearing evangelical sermons. Jet us not rest till 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 119 


we can say with David, “I esteem all Thy command- 
ments concerning all things to be right, and I hate every 
false way.” (Psalm cxix. 128.) 

We see, in the third place, how boldly a faithful minis- 
ter of God ought to rebuke sin. John the Baptist spoke 
plainly to Herod about the wickedness of his life. He 
did not excuse himself under the plea that it was impru- 
dent, or impolitic, or untimely, or useless to speak out. 
He did not say smooth things, and palliate the king’s 
ungodliness by using soft words to describe his offence. 
He told his royal hearer the plain truth, regardless of all 
consequences—‘‘ It is not lawful for thee to have thy 
brother’s wife.” 

Here is a pattern that all ministers ought to follow. 
Publicly and privately, from the pulpit and in private 
visits, they ought to rebuke all open sin, and deliver a 
faithful warning to all who are living init. It may give 
offence. It may entail immense unpopularity. With 
all this they have nothing to do. Duties are theirs. 
Results are God’s. 

No doubt it requires great grace and courage to do this. 
No doubt a reprover, like John the Baptist, must go to 
work wisely and lovingly in carrying out his Master’s 
commission, and rebuking the wicked. But it is a matter 
in which his character for faithfulness and charity are 
manifestly at stake. If he believes a man is injuring 
his soul, he ought surely to tell him gp. If he loves him 
truly and tenderly, he ought not to let him ruin himself 
unwarned. Great as the present offence may be, in the ° 
long run the faithful reprover will generally be respected. 
“ He that rebuketh a man, afterwards shall find more 


120 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


favor than he that flattereth him with his tongue.” 
(Prov. xxviii. 23.) 

We see, in the fourth place, how bitterly people hate a 
reprover, when they are determined to keep their sins. He- 
rodias, the king’s unhappy partner in iniquity, seems to 
have sunk even deeper in sin than Herod. Hardened 
and seared in conscience by her wickedness, she hated 
John the Baptist for his faithful testimony, and never 
rested till she had procured his death. 

We need not wonder at this, When men and women 
have chosen their line, and resolved to have their own 
wicked way, they dislike any one who tries to turn them. 
They would fain be let alone. They are irritated by op- 
position. They are angry when they are told the truth. 
The prophet Elijah was called a “man that troubled 
Israel.” The prophet Micaiah was hated by Ahab, “be- 
cause he never prophesied good of him, but evil.” The 
prophets and faithful preachers of every age have been 
treated in like manner. They have been hated by some, 
as well as not believed. 

Let it never surprise us when we hear of faithful 
ministers of the Gospel being spoken against, hated, and 
reviled. Let us rather remember that they are ordained 
to bear witness against sin, the world, and the devil, and 
that if they are faithful, they cannot help giving offence, 
It is no disgrace to a minister’s character to be disliked 
by the wicked and ungodly. It is no real honor to a 
minister to be thought well of by everybody. Those 
’ words of our Lord are not enough considered—“ Woe 
unto you when all men speak well of you.” 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 121 


We see, in the fifth place, how much sin may somes 
times follow from feasting and revelling. Herod keeps his 
birth-day with a splendid banquet. Company, drinking, 
dancing, fill up the day. In a moment of excitement, he 
grants a wicked girl’s request to have the head of John 
the Baptist cut off. Next day, in all probability, he re- 
pented bitterly of his conduct. But the deed was done, 
It was too late. 

This is a faithful picture of what often results from 
feasting and merry-making. People do things at such 
seasons, from heated feelings, which they afterwards 
deeply repent. Happy are they who keep clear of 
temptations, and avoid giving occasion to the devil ! 
Men never know what they may do when they once 
venture off safe ground. Late hours, and crowded 
rooms, and splendid entertainments, and mixed company, 
and inusic, and dancing, may seem harmless to many 
people. But the Christian should never forget, that to 
take part in these things is to open a wider door to 
temptation. 

We see, finally, in these verses, how litile reward some 
of God’s best servants receive in this world. An unjust 
imprisonment and a violent death, were the last fruit 
that John the Baptist reaped, in return for his labor. 
Like Stephen and James, and others, of whom the world 
was not worthy, he was called to seal his testimony with 
his blood. ; 

Histories like these are meant to remind us, that the 
true Christian’s best things are yet to come. His rest, 
his crown, his wages, his reward, are all on the other 
side of the grave. Here, in this world, he must walk 

6 


122 


by faith, and not by sight; and if he looks for the 
praise of man, he will be disappointed. Here, in this 
life, he must sow, and labor, and fight, and endure per- 
secution ; and if he expects a great earthly reward, he 
expects what he will not find. But this life is not all. 
There is to be a day of retribution. There is a glorious 
harvest yet tocome. Heaven will make amends for all. 
Eye hath not seen, and ear hath not heard the glorious 
things that God has laid up for allthat love Him. The 
value of real religion is not to be measured by the things 
seen, but the things unseen, ‘ The sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed.” ‘‘ Our light affliction, 
which is but for a.moment, worketh for us a far more 
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.” (Rom. viii. 18 ; 
2 Cor. iv. 17.) 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK VI. 30—34. 


30 And the apostles gathered them- 


selves together unto Jesus, and told 
him all things, both what they had 
done, and what they had taught. 

31 And he said unto them, Come ye 
yourselves apart into a desert place, 
and rest a while: for there were many 
coming and going, and they had no 
leisure so much as to eat. 

82 And they departed into a desert 
place by ship privately. 


83 And the people sawthem depart- 
ing, and many knew him, and ran 
afoot thither out ofall cities, and out- 
went them, and came togetber unto 
him. 

34 And Jesus, when he came out, 
saw much people, and was moved with 
compassion toward them, because they 
were as sheep not having a shepherd: 
and he began to teach them many 
things. 


Ler us mark in this passage, the conduct of the apostles 
when they returned from their first mission as preachers. 
We read that they “gathered themselves together unto 
Jesus, and told Him all things, both what they had 
done, and what they had taught.” 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 123 


These words are deeply instructive. They are a 
bright example to all ministers of the Gospel, and to all 
laborers in the great work of doing good to souls. All 
such should daily do as the apostles did on this occasion. 
They should tell all their proceedings to the great Head 
of the Church. They should spread all their work before 
Christ, and ask of Him counsel, guidance, strength, and 
help. > 

Prayer is the main secret of success in spiritual 
business. It moves Him who can move heaven and earth. 
It brings down the promised aid of the Holy Ghost, 
without whom the finest sermons, the clearest teaching, 
and the most diligent working, are all alike in vain, It 
is not always those who have the most eminent gifts who 
are most successful laborers for God. It is generally 
those who keep up closest communion with Christ and are 
most instant in prayer. It is those who cry with the 
prophet Ezekiel, ‘‘ Come from the four winds, O breath, 
and breathe upon these slain that they may live.” (Ezek. 
xxxvil. 9.) It is those who follow most exactly the 
apostolic model, and “ give themselves to prayer, and 
the ministry of the word.” (Acts vi. 4.) Happy is that 
church which has a praying as well as.a preaching 
ministry! The question we should ask about a new 
minister, is not merely “Can he preach well ?” but 
‘< Does he pray much for his people and his work ?” 

Let us mark, in the second place, the words of our Lord 
to the apostles, when they returned from their first public 
ministry. ‘‘He said unto them, come ye apart your- 
selves into a desert place, and rest a while.” 

These words are full of tender consideration. Our 


124 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Lord knows well that His ‘servants are flesh as well as 
spirit, and have bodies as well as souls. He knows that 
at best they have a treasure in earthen vessels, and are 
themselves compassed with many infirmities. He shows 
them that He does not expect from them more than their 
bodily strength can do. He asks for what we can do, 
and not for what we cannot do, ‘‘Come ye apart,” He 
says, “‘and rest a while.” 

These words are full of deep wisdom. Our Lord 
knows well that His servants must attend to their own 
souls as well as the souls of others. He knows that a 
constant attention to public work is apt to make us 
forget our own private soul-business, and that while we 
are keeping the vineyards of others, we are in danger of 
neglecting our own. (Cant. i. 6.) He reminds us that 
it is good for ministers to withdraw occasionally from 
public work, and look within. “Come ye apart,” He 
says, “into a desert place.” 

There are few unhappily in the church of Christ, who — 
need these admonitions. There are but few in danger of 
overworking themselves, and injuring their own bodies 
and souls by excessive attention to others. The vast 
‘ majority of professing Christians are indolent and sloth- 
ful, and do nothing for the world around them. There 
are few comparatively who need the bridle nearly so 
much as the spur. Yet these few ought to lay to heart 
the lessons of this passage. They should economize 
their health as a talent, and not squander it away like 
gamblers. They should be content with spending their 
daily income of strength, and should not draw recklessly 
on their principal. They should remember that to doa 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 125 


little, and do it well, is often the way to do most in the 
Jong run. Above all they should never forget to watch 
their own hearts jealously, and to make time for regular 
self-examination, and calm meditation. The prosperity 
of a man’s ministry and public work is intimately bound 
up with the prosperity of hisown soul. Occasional re- 
tirement is one of the most useful ordinances. 

Finally, let us mark the feelings of our Lord Jesus 
Christ towards the people who came together to Him. We 
read that He ‘“‘ was moved with compassion toward them, 
because they were as sheep without a shepherd.” They 
were destitute of teachers. They had no guides but the 
blind Scribes and Pharisees. They had no spiritual food 
but man-made traditions. Thousands of immortal souls 
stood before our Lord, ignorant, helpless, and on the high- 
road to ruin. It touched the gracious heart of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. He was “ moved with compassion toward 
them. He began to teach them many things.” 

Let us never forget that our Lord is the same yester- 
day, to-day, and for ever. He never changes. High in 
heaven, at God’s right hand, He still looks with com- 
passion on the children of men. He still pities the 
ignorant, and them that are out of the way. He is still 
willing to “teach them many things.” Special as His 
love is towards His own sheep who hear His voice, He 
still has a mighty general love towards all mankind—a 
love of real pity, a love of compassion. We must not 
overlook this. It is a poor theology which teaches that 
Christ cares for none except believers. There is war- 
rant in Scripture for telling the chief of sinners, that 
Jesus pities them, and cares for their souls, that Jesus is 


126 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


willing to save them, and invites them to believe and be 
saved. 

Let us ask ourselves, as we leave the passage, whether 
we know anything of the mind of Christ ? Are we, like 
Him, tenderly concerned about the souls of the uncon- 
verted ? Do we, like Him, feel deep compassion for all 
who are yet as sheep without a shepherd ? Do we care 
about the impenitent and ungodly near our own doors ? 
Do we care about the Heathen, the Jew, the Mahomet- 
an, and the Roman Catholic in foreign lands? Do we 
use every means, and give our money willingly, to spread 
the Gospel in the world ?_ These are serious questions, 
and demand a serious reply. The man who cares nothing 
for the souls of other people is not like Jesus Christ. It 
may well be doubted whether he is converted himself, 


and knows the value of his own soul. 





MARK VI. 35—46. 


85 And when the day was now far 
spent, his disciples came unto him, 
and said, This is a desert place, and 
now the time zs far passed : 

86 Send them away that they may 
go into the country round about, and 
into the villages, and buy themselves 
bread: for they have nothing to eat. 

387 Heansweredand suid unto them, 
Give ye them to eat. And they say 
unto him, Shall we go and buy two 
hundred penny worth of bread, and 
give them to eat? 

88 He saith unto them, How many 
loaves have ye? goandsee. And when 
they knew, they say, Five, and two 
fishes. 

89 And he commanded them to 
make all sit down by companies upon 
the green grass. 

40 And they sat down in ranks, by 





hundreds, and by fifties. 

41 And when he had taken the five 
loaves and the two fishes, he looked 
up to heaven, and blessed, and brake 
the loaves, and gave them to his disci- 
ples to set before them; and the two 
fishes divided he among them all. 

42 And they did alleat, and were 
filled. 

43 And they took up twelve baskets 
full of the fragments, and of the fishes. 

44 And they that did eat of the 
loaves were about five thousand men. 

45 And straightway he constrained 
his disciples to get into the ship, and 
to go to the other side before unto 
Bethsaida, while he sent away the 
people. 

45 And when he had sent them 
away, he departed into a mountain to 


pray. 


Or all our Lord Jesus Christ’s miracles, none is so fre- 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 127 


quently described in the Gospels, as that which we have 
now read. Hach of the four Evangelists was inspired to 
record it. It is evident that it demands a more than 
ordinary attention from every reader of God’s word. 

Let us observe, for one thing, in this passage, what an 
example this miracle affords of our Lord Jesus Christ's al- 
mighty power. We are told that He fed five thousand 
men, with five loaves and two fishes. We are distinctly 
told that this multitude had nothing to eat. We are no 
less distinctly told that the whole provision for their 
sustenance consisted of.only five loaves and two fishes. 
And yet we read that our Lord took these loaves and 
fishes, blessed, brake, and gave them to His disciples to set 
before the people. And the conclusion of the narrative 
tells us, that “‘ they did eat, and were filled,’ and that 
““twelve baskets full of fragments” were taken up. 

Here was creative power, beyond all question. Some- 
thing real, solid, substantial, must manifestly have been 
called into being, which did not before exist. There is 
no room left for the theory, that the people were under 
the influence of an optical delusion, or a heated imagin- 
ation. Five thousand hungry people would never have 
been satisfied, if they had not received into their mouths 
material bread: ‘Twelve baskets full of fragments would 
never have been taken up, if the five loaves had not been 
miraculously multiplied. In short, it is plain that the 
hand of Him who made the world out of nothing was 
present on this occasion. None but He who at the first 
created all things, and sent down manna in the desert, 
could thus have “spread a table in the wilderness.” 

It becomes all true Christians to store up facts like 


128 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


these in their minds, and to remember them in time of 
need. We live in the midst of an evil world, and see 
few with us, and many against us. We carry within us 
a weak heart, too ready at any moment to tun aside from 
the right way. We have near us, at every moment, a 
busy devil, watching continually for our halting, and 
seeking to lead usinto temptation. Where shall we tuin 
for comfort ? What shall keep faith alive, and preserve 
us from sinking in despair ? There is only one answer. 
We must look to Jesus. We must think on His al- 
mighty power, and His wonders of old time. We must 
call to mind how He can create food for His people out 
of nothing, and supply the wants of those who follow Him, 
even in the wilderness. And as we think these thoughts, 
we must remember that this Jesus still lives, never 
changes, and is on our side. 

Let us observe, for another thing, in this passage, our 
Lord Jesus Christ's conduct, when the miracle of feeding the 
multitude had been performed. We read, that “ when He — 
had sent them away, He departed into a mountain to 
pray.” 

There is something deeply instructive in this circum- 
stance. Our Lord sought not the praise of man. After 
one of His greatest miracles, we find Him immediately 
seeking solitude, and spending His time in prayer. He 
practised what He had taught elsewhere, when He said, 
- “enter into thy closet, and shut thy door, and pray to 
thy Father which is in secret.” None ever did such 
mighty works as He did. None ever spake such words. 
None ever was so instant in prayer. 

Let our Lord’s conduct in this respect be our example. 


MARK, CHAP, VI. 129 


We cannot work miracles as He did ; in this He stands 
alone. But we can walk in His steps, in the matter of 
private devotion. If we have the Spirit of adoption, we 
can pray. Let us resolve to pray more than we have 
done hitherto, Let us strive to make time, and place, 
and opportunity for being alone with God. Above all, 
let us not only pray before we attempt to work for God, 
but pray also after our work is done. 

It would be well for us all, if we examined ourselves 
more frequently as to our habits about private prayer. 
What time do we give to it in the twenty-four hours of 
the day? What progress can we mark, one year with 
another, in the fervency, fulness, and earnestness of our 
prayers? What do we know by experience, of ‘‘ labor- 
ing fervently in prayer?” (Col. iv. 12.) These are 
humbling inquiries, but they are useful for our souls. 
There are few things, it may be feared, in which Chris- 
tians come so far short of Christ’s example, as they do in 
the matter of prayer. Our Master’s strong crying and 
tears—His continuing all night in prayer to God—His 
frequent withdrawal to private places, to hold close com- 
munion with the Father, are things more talked of and 
admired than imitated. We live in an age of hurry, 
bustle, and so-called activity. Men are tempted contin- 
ually to cut short their private devotions, and abridge 
their prayers. When this is the case, we need not 
wonder that the Church of Christ does little in propor- 
tion to its machinery. The Church must learn to copy 
its Head more closely. Its members must be more in 
their closets. ‘‘ We have little,” because little is asked. 
(James iv. 2.) 

6* 


130 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


* 


MARK VI. 47—56. 


47 And when even was come, the 
ship was in the midst of the sea, and 
he alone on the land. 

48 And he sawthem toiling in row- 
ing; for the wind was contrary unto 
them: and about the fourth watch of 
the night he cometh unto them, walk- 
ing upon the sea, and would have 
passed by them. 

49 But when they saw him walkin 
upon the sea, they supposed it ha 
been a spirit, and cried out: 

50 For they all saw him, and were 
troubled. And immediately he talked 
with them, and saith unto them, Be 
of good cheer: itis 1; be not afraid. 

51 And he went up unto them into 
the ship: and the wind ceased: and 
they were sore amazed in themselves 
beyond measure, and wondered. 





52 For they considered not the mire 
acle of the loaves: for their heart was 
hardened. 

58 And when they had passed over, 
they came into the land of Gennesa- 
ret, and drew to the shore. 

54 And when they were core out 
“41 the ship, straightway they knew 

im. 

55 And ran through that whole re- 
gion round about, and began to carry 
about in beds those that were sick, - 
where they heard he was. 

56 And whithersoever he entered, 
into villages, or cities, or country, 
they laid the sick in the streets, and 
besought him that they might touch 
if it were but the border of his Sa 
ment: and as many as touched him 
were made whole. 


THE event first recorded in these verses, is a beautiful 
emblem of the position of all believers, between the first 
and second advents of Jesus Christ. Like the disciples, 
we are now tossed to and fro by storms, and do not enjoy 
the visible presence of our Lord. Like the disciples, we 
shall see our Lord face to face again, though if may be 
a time of great extremity, when He returns. Like the 
disciples, we shall see all things changed for the better, 
when our Master comes to us. We shall no longer be . 
buffeted by storms. There will be a great calm. 
There is nothing fanciful in such an application of the 
“passage. We need not doubt that there is a deep mean- 
ing in every step of His life, who was * God manifest in 
the flesh.” For the present, however, let us confine our- 
selves to the plain, practical lessons which these verses 
contain. 
Let us notice, in the first place, how our Lord sees the 
troubles of His believing people, and in due time will help 


MARK, CHAP. VI. 131 


them. We read that when “ the ship was in the midst 
of the sea, and He alone on the land,” He “saw His 
disciples toiling in rowing”—came to them walking on 
the sea—cheered them with the gracious words, “It is I, 
be not afraid”—and changed the storm into a calm. 
There are thoughts of comfort here for all true believ- 
ers. Wherever they may be, or whatsoever their circum- 
stances, the Lord Jesus sees them. Alone, or in company 
—in sickness or in health—by sea or by land—in perils 
in the city—in perils in the wilderness—the same eye 
which saw the disciples tossed on the lake, is ever looking 
at us. We are never beyond the reach of His care. 
Our way is never hid from Him, He knows the path 
that we take, and is still able to help. He may not 
come to our aid at the time we like best, but He will 
never allow us utterly to fail. He that walked upon the 
water never changes. He will always come at the right 
time to uphold His people. Though He tarry, let us 
wait patiently. Jesus sees us, and will not forsake us. 
Let us notice, in the second place, the fears of the dis- 
ciples, when they first saw our Lord walking upon the sea. 
We are told that “they supposed it had been a spirit, 
and cried out. For they all saw Him, and were afraid.” 
What a faithful picture of human nature we have in 
these words! How many thousands in the present day, 
if they had seen what the disciples saw, would have 
behaved in the same manner! How few, if they were on 
board a ship, in a storm at midnight, and suddenly saw 
one walking on the water, and drawing near to the ship 
—how few would preserve their composure, and be 
altogether free from fears! Let men laugh, if they 


132 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


please, at the superstitious fears of these unlearned dis- 
ciples. Let them boast, if they like, of the march of 
intellect, and the spread of knowledge, in these latter 
times. There are few, we may confidently assert, who, 
placed in the same position as the apostles, would have 
shown more courage than they. The boldest sceptics 
have sometimes proved the greatest cowards, when ap- 
pearances have been seen at night, which they could not 
explain. 

The truth is, there is an instinctive feeling in all men, 
which makes them shrink from anything which seems 
to belong to another world. There is a consciousness 
which many try in vain to conceal by affected careless- 
ness, that there are beings unseen, as well as seen, and 
that the life which we now live in the flesh, is not the 
only life in which man has a portion. The common 
stories about ghosts and apparitions, are undoubtedly 
foolish and superstitious. They are almost always 
traceable to the fears and imaginations of weak-minded 
people. Yet the universal currency which such stories 
obtain, all over the world, is a fact that deserves notice, 
It is an indirect evidence of latent belief in unseen things, 
just as counterfeit coin is an evidence that there is true 
money. It forms a peculiar testimony which the infidel 
would find it hard to explain away. It proves that 
there is something within men, which testifies of a world 
beyond the grave, and that when men feel it, they are 
afraid. 

The plain duty of the true Christian is, to live provided 
with an antidote against all fears of the great unseen 
world. That antidote is faith in an unseen Saviour, 


MARK, CHAP, VII. 133 


and.constant communion with Him. Armed with that 
antidote, and seeing Him who is invisible, nothing need 
make us afraid. We travel on towards a world of Spir- 
its. We are surrounded even now by many dangers. 
But with Jesus for our Shepherd, we have no cause for 
alarm. With Him for our Shield, we are safe. 

Let us notice, in the conclusion of the chapter, what 
a bright example we have of our duty to one another. We 
are told that when our Lord came into the land of Gen- 
nesaret, the people “ran through that whole region,” 
and brought to Him in beds “those that were sick.” 
We read that ‘‘ whithersoever he entered, into villages, 
or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and 
besought Him, that they might touch if it were but the 
border of His garment.” 

Let us see here a pattern for ourselves. Let us go 
and do likewise. Let us strive to bring all around us 
who are in need of spiritual medicine, to Jesus the great 
Physician, that they may be healed. Souls are dying 
every day. Time is short. Opportunities are rapidly 
passing away. The night cometh when no man can work. 
Let us spare no pains in laboring to bring men and 
women to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, that they may 
be saved, It is a comfortable thought, that ‘as many 
as touch him will be made whole.” 





MARK VII. 1—13. 


i Then came together unto him the; 3 For the Pharisees, and all the 
Pharisees, and certain of the Scribes, | Jews, except they wash their hands 
which came from Jerusalem. oft, eat not, holding the tradition of 

2 And when they saw some of his | the elders. 3 
disciples eat bread with defiled, that] 4 And when they come from the 
is to say, with unwashen hands, they | market, except they wash, they eat 
found fault. not. And many other things there be, 


134 


which they have received to hold, as; and many other such like thin 


the washing of cups, and pots, brasen 
vessels, and of tables. 

5 Then the Pharisees and Scribes 
asked him, Why walk not thy disci- 
ples according to the traditions of the 
elders, but eat bread with unwashen 
hands ? 

6 He answered and said unto them, 
Well hath Esaias prophesied of you 
hepa as it is written, This peo- 
ple honoreth me with their lips, but 
their heart is far from me. 

7 Howbeit in vain do they worship 
me, teaching jor doctrines the com- 
mandments of men. 

8 For laying aside the command- 
ment of God, ye hold the tradition of 
men, ds the washing of pots and cups : 





EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


ye do. 

9 And he said unto them, Full well 
ye reject the commandment of God, 
that ye may keep your own traditions. 

10 For Moses said, Honor thy fa- 
ther and thy mother; and, Whoso 
curseth father or mother, let him die 
the death: 

11 But ye say, If a man shall say 
to his father or mother, /¢ is Corban, 
that is to say, a gift, by whatsoever 
thou mightest be profited by me; he 
shall be free. 

12 And ye suffer him no more to do 
ought for his futher or his mother ; 

13 Making the*word of God of none 
effect through your tradition, which 
ye have delivered: and many suck 
like things do ye. 


T'HIs passage contains a humbling picture of what human 
nature is capable of doing in religion. It is one of those 
Scriptures which ought to be frequently and diligently 
studied by all who desire the prosperity of the Church 
of Christ. 

The first thing which demands our attention in these 
verses, is the low and degraded condition of Jewish religuon, 
when our Lord was upon earth. What can be more de- 
plorable than the statement now before us? We find 
the principal teachers of the Jewish nation finding fault, 
*“ because our Lord’s disciples ate bread with unwashen 
hands!” We are told that they attached great import- 
ance to the washing of cups, and pots, and brazen ves- 
sels, and tables!” In short, the man who paid most 
rigid attention to mere external observances of human 
invention was reckoned the holiest man ! 

The nation, be it remembered, in which this state of 
things existed, was the most highly favored in-the world 
To it was given the law on Mount Sinai, the service of 
God, the priesthood, the covenants, and the promises. 


MARK, CHAP. VII. 135 


Moses, and Samuel, and David, and the prophets, lived 
and died among its people. No nation upon earth ever 
had so many spiritual privileges. No nation ever mis- 
used its privileges so fearfully, and so thoroughly forsook 
its own mercies. Never did fine gold become so dim! 
From the religion of the books of Deuteronomy and 
Psalms, to the religion of washing hands, and pots, and 
cups, how great was the fall! No wonder that in the 
time of our Lord’s earthly ministry, He found the people 
like sheep without a shepherd. External observances 
alone feed no consciences and sanctify no hearts. 

Let the history of the Jewish church be a warning to 
us never to trifle with false doctrine. If we once tolerate 
it we never know how far it may go, or into what de- 
graded state of religion we may at last fall. Once leave 
the King’s highway of truth, and we may end with wash- 
ing pots and cups, like Pharisees and Scribes. There is 
nothing too mean, trifling, or irrational for a man, if he 
once turns his back on God’s word. There are branches 
of the Church of Christ at this day in which the Scrip- 
tures are never read, and the Gospel never preached— 
branches in which the only religion now remaining con- 
sists in using a few unmeaning forms and keeping certain 
man-made fasts and feasts—branches which began well, 
like the Jewish church, and, like the Jewish church, have 
now fallen into utter barrenness and decay. We can 
never be too jealous about false doctrine. A little leaven 
leaveneth the whole lump. Let us earnestly contend for 
the whole faith once delivered to the saints.*. 


* Absurd and ridiculous as the customs and traditions of the Phari- 
sees appear at first sight, it is a humbling fact that the Pharisees have 


136 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The second thing, that demands our attention, is the 
uselessness of mere lip-service in the worship of God. Our 
Lord enforces this lesson by a quotation from the Old 
Testament ; “‘ Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypo- 
crites, This people honoreth me with their lips, but 
their heart is far from me.” 

The heart is the part of man which God chiefly notices 
in religion. The bowed head, and the bended knee— 
the grave face and the rigid posture—the regular re- 
sponse, and the formal amen—all these together do not 
make up a spiritual worshipper. The eyes of God look 
further and deeper. He requires the worship of the 
heart. ‘ My son,” he says to every one of us, ‘Give 
me thy heart.” 

Let us remember this in the public congregation. It 
must not content us to take our bodies to church, if we 
leave our hearts at home. The eye of man may detect 
no flaw in our service. Our minister may look at us with 
approbation, Our neighbors may think us patterns of © 


never wanted imitators and successors. Zeal about washing pots, and 
cups, and tables, may seem almost ludicrous, and worthy of none but 
children; but we need not look far to find an exact parallel near home. 
What can we say to the gravity and seriousness with which men argue 
on behalf of chasubles, albs, tunicles, piscinas, sedilia, credence-tables, 
rood-screens, and the like, in the present day? What can we say to 
the exaggerated attention paid by many to ceremonies, ornaments, 
gestures, and postures, in the worship of God, about which it is enough 
to say that Scripture is totally silent? What is it all but Pharisaism 


over again? What is it but a melancholy repetition of disproportioned . 


zeal about men’s traditional usages? What single argument can be 
used in defence of these things that the Pharisees might not have 
used with equal force? Highteen hundred years have passed away, 
and yet the generation that made so much ado about washing pots, 
cups, and tables, is still amongst us. The succession of the Pharisees 
has never ceased. 


MARK, CHAP, VII. 187 


what a Christian ought to be. Our voice may be heard 
foremost in the praise and prayer. But it is all worse 
than nothing in God’s sight, if our hearts are far away. 
It is only wood, hay, and stubble before Him who dis- 
cerns thoughts, and reads the secrets of the inward man. 

Let us remember this in our private devotions. It 
must not satisfy us to say good words, if our heart and 
our lips do not go together. What does it profit us to 
be fluent and lengthy, if our imaginations are roving far 
away, while we are upon our knees? It profits us 
nothing at all. God sees what we are about, and rejects 
our offering. Heart-prayers are the prayers He loves to 
hear. Heart-prayers are the only prayers that He will 
answer. Our petitions may be weak, and stammering, 
and mean in our eyes, They may be presented with no 
fine words, or well-chosen language, and might seem 
almost unintelligible, if they were written down. But 
- if they come from a right heart, God understands them. 
Such prayers are His delight. 

The last thing that demands our attention in these 
verses, is the tendency of man’s inventions in religion to 
supplant God’s word, Three times we find this charge 
brought forward by our Lord against the Pharisees. 
“ Laying aside the commandments of God, ye hold the 
traditions of men.” “ Full well ye reject the command- 
ment of God, that ye may keep your own traditions.” 
“ Making the Word of God of none effect through your 
traditions.” The first step of the Pharisees, was to add 
their traditions to the Scriptures, as useful supplements. 
The second was to place them on a level with the Word 
of God, and give them equal authority. The last was 


138 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to honor them above the Scripture, and to degrade 
Scripture from its lawful position. This was the state of 
things which our Lord found when he was upon earth. 
Practically, the traditions of man were everything, and 
the Word of God was nothing at all. Obedience to the 
traditions constituted true religion. Obedience to the 
Scriptures was lost sight of altogether. 

Ht is a mournful fact, that Christians have far too often 
walked in the steps of Pharisees in this matter. The 
very same process has taken place over and over again. 
The very same consequences have resulted. Religious 
observances of man’s invention, have been pressed on the 
acceptance of Christians—observances to all appearance 
useful, and at all events well-meant, but observances 
nowhere commanded in the word of God. These very 
observances have by and by been enjoined with more 
vigor than God’s own commandments, and defended with 
more zeal than the authority of God’s own word. We 
need not look fur forexamples. The history of our own 
church will supply them.* 

Let us beware of attempting to add anything to the 
word of God, as necessary to salvation. It provokes 

* The persecution of ‘the Puritans in the time of the Stuarts, on 
account of canons and rubrics was, in too many cases, neither more 
nor less than zeal for traditions. An enormous amount of zeal was 
expended in enforcing conformity to the Church of England, while 
drunkenness, swearing, and open sin were comparatively let alone. 
Obedience to man-made ecclesiastical rules was required, on pain of 
fine or imprisonment, while open disobedience to God’s ten com- 
mandments was overlooked. Experience supplies painful proof, that 
traditions once called into being are first called useful, Then they 


become necessary. At last they are too often made édols, and all 
must bow down to them, or be punished. 


MARK, CHAP, VII. 139 


God to give us over to judicial blindness. It is as good 
as saying that His Bible is not perfect, and that we 
know better than He does what is necessary for man’s 
salvation. It is just as easy to destroy the authority of 
God’s word by addition as by subtraction, by burying it 
under man’s inventions as by denying its truth. The 
whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible, must be our rule 
of faith—nothing added and nothing taken away. 
Finally, let us draw a broad line of distinction between 
those things in religion which have been devised by man, 
and those which are plainly commanded in God’s word. 
What God commands is necessary to salvation. What 
man commands is not. What man devises may be useful 
and expedient for the times ; but salvation does not hinge 
on obedience to it. What God requires is essential to life 
eternal. He that wilfully disobeys it ruins his own soul.* 


_  * The subtle way in which the Pharisees evaded the requirements 
of the fifth commandment, to which our Lord refers in this passage, 
calls for a few words of explanation. 

We must remember that the Pharisees did not openly deny the 
obligation of the fifth commandment. In all probability they pro- 
fessed to attach as much importance to it asany men. And yet they 
contrived to make it void! How did they effect this? 

They taught that a man might dedicate to God’s service, as sacred, 
any part of his property which might be applied to the relief of his 
parents, and so discharge himself from any further expense about 
them. He had only to say that all his money was “ corban”—that 
is, given over to holy purposes—and no further claim could be made 
upon him for his father’s or mother’s support. Under pretence of 
giving God a prior claim, he set himself free from the burden of main- 
taining them for ever. He did not flatly deny his duty to minister 
of his worldly substance to his parents’ necessities. But he evaded 
it by setting up a human tradition, and recite a higher call of duty, 
even duty to God. 

The likeness between the traditions and sophistries of the pices 
sees, making void God’s word under a pretended zeal for God's glory, 


140 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK VII. 14—23. 


14 And when he had called all the 
per unto him, he said unto them, 

earken unto me every one gf you, 
and understand : 

15 There is nothing from without a 
man, that entering into him can defile 
him: but the things which come out of 
him, those are they that defile the man. 

16 If any man have ears to hear, 
let him hear. 

17 And when he was entered into 
the house from the people, his disciples 
asked him concerning the parable. 

18 And he saith unto them, Are 





thing from without entereth into the 
man, i¢ cannot defile him ; 

19 Becuuse it entereth not into his 
heart, but into the belly, and goeth out 
into the draught, Purging all meats ? 

20 And he said, That which com- 
eth out of the man, that defileth the 
man. 

21 For from within, out of the heart 
of men, proceed evil thoughts, adul- 
teries, fornications, murders, 

22 Thefts, covetousness, wicked- 
ness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil 
eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness : 


23 All these evil things come from 


so without understanding also ? 
within, and defile the man. 


e 
Do ye not perceive, that whatsoever 


WE see in the beginning of this passage, how slow of 
understanding men are in spiritual things. ‘ Hearken,” 
says our Lord to the people, “‘ hearken unto me every one 
of you, and understand.” ‘Are ye so without understand- 
ing 2” He says to His disciples—“ Do ye not perceive 2?” 


and those of the Jesuits, and other advocates of the Roman Catholic 
Church, is painfully striking. The following passage from an old com- 
mentator is worth reading : 

“The Scriptures teach that there is no difference to be put between 
meats, in regard of holiness, but that every creature of God is good. 
This the Papists make void by teaching that it is matter of religion 
and conscience to abstain from flesh meats at certain seasons. The 
Scripture teacheth that we should pray to God alone. This they make 
void by their manifold prayers to saints departed. The Scripture 
teacheth Christ alone to be our mediator, both of redemption and in- 
tercession. This they make void by making saints intercessors. The 
Scripture teacheth Christ to be the only head of the church. This 
they abrogate by their doctrine of the Pope’s supremacy. The Scrip- 
ture teacheth that every soul should be subject to the higher power. 
This they abrogate by exempting the Pope and popish clergy from 
subjection to the civil power of princes and magistrates, Lastly, to 
instance in the same kind as our Saviour here against the Pharisees, 
whereas the word of God commands children to honor their parents, 
the Papists teach that if the child have vowed a monastical life, he is 
exempted from duty to parents.” —Petter on St. Mark. 


MARK, CHAP. VII. 141 


The corruption of human nature is an universal dis- 
ease. It affects not only a man’s heart, will, and con- 
science, but his mind, memory, and understanding. The 
very same person who is quick and clever in worldly 
things, will often utterly fail to comprehend the simplest 
truths of Christianity. He will often be unable to take 
in the plainest reasonings of the Gospel. He will see no 
meaning in the clearest statements of evangelical doctrine. 
They will sound to him either foolish or mysterious. He 
" will listen to them like one listening to a foreign language, 
catching a word here and there, but not seeing the drift 
of the whole. ‘“ The world by wisdom knows not God.” 
(1 Cor. i. 21.) It hears, but does not understand. 

We must pray daily for the teaching of the Holy 
Ghost, if we would make progress. in the knowledge of 
divine things. Without Him, the mightiest intellect and 
the strongest reasoning powers will carry us but a little 
way. In reading the Bible and hearing sermons, every- 
thing depends on the spirit in which we read and hear. 
A humble, teachable, child-like frame of mind is the 
grand secret of success. Happy is he who often says 
with David, ‘‘ Teach me thy statutes.” (Psalm cxix. 64.) 
Such an one will understand as well as hear. 

We see, in tlie second place, from this passage, that the 
heart is the chief source of defilement and impurity in God’s 
sight, Moral purity does not depend on washing or not 
washing—touching things or not touching them—eating 
things or not eating them, as the Scribes and Pharisees 
taught, “There is nothing from without a man, that 
entering into him can defile him: but the things which 
come out of him, these are they that defile the man.” 


142. EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is a deep truth in these words which is fre- 
quently overlooked. Our original sinfulness and natural 
inclination to evil are seldom sufficiently considered. 
The wickedness of men is often attributed to bad exam- 
ples, bad company, peculiar temptations, or the snares 
of the devil. It seems forgotten that every man carries 
within him a fountain of wickedness. We need no bad 
company to teach us, and no devil to tempt us, in order 
to run into sin. We have within us the beginning of 
every sin under heaven. 

We ought to remember this in the training and edu- 
cation of children. In all our management we must 
never forget, that the seeds of all mischief and wickedness 
are in their hearts. It is not enough to keep boys and 
girls at home, and shut out every outward temptation. 
They carry within thém a heart ready for any sin, and 
until that heart is changed they are not safe, whatever 
wedo. When children do wrong, it is a common practice 
to lay all the blame on bad companions. But it is mere. 
ignorance, blindness, and foolishness todo so. Bad com- 
panions are a great evil no doubt, and an evil to be avoided 
as much as possible. But no bad companion teaches a 
boy or girl half as much sin as their own hearts will sug- 
gest to them, unless they are renewed by the Spirit. The 
beginning of all wickedness is within. If parents were 
half as diligent in praying for their children’s conversion 
as they are in keeping them from bad company, their 
children would turn out far better than they do.* 


* The common arguments against “public school” education, ap- 
pear to me based on forgetfulness of our Lord’s teaching about the 
heart. Unquestionably there are many evils in “ public schools,” how- 


MARK, CHAP, VII. _ 143 


We see, in the last place, from this passage, what a 
black catalogue of evils the human heart contains. “ Out of 
the heart of men,” says our Lord, “ proceed evil thoughts, 
adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, an 
evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all these evil 
things come from within.” 

Let us distinctly understand, when we read these 
words, that our Lord is speaking of the human heart 
generally, He is not speaking only of the notorious 
. profligate, or the prisoner in the jail. He is speaking of 
all mankind. All of us, whether high or low, rich or 
poor, masters or servants, old or young, learned or un- 
learned—all of us have by nature such a heart as Jesus 
here describes. The seeds of all the evils here mentioned 
he hid within us all. They may lie dormant all our lives. 
They may be kept down by the fear of consequences— 
the restraint of public opinion—the dread of discovery— 
the desire to be thought respectable—and, above all, by 
the almighty grace of God. But every man has within 
him the root of every sin. 

How humble we ought to be, when we read these 
verses! ‘‘ We are all as an unclean thing” in God’s 


eyer carefully conducted. It must needs beso. We must expect it. 
But it is no less true that there are great dangers in private educa- 
tion, and dangers in their kind quite as formidable as any which beset 
a boy at public school. Of course no universal rule can be laid down. 
Regard must be had to individual character and temperament. But 
to suppose, as some seem to do, that boys educated at public schools 
must turn out ill, and boys educated at home must turn out well, is 
surely not wise. It is forgetting our Lord’s doctrine, that the heart 
is the principal source of evil. Without a change of heart a bov may 
be kept at home, and yet learn all manner of sin. 


144 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


sight. (Isai. Ixiv. 6.) He sees in each one of us count- 
less evils, which the world never sees at all, for He reads 
our hearts. Surely of all sins to which we are liable, 
self-righteousness is the most unreasonable and unbe- 
coming. . 

How thankful we ought to be for the Gospel, when we 
read these verses! That Gospel contains a complete 
provision for all the wants of our poor defiled natures. 
The blood of Christ can ‘cleanse us from all sin.” The 
Holy Ghost can change even our sinful hearts, and keep 
them clean, when changed. The man that does not glory 
in the Gospel, can surely know little of the plague that 
is within him. 

How watchful we ought to be, when we remember 
these verses! What a careful guard we ought to keep 
over our imaginations, our tongues, and our daily be- 
havior! At the head of the black list of our heart’s 
contents, stand ‘evil thoughts.” Let us never forget 
that. Thoughts are the parents of words and deeds, 
Let us pray daily for grace to keep our thoughts in order, 
and let us cry earnestly and fervently, ‘lead us not into 
temptation.” 





MARK VII. 24—20. 


24 And from thence he arose, and 
went into the borders of Tyre and 
Sidon, and entered into an house, and 
would have no man know zz: but he 
could not be hid. 

25 For a certain woman, whose 
young daughter had an unclean spir- 
it, heard of him, and camé and fell at 
his feet: 

26 The woman was a Greek, a Sy- 
rophenician by nation; and she be- 
sought him that he would cast forth 
the devil out of her daughter. 


27 But Jesus said unto her, Let the 
children first be filled : for it is not 
meet to take the children’s bread, 
and to cast 7¢ unto the dogs. 

28 And she answered and said unto 
him, Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under 
the table eat of the children’s crumbs. 

29 And he said unto her, For this 
saying go thy way; the devil is gone 
out of thy daughter. 

30 And when she was come to her 
house, she found the devil gone out, 
and her daughter laid upon the bed. 


MARK, CHAP. VIL. 145 


We know nothing of the woman who is here mentioned, 
beyond the facts that we here read. Her name, her 
former history, the way in which she was led to seek our 
Lord, though a Gentile, and dwelling in the borders of 
Tyre and Sidon—all these things are hidden from us. 
But the few facts that are related about this woman are 
full of precious instruction. Let us observe them, and 
learn wisdom, 

In the first place, this passage is meant to encourage us 
to pray for others. The woman who came to our Lord, 
in the history now before us, must doubtless have been 
in deep affliction. She saw a beloved child possessed by 
an unclean spirit. She saw her in a condition in which 
no teaching could reach the mind, and no medicine could 
heal the body—a condition only one degree better than 
death itself. She hears of Jesus, and beseeches Him to 
“cast forth the devil out of her daughter.” She prays 
for one who could not pray for herself, and never rests 
till her prayer is granted. By prayer she obtains the 
cure which no human means could obtain. Through the 
prayer of the mother, the daughter is healed. On her 
own behalf that daughter did not speak a word ; but her 
mother spoke for her to the Lord, and did not speak in 
vain. Hopeless and desperate as her case appeared, she 
had a praying mother, and where there is a praying 
mother there is always hope. 

The truth here taught is one of deep importance. 
The case here recorded is one that does not stand alone. 
Few duties are so strongly recommended by Scriptural 
example, as the duty of intercessory prayer. There is a 
long catalogue of instances in Scripture, which show the 

7 


146 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


benefits that may be conferred on others by praying for 
them. The nobleman’s son at Capernaum—the centu- 
rion’s servant—the daughter of Jairus, are all striking 
examples. Wonderful as it may seem, God is pleased to 
do great things for souls, when friends and relations are 
moved to pray for them. “ The effectual fervent prayer 
of a righteous man availeth much.” (James v. 16.) 

Fathers and mothers are especially bound to remember 
the case of this woman. They cannot give their children 
new hearts. They can give them Christian education, 
and show them the way of life ; but they cannot give 
them a will to choose Christ’s service, and a mind to love 
God. Yet there is one thing they can always do—they 
can pray for them. They can pray for the conversion 
of profligate sons, who will have their own way, and run 
greedily into sin. They can pray for the conversion of 
worldly daughters, who set their affections on things 
below, and love pleasure more than God. Such prayers 
are heard on high. Such prayers will often bring down 
blessings. Never, never let us forget that the children 
for whom many prayers have been offered, seldom 
finally perish. Let us pray more for our sons and 
daughters. Even when they will not let us speak to 
them about religion, they cannot prevent us speaking 
for them to God. 

In the second place, this passage is meant to teach us 
to persevere in praying for others. The woman whose 
history we are now reading, appeared at first to obtain 
nothing by her application to our Lord. On the contrary, 
our Lord’s reply was discouraging. Yet she did not 
give up in despair. She prayed on, and did not faint, 


MARK, CHAP. VII. 147 


She pressed her suit with ingenious arguments. She 
would take no refusal. She pleaded for a few “ crumbs” 
of mercy, rather than none at all. And through this 
holy importunity she succeeded. She heard at last these 
joyful words: “ For this saying go thy way ; the devil 
_ is gone out of thy daughter |” 

Perseverance in prayer is a point of great moment. 
Our hearts are apt to become cool and indifferent, and 
to think that it is no use to draw near to God. Our 
hands soon hang down, and our knees wax faint. Satan 
is ever laboring to draw us off from our prayers, and 
filling our minds with reasons why we may give them 
up. These things are true with respect to all prayers, 
but they are especially true with respect to intercessory 
prayer. It is always far more meagre than it ought to 
be. It is often attempted for a little season, and then 
left off. We see no immediate answer to our prayers. 
We see the persons for whose souls we pray, going on 
still in sin. We draw the conclusion that it is useless 
to pray for them, and allow our intercession to come to 
an end. 

In order to arm our minds with arguments for perse- 
verance in intercessory prayer, let us often study the 
case of this woman. Let us remember how she prayed 
on and did not faint, in the face of great discouragement. 
Let us mark how at last she went home rejoicing, and 
let us resolve, by God’s grace, to follow her example. 

Do we know what it is to pray for ourselves ? This, 
after all, is the first question for self-inquiry. The man 
who never speaks to God about his own soul, can 
know nothing of praying for others. He is as yet 


148 


Godless, Christless, and hopeless, and has to learn the 
very rudiments of religion. Let him awake, and call 
upon God. 

But do we pray for ourselves ? Then let us take heed 
that we pray for others also. Let us beware of selfish 
prayers—prayers which are wholly taken up with our own 
affairs, and in which there is no place for other souls be- 
side our own. Let us name all whom we love before God 
continually. Let us pray for all—the worst, the hard- 
est, and the most unbelieving. Let us continue praying 
for them year after year, in spite of their continued un- 
belief. God’s time of mercy may be a distant one. Our 
eyes may not see an answer to our intercession. The 
answer may not come for ten, fifteen, or twenty years. 
It may not come till we have exchanged prayer for 
praise, and are far away from. this world. But while we 
live, let us pray for others. It is the greatest kindness 
we can do to any one, to speak for him to our Lord Jesus 
Christ. The day of judgment will show that one of the 
greatest links in drawing some souls to God, has been 
the intercessory prayer of friends. ' 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


MARK VII. 31—37. 


31 And again, departing from the 


coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came} 


unto the sea of Galilee, through the 
midst of the coasts of Decapolis. 

82 And they bring unto him one 
that was deaf, and had an impediment 
in his speech ; and they beseech him 
to put his hand upon him. 

33 And he took him aside from the 
multitude, and put his fingers into 
his ears, and he spit, and touched his 
tongue ; 

84 And looking up to heaven, he 





sighed, and said unto him, Ephpha- 
tha, that is, Be opened. 

35 And straightway his ears were 
opened, and the string of his tongue 
was loosed, and he spake plain. 

36 And he charged them that they 

should tell no man: but the more he 
charged them, so much the more a 
great deal they published i¢ ; 
_ 37 And were beyond measure aston- 
ished, saying, He hath done all things 
well: he maketh both the deaf to 
hear, and the dumb to speak. 


MARK, CHAP. VII. 149 


Tur first thing that demands our notice in these verses, 
is the mighty miracle that ts here recorded. We read that 
they brought unto our Lord “ one that was deaf and had 
an impediment in his speech,” and besought Him that 
He would “ put His hand upon him.” At once the pe- 
tition is granted, and the cure is wrought. Speech and 
hearing are instantaneously given to the man by a word 
and a touch. ‘ Straightway his ears were opened, and 
the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plain.” 

We see but half the instruction of this passage, if we 
only regard it as an example of our Lord’s divine power. 
It is such an example, beyond doubt, but it is something 
more than that. We must look further, deeper, and 
lower than the surface, and we shall find in the passage 
precious spiritual truths. 

Here we are meant to see our Lord’s power to heal the 
spiritually deaf. He can give the chief of sinners a 
hearing ear. He can make him delight in listening to 
the very Gospel which he once ridiculed and despised. 

Here also we are meant to see our Lord’s power to 
heal the spiritually dumb. He can teach the hardest of 
transgressors to callupon God. He can put anew song 
in the mouth of him whose talk was once only of this 
worid. He can make the vilest of men speak of spirit- 
ual things, and testify the Gospel of the grace of God. 

When Jesus pours forth His Spirit, nothing is impos- 
sible. We must never despair of others. We must 
never regard our own hearts as too bad to be changed. 
He that healed the deaf and dumb still lives. The cases 
which moral philosophy pronounces hopeless, are not in- 
curable if they are brought to Christ. 


150 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The second thing which demands our notice in these 
verses, is the peculiar manner in which our Lord thought 
good to work the miracle here recorded. We are told that . 
when the deaf and dumb person was brought to Jesus, 
“He took him aside from the multitude, and put his 
fingers into his ears, and he spit and touched his tongue ; 
and looking up to heaven, he sighed”—and then, and 
not till then, came the words of commanding power, 
“ Ephphatha, that is, be opened.” 

There is undoubtedly much that is mysterious in these 
actions. We know not why they were used. It would 
have been as easy to our Lord to speak the word, and 
command health to return at once, as to do what He 
here did. His reasons for the course He adopted are not 
recorded. We only know that the result was the same 
as on other occasions—the man was cured, 

But there is one simple lesson to be learned from our 
Lord’s conduct on this occasion. That lesson is, that 
Christ was not tied to the use of any one means in doing 
His works among men. Sometimes He thought fit to 
work in one way, sometimes in another. His enemies 
were never able to say, that unless He employed certain 
invariable agency He could not work at all. 

We see the same thing going on still in the Church 
of Christ. We see continual proof that the Lord is not 
tied to the use of any one means exclusively in convey- 
ing grace to the soul. Sometimes He is pleased to work 
by the word preached publicly, sometimes by the word 
read privately. Sometimes He awakens people by 
sickness and affliction, sometimes by the rebukes or. 
counsel of friends. Sometimes He employs means of 


MARK, CHAP. VII. 151 


grace to turn people out of the way of sin. Sometimes 
He arrests their attention by some providence, without 
any means of grace at all. He will not have any means 
of grace made an idol and exalted, to the disparagement 
of other means. He will not have any means despised 
as useless, and neglected as of no value. All are good 
and valuable. All are in their turn employed for the 
same great end, the conversion of souls. All are in the 
hands of Him who “ giveth not account of His matters,” 
and knows best which to use, in each separate case that 
He heals. 

The last thing which demands our notice in these 
verses, is the remarkable testimony which was borne by those 
who saw the miracle here recorded, They said of our Lord, 
“He hath done all things well!” 

It is more than probable that those who said these 
words were little sensible of their full meaning, when 
applied to Christ. Like Caiaphas, they “‘ spoke not of 
themselves.” (John xi. 51.) . But the truth to which 
they gave utterance is full of deep and unspeakable 
comfort, and ought to be daily remembered by all true 
_ Christians. 

Let us remember it as we look back over the days 
past of our lives, from the hour of our conversion. “ Our 
Lord hath done all things well.” In the first bringing 
us out of darkness into marvellous light—in humbling 
us and teaching us our weakness, guilt, and folly—in 
stripping us of our idols, and choosing all our portions— 
in placing us where we are, and giving us what we have 
——how well everything has been done! How great the 
mercy that we have not had our own way ! 


152 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us remember it as we look forward to the days yet 
to come. We know not what they may be, bright or 
dark, many or few. But we know that we are in the 
hands of Him who “ doeth all things well.” He will not 
err in any of His dealings with us. He will take away 
and give—He will afflict and bereave—He will move 
and He will settle, with perfect wisdom, at the right 
time, in the right way. The great Shepherd of the 
sheep makes no mistakes. He leads every lamb of His 
flock by the right way to the city of habitation. 

We shall never see the full beauty of these words till 
the resurrection morning. We shall then look back 
over our lives, and know the meaning of everything that 
happened from first to last. We shall remember all the 
way by which we were led, and confess that all was 
“well done.” The why and the wherefore, the causes 
and the reasons of everything which now perplexes, will 
be clear and plain as the sun at noon-day. We shall 
wonder at our own past blindness, and marvel that we 
could ever have doubted our Lord’s love. ‘‘ Now we see 
through a glass darkly, but then face to face. Now we 
know in part, but then shall we know even as we are 
known.”* (1 Cor. xiii. 13.) 

* The reason why our Lord made use of the previous actions re- 
corded in this miracle—spitting, looking up to heaven, and sighing— 
is a question that has often perplexed commentators. Some obser- 
vations of Luther, quoted by Stier, are worth reading: 

“This sigh was not drawn from Christ on account of the single 
tongue and ear of this poor man; but it is a common sigh over all 
tongues and ears, yea over all hearts, bodies, and souls, and over all 
men from Adam to his last descendant.” 


“Our beloved Lord saw well what an amount of suffering and 
sorrow would be occasioned by tongues and ears. For the greatest 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. 


153 


MARK VIII. 1—13. 


1 In those days the multitude being 
very great, and having nothing to eat, 
Jesus called his disciples unto him, 
and saith unto them, 

2 I have compassion on the multi- 
tude, because they have now been 
with me three days, and have nothing 
to eat; 

8 And if I send them away fasting, 
to their own houses, they will faint 
by the way: for divers of them come 
from far. 

4 And his discip'es answered him, 
From whence can a man satisfy these 
. men with bread here in the wilder- 
ness ? 

5 And he asked them, How many 
loaves have ye? And they said, Seven. 

6 And he commanded the people to 
sit down on the ground: and he took 
the seven loaves, and gave thanks, 
and brake, and gave to his disciples 
to set before them; and they did set 
them betore the people. 





7 And they had a few small fishes; 
and he blessed, and commanded to 
set them also before them. 

8 So they did eat, and were filled: 
and they took up of the broken meaé 
that was left seven baskets. 

9 And they that had eaten were 
about four thousand: and he sent 
them away. 

10 And straightway he entered into 
a ship. with his disciples, and came 
into the parts of Dalmanutha. 

11 And the Pharisees came forth, 
and began to question with him, 
seeking of Lim asign from heaven, 
tempting him. 

12 And he sighed deeply in his 
spirit, and saith, Why doth this gene- 
ration seek after a sign? verily I say 
unto you, There shall no sign be giv- 
en unto this generation. 

13 And he left them, and entering 
into the ship aguin departed to the 
other side. 


OncE more we see our Lord feeding a great multitude 
with a few loaves and fishes. He knew the heart of man. 
He saw the rise of cavillers and skeptics, who would 
question the reality of the wonderful works He performed. 
By repeating the mighty miracle here recorded, He stops 
the mouth of all who are not wilfully blind to evidence. 
Publicly, and before four thousand witnesses, He shows 
His almighty power a second time. 

Let us observe in this passage how great as the kindness 
and compassion of our Lord Jesus Christ. He saw around 
Him a “very great multitude,” who had nothing to eat. 
He knew that the great majority were following Him 


mischief which has been inflicted on Christianity, has not arisen from 
tyrants (with persecution, murder, and pride against the word), but 
from that little bit of flesh which abides between the jaws. ‘This it is 
that inflicts the greatest injury upon the kingdom of God,” 


154 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


from no other motive than idle curiousity, and had no 
claim whatever to be regarded as His disciples. Yet 
when He saw them hungry and destitute, He pitied 
them: “I have compassion on the multitude, because 
they have now been with me three days, and have 
nothing to eat.” 

The feeling heart of our Lord Jesus Christ appears in 
these words. He has compassion even on those who are 
not His people—the faithless, the graceless, the followers 
of this world. He feels tenderly for them, though they 
know it not. He died for them, though they care little 
for what He did on the cross. He would receive them 
graciously, and pardon them freely, if they would only 
repent and believe on Him. Let us ever beware of 
measuring the love of Christ by any human measure. 
He has a special love, beyond doubt, for His own believ- 
ing people. But He has also a general love of compas- 
sion, even for the unthankful and the evil. His love 
* passeth knowledge.” (Hphes. iii. 19.) . 

Let us strive to make Jesus our pattern in this, as well 
as in everything else. Let us be kind, and compassion- 
ate, and pitiful, and courteous to all men. Let us be 
ready to do good to all men, and not only to friends and 
the household of faith. Let us carry into practice our 
Lord’s injunction, ‘‘ Love your enemies, bless them that 
curse you, do good to them that hate you.” (Matt. v. 44.) 
This is to show the mind of Christ. This is the right 
way to heap coals of fire on an enemy’s head, and to 
melt foes into friends. (Rom. xii. 20.) 

Let us observe, in the second place, from this passage, 
that with Christ nothing is impossible. The disciples said, 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. 155 


“from whence can a man satisfy these men with bread 
here in the wilderness?” They might well say so. 
Without the hand of Him who first made the world out 
of nothing, the thing could not be. Butin the almighty 
hands of Jesus seven loavés and a few fishes were made 
sufficient to satisfy four thousand men. Nothing is too 
hard for the Lord. 

We must never allow ourselves to doubt Christ’s power 
to supply the spiritual wants of all His people. He has 
“bread enough and to spare” for every soul that trusts 
in Him. Weak, infirm, corrupt, empty as believers feel 
themselves, let them never despair, while Jesus lives. In 
Him there is a boundless store of mercy and grace, laid 
up for the use of all His believing members, and ready 
to be bestowed on all who ask in prayer. “It pleased the 
Father that in Him should all fulness dwell.” (Colos.i. 19.) 

Let us never doubt Christ’s providential care for the 
temporal wants of all His people. He knows their cir- 
cumstances. He is acquainted with all their necessities. 
He will never allow them to lack anything that is really 
for their good. His heart is not changed since He as- 
cended up on high, and sat down on the right hand of 
God. He still lives who had compassion on the hungry 
crowd in the wilderness, and supplied their need. How 
much more, may we suppose, will He supply the need of 
those who trust Him? He will supply them without 
fail. Their faith may occasionally be tried. They may 
sometimes be kept waiting, and be brought very low. 
But the believer shall never be left entirely destitute. 
‘«‘ Bread shall be given him ; his water shall be sure,” 
(Isaiah xxxiii. 16.) 


156 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us observe, in the last place, how much sorrow un= 
belief occasions to our Lord Jesus Christ. We are told 
that when “the Pharisees began to question with Him, 
seeking of Him a sign from heaven, tempting Him, He 
sighed deeply in His spirit.” There was a deep meaning 
in that sigh! It came from a heart which mourned 
over the ruin that these wicked men were bringing on 
their own souls. Enemies as they were, Jesus could not 
behold them hardening themselves in unbelief without 
sorrow. 

The feeling which our Lord Jesus Christ here ex- 
pressed, will always be the feeling of all true Christians. 
Grief over the sins of others is one leading evidence of 
true grace. The man who is really converted, will 
always regard the unconverted with pity and concern. 
This was the mind of David: “I beheld the transgres- 
sors, and was grieved.” (Psalm cxix. 158.) This was 
the mind of the godly in the days of Ezekiel: ‘“‘ They 
sighed and cried for the abominations done in the land.” © 
(lizek. ix. 4.) This was the mind of Lot: ‘‘ He vexed 
his righteous soul with the unlawful deeds” of those 
around him, (2 Peter ii. 8.) This was the mind of 
Paul: “I have great heaviness and continual sorrow for 
my brethren.” (Rom. ix. 2.) In all these cases we see 
something of the mind of Christ. As the great Head 
feels, so feel the members. They all grieve when they 
see sin. 

Let us leave the passage with solemn self-inquiry. Do 
we know anything of likeness to Christ, and fellow-feeling 
with Him ? Do we feel hurt, and pained, and sorrow- 
ful, when we see men continuing in sin and unbelief ? 


157 


Do we feel grieved and concerned about the state of the 
unconverted ? 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. 


These are heart-searching questions, 
and demand serious consideration. There are few surer 
marks of an unconverted heart, than carelessness and 
indifference about the souls of others. 

Finally, let us never forget that unbelief and sin are 
just as great a cause of grief to our Lord now, as they 
were eighteen hundred years ago. Let us strive and 
pray that we may not add to that grief by any act or 
deed of ours, The sin of grieving Christ is one which 
many commit continually without thought or reflection. 
He that sighed over the unbelief of the Pharisees is still 
unchanged. Can we doubt that when He sees some 
persisting in unbelief at the present day, He is grieved ? 
From such sin may we be delivered ! 





MARK VIII. 14—21. 


14 Now the disciples had forgotten 
to take bread, neither had they in the 
ship with them more than one loaf. 

15 And he charged them, saying, 
Take heed, beware of the leaven of 
the Pharisees, and gf the leaven of 
Herod. 

16 And they reasoned among them- 
selves, saying, Jt is because we have 
no bread. 

17 And when Jesus knew ti, he 
saith unto them, Why reason ye, be- 
cause ye have no bread ? perceive ye 
not yet, neither understand? have ye 





your heart yet hardened ? 

18 Having eyes, see ye not? and 
having ears, hear ye not? and do ye 
not remember ? 

19 When I brake the five loaves 
among five thousand, how many bas- 
kets full of fragments took ye up? 
They say unto him, Twelve. 

20 And when the seven among four 
thousand, how many baskets full of 
fragments took yeup? And they said, 
Seven. 

21 And he said unto them, How is 
it that ye do not understand ¢ 


Let us notice the solemn warning which our Lord gives 
to His disciples at the beginning of this passage. He 
says, “ Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, 
_and of the leaven of Herod.” 

We are not left to conjecture the meaning of this 


158 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


warning. This is made clear by the parallel passage in 
St. Matthew’s Gospel. We there read that Jesus did not 
mean the leaven of “ bread,” but the leaven of “doctrine.” 
The self-righteousness and formalism of the Pharisees— 
the worldliness and scepticism of the courtiers of Herod, 
were the object of our Lord’s caution. Against both 
He bids His disciples be on their guard. 

Such warnings are of deep importance. It would be 
well for the Church of Christ, if they had been more 
remembered. The assaults of persecution from without 
have never done half so much harm to the Church, as 
the rise of false doctrines within. False prophets and 
false teachers within the camp have done far more mis- 
chief in Christendom than all the bloody persecutions of 
the emperors of Rome. The sword of the foe has never 
done such damage to the cause of truth as the tongue 
and the pen. 

The doctrines which our Lord specifies, are precisely 
those which have always been found to inflict most - 
injury on the cause of Christianity. Formalism on the 
one hand, and scepticism on the other, have been chronic 
diseases in the professing Church of Christ. In every age 
multitudes of Christians have been infected by them. In 
every age men need to watch against them, and be on 
their guard. 

The expression used by our Lord in speaking of false 
doctrine is singularly forcible and appropriate. He calls 
it “leaven.” No word more suitable could have been 
employed. It exactly describes the small beginnings of 
false doctrine—the subtle quiet way in which it insensi- 
bly pervades a man’s religion—the deadly power with 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. 159 


which it changes the whole character of his Christianity. 
Here, in fact, lies the great danger of false doctrine, If 
it approached us under its true colors, it would do little 
harm. The great secret of its success is its subtlety and 
likeness to truth. Every error in religion has been said 
to be a truth abused. 

Let us often ‘examine ourselves whether we be in the 
faith,” and beware of “leaven.” Let us no more trifle 
with a little false doctrine, than we would trifle with a 
little immorality or a little lie. Once admit it into our 
hearts, and we never know how far it may lead us 
astray. The beginning of departure from the pure truth 
is like the letting out of waters—first a drop, and at last 
a torrent, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 
(Gal. v. 9.) 

Let us notice the dull understanding of the disciples, 
when our Lord gave the warning of this passage. They 
thought that the “leaven” of which He spoke must be the 
leaven of bread.- It never struck them that He was 
speaking of doctrine. They drew from Him the sharp 
reproof: “‘ Perceive ye not yet, neither understand ? 
have ye your heart yet hardened ? How isit that yedo 
not understand ?” Believers, converted, renewed, as 
the disciples were, they were still dull of apprehension 
in spiritual things. Their eyes were still dim, and their 
perception slow in the matters of the kingdom of God. 

We shall find it useful to ourselves to remember what 
is here recorded of the disciples. It may help to correct 
the high thoughts which we are apt to entertain of our 
own wisdom, and to keep us humble and lowly-minded. 
We must not fancy that we know everything as soon as 


160 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


we are converted. Our knowiedge, like all our graces, 
is always imperfect, and never so far from perfection as 
at our first beginning in the service of Christ. There is 
more ignorance in our hearts than we are at all aware of. 
“Tf any man think that he knoweth anything, he know- 
eth nothing yet as he ought to know.” (1 Cor. viii. 2.) 
Above all, we shall find it useful to remember what is 
here recorded, in dealing with young Christians. We 
must not expect perfection in a new convert. We must 
not set him down as graceless and godless and a false 
professor, because at first he sees but half the truth and 
commits many mistakes. His heart may be right in the 
sight of God, and yet, like the disciples, he may be very 
slow of understanding in the things of the Spirit. We 
must bear with him patiently, and not cast him aside, 
We must give him time to grow in grace and knowledge, 
and his latter end may find him ripe in wisdom, like 
Peter and John. Itisa blessed thought that Jesus, our 
Master in heaven, despises none of His people. Mar-— 
vellous and blameworthy as their slowness to learn un- 
doubtedly is, His patience never gives way. He goes on 
teaching them, ‘line upon line, precept upon precept.” 
Let us do likewise. Let it be a rule with us never to 
despise the weakness and dulness of young Christians. 
Wherever we see a spark of true grace, however dim and 
mixed with infirmity, let us be helpful and kind. Let 
us do as we would be done by. . 





MARK VIII. 22—26. 


22 And he cometh to Bethsai-| unto him, and besought him 
da; and they bring a blind man|him. ’ oug: to touch 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. 161 


28 And he took the blind man by} 25 After that he put his hands 
the hand, and led him out of the again upon his eyes, and bade him 
town; and when he had spit on his|look up: and he was restored, and 
eyes, and put his hands upon him, he | saw every man clearly. 


asked him if he saw ought. 26 And he sent him away to his 
24 And he looked up, and said, I} house, saying, Neither go into the 
see men as trees, walking. town, nor tell i¢ to any in the town. 


WE do not know the reason of the peculiar means em- 
ployed by our Lord. Jesus Chirst, in working the miracle 
recorded in these verses. We sce a blind man miracu- 
lously healed. We know that a word from our Lord’s 
mouth, or a touch of His hand would have been guf- 
ficient to effect a cure. But we see Jesus taking this 
blind man by the hand—leading him out of the town— 
spitting on his eyes—putting His hands on him, and 
then, and not till then, restoring his sight. And the 
meaning of all these actions, the passage before us leaves 
entirely unexplained. 

But it is well to remember, in reading passages of this 
kind, that the Lord is not tied to the use of any one 
means. In the conversion of men’s souls there are 
diversities of operation, but it is the same Spirit which 
converts. So also in the healing of men’s bodies there 
were varieties of agency employed by our Lord, but it 
was the same divine power that effected the cure. In 
all His works God is a sovereign. He giveth not ag 

count of any of His matters. 
One thing in the passage demands our special obser- 
vation. That thing is the gradual nature of the cure 
which our Lord performed on this blind man. He did 
not deliver him from his blindness at once, but by de- 
grees. He might have done it in a moment, but He 
chose to do it step by step. First the blind man said 


162 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


that he only saw “ men as trees walking.” Afterwards 
his eyesight was restored completely, and he “‘ saw every 
man clearly.” In this respect the miracle stands entirely 
alone. 

We need hardly doubt that this gradual cure was 
meant to be an emblem of spiritual things. We may be 
sure that there was a deep meaning in every word and 
work of our Lord’s earthly ministry, and here, as in other 
places, we shall find a useful lesson. 

Let us see then in this gradual restoration to sight, a 
vivid illustration of the manner in which the Spirit fre- 
quently works in the conversion of souls. We are all 
naturally blind and ignorant in the matters which con- 
cern our souls, Conversion is an illumination, a change 
from darkness to light, from blindness to seeing the king- 
dom of God. Yet few converted people see things dis- 
tinctly at first. The nature and proportion of doctrines, 
practices, and ordinances of the Gospel are dimly seen 
by them, and imperfectly understood. They are like the . 
man before us, who at first saw men as trees walking. 
Their vision is dazzled and unaccustomed to the new 
world into which they have been introduced. It is not 
till the work of the Spirit has become deeper and their 
experience been somewhat matured, that they see all 
things clearly, and give to each part of religion its proper 
place. This is the history of thousands of God’s children. 
They begin with seeing men as trees walking—they end 
with seeing all clearly. Happy is he who has learned 
this lesson well, and is humble and distrustful of his 
own judgment. 

Finally, let us see in the gradual cure of this blind 


MARK, CHAP, VIII, 168 


man, a striking picture of the present position of Christ’s 
believing people in the world, compared with that which 
is to come. We see in part and know in part in the 
present dispensation. We are like those that travel by 
night. We know not the meaning of much that is 
passing around us. In the providential dealings of God 
with His children, and in the conduct of many of God’s 
saints, we see much that we cannot understand—and 
cannot alter. In short, we are like him that saw ‘men 
as trees walking.” r | 

But let us look forward and take comfort. The time 
comes when we shall see all “clearly.” The night is-far 
spent. The day is at hand. Let us be content to wait, 
and watch, and work, and pray. When the day of the 
Lord comes, our spiritual eyesight will be perfected. 
We shall see as we have been seen, and know as we have 
been known. 


MARK VIII. 27—33. 


27 And Jesus went out, and his] that the Son of man must suffer many 


disciples, into the towns of Caesarea 
Philippi: and by the way he asked 
his disciples, saying unto them, 
Whom do men say that I am? 

28 And they answered, John the 
Baptist: but some say, Elias; and 
others, One of the prophets. 

99 And he saith unto them, But 
whom say ye thatlam? And Peter 
answereth and saith unto him, Thou 
art the Christ. 

30 And he charged them that they 
should tell no man of him. 

31 And he began to teach them, 


things, and be rejected of the elders, 
and of the Chief Priests, and Scribes, 
and be killed, and after three days 
rise again. 

82 And he spake that saying open- 
ly. And Peter took him, and began te 
rebuke him. . 

83 But when he had turned about 
and looked on his disciples,he rebuked 
Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, 
Satan: for thou savorest not the 
things that be of God, but the things 
that be of men. 


TE circumstances here recorded are of great import- 
ance. They took place during a journey, and arose out 


164 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of a conversation “by the way.” Happy are those 
journeys, in which time is not wasted on trifles, but 
redeemed as far as possible for the consideration of 
serious things. 

Let us observe the variety of opinions about Christ, 
which prevailed among the Jews. Some said that He 
was John the Baptist—some Elias—and others one of 
the prophets. In short every kind of opinion appears to 
have been current, excepting that one which was true. 

We may sce the same thing on every side at the 
present day. Christ and his Gospel are just as little 
understood in reality, and are the subject of just as many 
different opinions as they were eighteen hundred years 
ago. Many know the name of Christ, acknowledge Him 
as one who came into the world to save sinners, and 
regularly worship in buildings set apart for His service. 
Few thoroughly realize that He is very God—the one 
Mediator—the one High Priest—the only source of life 
and peace—their own Shepherd and their own Friend. - 
Vague ideas about Christ are still very common. Intel- 
ligent experimental acquaintance with Christ is:still very 
rare. May we never rest till we can say of Christ, “ My 
beloved is mine and I am His.” (Cant, 11,16.) This is 
saving knowledge. This is life eternal. 

‘ Let us observe the good confession of faith which the 
apostle Peter witnessed. He replied to our Lord’s question, 
“Whom say ye that am?” ‘ Thou art the Christ.” 

This was a noble answer, when the circumstances 
under which it was made are duly considered. It was 
made when Jesus was poor in condition, without honor, 
majesty, wealth, or power. It was made when the heads 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. 165 © 


of the Jewish nation, both in church and state, refused 
to receive Jesus as the Messiah. Yet even then Simon 
Peter says, “Thou art the Christ.” His strong faith 
was not stumbled by our Lord’s poverty and low estate. 
His confidence was not shaken by the opposition of 
Scribes and Pharisees, and the contempt of rulers and 
priests. None of these things moved Simon Peter. He 
believed that He whom he followed, Jesus of Nazareth, 
was the promised Saviour, the true Prophet greater than 
Moses, the long-predicted Messiah. He declared it 
boldly and unhesitatingly, as the creed of himself and 
his few companions: “ Thou art the Christ.” 

There is much that we may profitably learn from 
Peter’s conduct on this occasion. Erring and unstable 
as he sometimes was—the faith he exhibited, in the 
passage now before us, is well worthy of imitation. Such 
bold confessions as his, are the truest evidence of living 
faith, and are required in every age, if men will prove 
themselves to be Christ’s disciples. We too must be 
ready to confess Christ, even as Peter did. We shall 
never find our Master and His doctrine popular. We 
must be prepared to confess Him, with few on our side, 
and many against us. But let us take courage and 
walk in Peter’s steps, and we shall not fail of receiving 
Peter’s reward. Jesus takes notice of those who confess 
Him before men, and will one day confess them as His 
servants before an assembled world. 

Let us observe the full declaration which our Lord makes 
of His own coming death and resurrection. We read that 
‘He began to teach them, that the Son of man must 
suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and of 


166 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the chief priests, an scribes, and be killed, and after 
three days rise again.” 

The events here announced must have sounded strange 
to the disciples. To be told that their beloved Master, 
after all His mighty works, would soon be put to death, 
must have been heavy tidings and past their understand- 
ing. But the words which convey the announcement 
are scarcely less remarkable than the event: “‘ He must 
suffer—He must be killed—He must rise again.” 

Why did our Lord say “must?” Did He mean that 
He was unable to escape suffering—that He must die 
by compulsion of a stronger power than His own? Im- 
possible. This could not have been His meaning. Did 
He mean that He must needs die to give agreat example ~ 
to the world of self-sacrifice and self-denial, and that 
this, and this alone, made His death necessary ? Once 
more it may be replied, ‘‘ Impossible.” There is a far 
deeper meaning in the word “‘ must” suffer and be killed. 
He meant that His death and passion were necessary in © 
order to make atonement for man’s sin. Without shed- 
ding His blood there could be no remission. Without 
the sacrifice of His body on the cross, there could be no 
satisfaction to God’s holy law. He ‘‘ must” suffer to 
make reconciliation for iniquity. He “ must” die, because 
without His death as a propitiatory offering, sinners could 
. never have life. He “‘ must” suffer, because without His 
vicarious sufferings, our sins could never be taken away. 
In a word, He “ must” be delivered for our offences, and 
raised again for our justification. 

Here is the centre truth of the Bible. Let us never 
forget that. All other truths compared to this are of 


% 


MARK, CHAP. VIII. j 167 


secondary importance. Whatever views we hold of re- 
ligious truth, let us see that we have a firm grasp upon 
the atoning efficacy of Christ’s death. Let the truth so 
often proclaimed by our Lord to His disciples, and so 
diligently taught by the disciples to the world, be the 
foundation truth in our Christianity. In life and in 
death, in health and in sickness, let us lean all our 
weight on this mighty fact—that though we have sinned 
Christ hath died for sinners—and that though we deserve 
nothing, Christ hath suffered on the cross for us, and 
by that suffering purchased heaven for all that believe 
in Him. 

Finally, let us observe in this passage the strange mia- 
ture of grace and infirmity which may be found in the heart 
of a true Christian. We see that very Peter who had just 
witnessed so noble a confession, presuming to rebuke his 
Master because He spoke of suffering and dying. We 
see him drawing down on himself the sharpest rebuke 
which ever fell from our Lord’s lips during His earthly 
ministry : “Get thee behind me, Satan: thou savorest 
not the things that be of God, but the things that be 
of man.” 

We have here a humbling proof that the best of saints 
is a poor fallible creature. Here was ignorance in Simon 
Peter. He did not understand the necessity of our 
Lord’s death, and would have actually prevented His 
sacrifice on the cross. Here was se/fconceit in Simon 
Peter. He thought he knew what was right and fitting 
for his Master better than his Master Himself, and actu- 
ally undertook to show the Messiah a more excellent 
way. And last, but not least, Simon Peter did it all 


168 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


with the best intentions! He meant well. His motives 
were pure. But zeal and earnestness are no excuse for 
error. A man may mean well and yet fall into tremen- 
dous mistakes. 

Let us learn humility from the facts here recorded. 
Let us beware of being puffed up with our own spiritual 
attainments, or exalted by the praise of others. Let us 
never think that we know everything and are not likely 
to err. We see that it is but a little step from making 
a good confession to being a “Satan” in Christ’s way. 
Let us pray daily, “ Hold thou me up—keep me—teach 
me—let me not err.” 

Lastly, let us learn charity towards others from the 
facts here recorded. Let us not be in a hurry to cast off 
our brother as graceless because of errors and mistakes. 
Let us remember that his heart may be right in the 
sight of God, like Peter’s, though like Peter he may for 
atime turn aside. Rather let us call to mind St. Paul’s 
advice, and act uponit. ‘If a man be overtaken in a 
fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the 
spirit of meekness ; considering thyself, lest thou also 
be tempted.” (Gal. vi. 1.) 





MARK VIII. 34—88. 


84 And when he had called the)if he shall gain the whole world, and 
people wnto him with his disciples | lose his own soul ? 


also, he said unto them, Whosoever 
will come after me, let him deny him- 
self, and take up his cross, and follow 
me. 

85 For whosoever will save his life 
shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose 
his life for my sake and the Gospel’s, 
the same shall save it. 

36 For what shall it profit a man, 


37 Or what shall a man give in ex- 
change for his soul ? 

38 Whosoever therefore shall be 
ashamed of me and of my words in 
this adulterous and sinful genera- 
tion; of him also shall the Son of 
man be ashamed, when he cometh in 
the glory of his Father with the holy 
angels. 


MARK, CHAP, VIII. 169 


THE words of our Lord Jesus Christ in this passage are 
peculiarly weighty and solemn. They were spoken to 
correct the mistaken views of His disciples, as to the 
nature of His kingdom. But they contain truths of the 
deepest importance to Christians in every age of the 
Church. The whole passage is one which should often 
form the subject of private meditation. 

We learn, for one thing, from these verses, the absolute 
necessity of self-denial, of we would be Christ's disciples, and 
be saved. What saith our Lord? ‘* Whosoever will 
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his 
cross, and follow me.” 

Salvation is undoubtedly all of grace. It is offered 
freely in the Gospel to the chief of sinners, without 
money and without price. ‘‘ By grace are ye saved 
through faith, and that not of yourselves ; it is the gift of 
God: not of works, lest any man should boast.” (Ephes. 
ii. 8, 9.) But all who accept this great salvation, must 
prove the reality of their faith by carrying the cross after 
Christ. They must not think to enter heaven without 
trouble, pain, suffering, and conflict on earth. They must 
be content to take up the cross of doctrine, and the cross 
of practice—the cross of holding a faith which the world 
despises, and the cross of living a life which the world 
ridicules as too strict and righteous overmuch. They 
must be willing to crucify the flesh, to mortify the deeds 
of the body, to fight daily with the devil, to come out 
from the world, and to lose their lives, if needful, for 
Christ’s sake and the Gospel’s. These are hard sayings, 
but they admit of no evasion. The words of our Lord 
are plain and unmistakeable. If we will not carry the 
cross, we shall never wear the crown. 


170 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us not be deterred from Christ’s service by fear 
of the cross. Heavy as that cross may seem, Jesus will 
give us grace to bear it. “I can do all things through 
Christ which strengtheneth me.” (Phil. iv, 13.) Thou-_ 
sands and tens of thousands have borne it before us, and 
have found Christ’s yoke easy, and Christ’s burden light. 
No good thing on earth was ever attained without 
trouble. ~ We cannot surely expect that without trouble 
we can enter the kingdom of God. Let us go forward 
boldly, and allow no difficulty to keep us back. The 
cross by the way is but for a few years. The glory at 
the end is for evermore. 

Let us often ask ourselves whether our Christianity 
costs us anything ? Does it entail any sacrifice? Has 
it the true stamp of heaven ? Does it carry with it any 
cross >—If not, we may well tremble and be afraid. We 
have everything to learn. A religion which costs noth- 
ing, is worth nothing. It will do us no good in the life 
that now is. It will lead to no salvation in the life to 
come. 

We learn, for another thing, from these verses, the 
unspeakable value of the soul. What saith our Lord ? 
‘What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole 
world, and lose his own soul?” These words were 
meant to stir us up to exertion and self-denial. They 
ought to ring in our ears like a trumpet, every morning 
when we rise from our beds, and every night when we 
lie down. May they be deeply graven in our memories, 
and never effaced by the devil and the world ! 

We have all souls that will live for evermore. 
Whether we know it or not, we all carry about with us 
something which will live on when our bodies are moul- 


MARK, CHAP, VIII. 171 


dering in the grave. We have all souls, for which we 
shall have to give account to God. It is an awful 
thought, when we consider how little attention most men 
give to anything except this world. But it is true. 

Any man may lose his own soul. He cannot save it : 
Christ alone can do that. But he can lose it, and that 
in many different ways. He may murder it, by loving 
sin and cleaving to the world. He may poison it by 
choosing a religion of lies, and believing man-made 
superstitions. He may starve it, by neglecting all means 
of grace, and refusing to receive into his heart the Gospel. 
Many are the ways that lead to the pit. Whatever way 
a man takes, he, and he alone, is accountable for it. 
Weak, corrupt, fallen, impotent as human nature is, man 
has a mighty power of destroying, ruining, and losing 
his own soul, 

The whole world cannot make up to a man the loss of 
his soul. The possession of all the treasures that the 
world contains, would not compensate for eternal ruin, 
They would not satisfy us, and make us happy while we 
had them. They could only be enjoyed for a few years, 
at best, and must then be left for evermore. Of all un- 
profitable and foolish bargains that man can make, the 
worst is that of giving up his soul’s salvation for the sake 
of this present world. It is a bargain of which thousands, 
like Esau, who sold his birth-right for a mess of pottage, 
have repented—but many, unhappily, like Esau, have 
repented too late. 

Let these sayings of our Lord sink deep into our hearts. 
Words are inadequate to express their importance. May 
we remember them in the hour of temptation, when the 


172 EXPOSITORY THOUGATS. 


soul seems a small and unimportant thing, and the world 
seems very bright and great. May we remember them 
in the hour of persecution, when we are tried by the fear 
of man, and half inclined to forsake Christ. In hours 
like these, let us call to mind this mighty question of our 
Lord, and repeat it to ourselves, “‘ What shall it profit a 
man if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul ?” 

We learn, in the last place, from these verses, the great 
danger of being ashamed of Christ. What saith our 
Lord ? “ Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my 
words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him 
also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when He cometh 
in the glory of His Father with the holy angels.” 

When can it be said of any one, that he is ashamed 
of Christ ? We are guilty of it, when we are ashamed 
of letting people see that we believe and love the doctrines 
of Christ, that we desire to live according to the com- 
mandment of Christ, and that we wish to be reckoned 
among the people of Christ. Christ’s doctrine, laws, and” 
people were never popular, and never will be. The man 
who boldly confesses that he loves them, is sure to bring 
on himself ridicule and persecution. Whosoever shrinks 
from this confession from fear of this ridicule and per- 
secution, is ashamed of Christ, and comes under the 
sentence of the passage before us. 

Perhaps there are few of our Lord’s sayings which are 
more condemning than this. ‘‘ The fear of man” does 
indeed “‘ bring a snare.” (Prov. xxix. 25.) There are 
thousands of men who would face a lion, or storm a 
breach, if duty called them, and fear nothing—and yet 
would be ashamed of being thought “ religious’—and 


MARK, CHAP, IX. 173 


would not dare to avow that they desired to please Christ 
rather than man. Wonderful indeed is the power of 
ridicule !_ Marvellous is the bondage in which men live 
to the opinion of the world ! 

Let us all pray daily for faith and courage to confess 
Christ before men, Of sin, or worldliness, or unbelief, 
we may well be ashamed. We ought never to be 
ashamed of Him who died for us on the cross. In spite 
of laughter, mockery, and hard words, let us boldly 
avow that we serve Christ. Let us often look forward to 
the day of His second coming, and remember what He 


says in this place. 


Better a thousand times confess 


Christ now, and be despised by man, than be disowned 
by Christ before His Father in the day of judgment. 





MARK IX. 1—18. 


1 And he said unto them, Verily I 
say unto you, That there be some of 
them that stand here, which shall not 
taste of death, till they have seen the 
kingdom of God come with power. 

2 And after six days Jesus taketh 
with him Peter, and James, and John, 
and leadeth them up into an high 
mountain apart by themselves: and 
he was transfigured before them. 

8 And his raiment became shining, 
exceeding white as snow; so as no 
fuller on earth can white them. 

4 And there appeared unto them 
Elias with Moses: and they were 
talking with Jesus. 

5 And Peter answered and said to 
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be 
here: and let us make three taberna- 
cles ; one for thee, and one for Moses, 
and one for Elias. 

6 For he wist not what to say; for 
they were sore afraid. 

7 And there was a cloud that over- 
shadowed them: anda voice came 
out of the cloud, saying, This is my 





beloved Son: hear him. 

8 And suddenly, when they had 
looked round about, they saw no man 
any more, save Jesus only with them- 
selves. 

9 And as they came down from the 
mountain, he charged them that they 
should tell no man what things they 
had seen, till the Son of man was 
risen from the dead. 

10 And they kept that saying with 
themselves, questioning one with an- 
other what the rising from the dead 
should mean. 

11 And they asked him, saying, 
Why say the Scribes that Klas must 
first come ? 

12 And he answered and told them, 
Elias verily cometh first, and restor- 
eth all things; and how it is written 
of the Son of man, that he must suffer 
many things, and be set at nought. 

13 But I say unto you, That Elias 
is indeed come, and they have done 
unto him whatsoever they listed, as 
it is written of him. 


174 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


THE connection of this passage with the end of the last 
chapter ought never to be overlooked. Our Lord had 
been speakimg of His own coming death and passion—of 
the necessity of self-denial, if men would be His disciples 
—of the need of losing our lives, if we would have them 
saved.—But in the same breath he goes on to speak of 
His future kingdom and glory. He takes off the edge of 
His “hard sayings,” by promising a sight of that glory 
to some of those who heard Him. And in the history of 
the transfiguration, which is here recorded, we see that 
promise fulfilled. 

The first thing which demands our notice in these 
verses, is the marvellous vision they contain of the glory 
which Christ and His people shall have at His second com- 
ing. ‘, 

There can be no doubt that this was one of the prin- 
cipal purposes of the transfiguration. It was meant to 
teach the disciples, that though their Lord was lowly and 
poor in appearance now, He would one day appear in 
such royal majesty as became the Son of God. It was 
meant to teach them that when their Master came the 
second time, His saints, like Moses and Elias, would 
appear with Him. It was meant to remind them, that 
though reviled and persecuted now, because they belonged 
to Christ, they would one day be clothed with honor, 
and be partakers of their Master’s glory.* 

ie The analogy between the glory assumed by our Lord at His 
transfiguration, and the glory which the saints shall receive at His 
resurrection, is well pointed out by Victor Antiochenus in a 
passage quoted by Du Veil. He says, ‘‘We must not suppose 


that there is to be any change of the natural form of man in the 
kingdom of heaven. For as the appearance of Christ. was not in 


MARK, CHAP, IX. 175 


_ We have reason to thank God for this vision. We are 
often tempted to give up Christ’s service, because of the 
cross and affliction which it entails. We sce few with us, 
and many against us. We find our names cast out as 
evil, and all manner of evil said of us, because we believe 
and love the Gospel. Year after year we see our com- 
panions in Christ’s service removed by death, and we feel 
as if we knew little about them, except that they are 
gone to an unknown world, and that we are left alone. 
All these things are trying to flesh and blood. No won- 
der that the faith of believers sometimes languishes, and 
their eyes fail while they look for their hope. 

Let us see in the story of the transfiguration, a remedy 
for such doubting thoughts as these. The vision of the 
holy mount is a gracious pledge that glorious things are 
in store for the people of God. Their crucified Saviour 
shall come again in power and great glory. His saints 
shall all come with Him, and are in safe keeping until 
that happy day. We may wait patiently. ‘“ When 
Christ, who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also 
appear with Him in glory.” (Colos, iii. 4.) 

The second thing which demands our notice in this 
passage, is the strong expression of the apostle Peter, when 
he saw his Lord transfigured. ‘“‘ Master,” he said, “ it is 
good for us to be here.” 

No doubt there was much in this saying, which cannot 
be commended. It showed an ignorance of the purpose 
itself changed, but only illumined (or glorified)—so, also, the just 
who will be conformed to His glorious body, will not be changed as 
to their outward form. Their bodies will only receive a certain ac- 


cession of splendor and light, which St. Paul calls a change, (1 Cor. 
xv. 62,) but the evangelists a transfiguration.” 


176 _ EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


for which Jesus came into the world, to suffer and to die. 
It showed a forgetfulness of his brethen, who were not 
with him, and of the dark world which so much needed 
his Master’s presence. Above all, the proposal which he 
made at the same time to ‘“ build three tabernacles” for 
Moses, Elias, and Christ, showed a low view of his Mas- 
ter’s dignity, and implied that he did not know that a 
greater than Moses and Elias was there. In all these 
respects the apostle’s exclamation is not to be praised, 
but to be blamed. 

But having said this, let us not fail to remark what 
joy and happiness this glorious vision conferred on this 
warm-hearted disciple.* Let us see in his fervent cry, 
““It is good to be here,” what comfort and consolation 
the sight of glory can give to a true believer. Let us 
look forward, and try to form some idea of the pleasure 
which the saints shall experience, when they shall at last 
meet the Lord Jesus at His second coming, and meet to 
part no more. <A vision of a few minutes was sufficient 
to warm and stir Peter’s heart. The sight of two saints 
in glory was so cheering and quickening, that he would 
fain have enjoyed more of it. What then shall we say, 
when we see our Lord appear at the last day with all His 
saints ? What shall we say, when we ourselves are 


* The remark of Brentius on the glorious nature of the whole 

vision of the transfiguration is well worth quoting. Like most of 
that admirable commentator’s expositions, it contains much in few 
words. 
. “No Synod on earth was ever more gloriously attended than this. 
No assembly was ever more illustrious. Here is God the Father, God 
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. Here are Moses and Elias, the 
chief of the prophets. Here are Peter, James, and John, the chief 
of the apostles.” 


MARK, CHAP. IX, 117 


allowed to share in His glory, and join the happy company, 
and feel that we shall go out no more from the joy of our 
Lord ? These are questions that no man can answer. The 
happiness of that great day of gathering together is one 
that we cannot now conceive. The feelings of which Peter 
had a little foretaste, will then be our’s in full experience. 
We shall all say with one heart and one voice, when we 
see Christ and all His saints, “It is good to be here.” 

The last thing which demands our notice in this 
passage is the distinct testimony which it bears to Christ’s 
office and dignity, as the promised Messiah. We see this 
testimony first in the appearance of Moses and Elias, 
the representatives of the law and the prophets. They 
appear as witnesses that Jesus is He of whom they spoke 
in old times, and of whom they wrote that He would 
come. They disappear after a few minutes, and leave 
Jesus alone, as though they would show that they were 
only witnesses, and that our Master having come, the 
servants resign to Him the chief place.—We see this 
testimony, secondly, in the miraculous voice from heaven, 
saying, “‘ This is my beloved Son: hear Him.” The same 
voice of God the Father, which was heard at our Lord’s 
baptism, was heard once more at His transfiguration. 
On both occasions there was the same solemn declaration 
“This is my beloved Son.” On this last occasion, there 
was an addition of two most important words, “‘ Hear 
Him.” 

The whole conclusion of the vision was calculated to 
Jeave a lasting impression on the minds of the three dis- 
ciples. It taught them in the most striking manner, 
that their Lord was far above them and the prophets, 

g* 


178 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


as the master of the house is above the servants, and 
that they must in all things believe, follow, obey, trust, 
and hear Him. 

Finally, the last words of the voice from heaven, are 
words that should be ever before the minds of all true 
Christians. They should “hear Christ.” He is the 
great Teacher ; they that would be wise must learn of 
Him. He is the light of the world: they that would 
not err must follow Him. He is the Head of the 
Church : they that would be living members of His 
mystical body must ever look to Him. The grand ques- 
tion that concerns us all is not so much what man says, 
or ministers say—what the Church says, or what 
councils say—but what says Christ >—Him let us hear. 
In Him let us abide. On him let us lean. To Him let 
us look. He and He only will never fail us, never dis- 
appoint us, and never lead us astray. Happy are they 
who know experimentally the meaning of the text, “my 
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow 
me; and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall 
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of 
my hand.” (John x. 27, 28.)* 

* The coming of Hlias, or Elijah, which forms the topic of con- 
versation between our Lord and His disciples in the latter part of 
the passage now expounded, is a deep and mysterious subject. 

1. According to one class of interpreters, the ministry of John the 
Baptist was the coming of Elias. They consider that the prophecy 
of Malachi (Mal. iv. 5, 6) that Elijah the prophet should be sent be- 
fore the great and dreadful day of the Lord, was completely accom- 
plished in John the Baptist, and that no other coming of Elias is to 
be expected. This is the view maintained by the great majority of 
Protestant commentators, both English and foreign, from the time 


of the Reformation to the present day. 
2, According to another class of interpreters, a literal coming of 


MARK, CHAP. IX, _ 


14 And when he came to his dis- 
ciples, he saw a great multitude about 
them, aud the Scribes questioning 
with them. 

15 And straightway all the people, 
when they beheld him, were greatly 
sesreds and running to him saluted 

im. 

16 And he asked the Scribes, What 
question ye with them? 

17 And one of the multitude an- 
swered and said, Master, I have 
brought unto thee my son, which 
hath a dumb spirit ; 

18 And wheresoever he taketh him 
he teareth him; and he foameth, and 
gnasheth with his teeth, and pineth 
away: and I spake to thy disciples 
that they should cast him out; and 
they could not. 

19 He answereth him, and saith 
O faithless generation, how long shall 
I be with you? how long shall I suf 
fer you? bring him unto me. 

20 And they brought him unto 
him: and when he saw him, straight- 
way the spirit tare him; and he fell 
on the ground and wallowed foaming. 

21 And he asked his father, How 


1T9 


MARK IX, 14—29. 


22 And ofttimes it hath cast him 
into the fire, and into the waters, to 
destroy him: but if thou canst do any 
thing, have compassion on us, and 
help us. 

23 Jesus said unto him, If thou 
canst believe, all things ave possible 
to him that believeth. 

24 And straightway the father of 
the child cried out, and said with tears, 
Lord, I believe; help thou mine un- 
belief. 

25 When Jesus saw that the people 
came running together, he rebakied 
the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou 
dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, 
come out of him and enter no more 
into him. 

26 And the spirit cried, and rent 
him sore and came out of him; and 
he was as one dead; insomuch that 
many said, He is dead. 

27 But Jesus took him by the hand, 
and lifted him up; and he arose. 
| 28 And when he was come intothe 

house, his disciples asked him priv- 
ately, Why could not we cast him 
out ? 

29 And he said unto them, This 





long is it ago since this came unto | kind can come forth by nothing, but 
him? And he said, Of u child. by prayer and fasting. 


THE contrast between these verses and those which pre- 
cede them in the chapter is very striking. We pass from 
the mount of transfiguration to a melancholy history of 
the work of the devil. We come down from the vision 


Elias is yet to take place. They consider that John the Baptist only 
went before our Lord in the “ spirit and power of Elias,” (Luke i. 17,) 
and that the words of Malachi are yet to be fulfilled. This is the 
view maintained by nearly all the Fathers, by the great majority of 
the Roman Catholic commentators, and by not a few modern Prot- 
estant divines, both English and continental, at the present time. 

If I must express an opinion, when great and learned divines differ 
so widely, I must honestly confess that I decidedly incline to the sec- 
ond of the two interpretations above given. I believe that a literal 
appearing of Elijah the prophet before the second coming of Christ 
may be expected. Dark and incomprehensible as the subject is, the 
scriptural arguments in favor of this view appear to me unanswer- 
able. Any other view seems to do violence to the plain meaning of 


180 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of glory, to a conflict with Satanic possession. We 
change the blessed company of Moses and Hlias, for the 
rude intercourse of unbelieving Scribes. We leave the 
foretaste of millennial glory, and the solemn voice of 
God the Father testifying to God the Son, and return 
once more to a scene of pain, weakness, and misery—a 
boy in agony of body, a father in deep distress, and a 
little band of feeble disciples baffled by Satan’s power, 
and unable to give relief—The contrast, we must all feel, 
is very great. Yet it is but a faint emblem of the 
change of scene that Jesus voluntarily undertook to 
witness, when He first laid aside His glory and came 
into the world. And it is after all a vivid picture of the 
life of all true Christians. With them, as with their 
Master, work, conflict, and scenes of weakness and sor- 
row will always be the rule. With them too, visions of 
glory, foretastes of heaven, seasons on the mount, will 
always be the exception. 

Let us learn from these verses, how dependent Christ’s 
disciples are on the company and help of their Master. 
the words of Malachi iv. 5,6; Matt. xvii. 11; John i 21. There 
seems no reason why there should not be a double “ coming of Hli- 
as’—the first, “in spirit and power,’ when John the Baptist 
preached—the second, “‘literal and in person,” when he shall come 
at the end of the world—immediately before the great and dreadful 
day of the Lord. 

The whole question is undoubtedly surrounded with difficulties, 
whatever view we adopt. I can only say that after patient and 
calm investigation, I see much fewer difficulties in the way of the 
interpretation to which I lean, than in the way of the other. I hold 
with Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, Hilary, Jansenius, Brenius, 
Greswell, Alford, and Stier, that Malachi iv. 5, 6, is not yet com- 
plotely fulfilled, and that Elijah the prophet will yet come. Those 


who can read Greek will find an interesting note on this subject, in 
Cramer’s Catena on St. Mark, 


MARK, CHAP. IX. 181 


We see this truth brought outin a striking manner in 
the scene which meets our Lord’s eyes, when He came 
down from the mount. Like Moses, when he came down 
from Mount Sinai, He finds his little flock in confusion. 
He sees His nine apostles beset by a party of malicious 
Scribes, and baffled in an attempt to heal one who had 
been brought to them possessed with a devil. The very 
same disciples who a short time before had done many 
miracles and ‘ cast out many devils,” had now met with 
a case too hard for them. They were learning by 
humbling experience the great lesson, ‘‘ without me ye 
can do nothing.” (John xv. 5.)—It was a useful lesson, 
no doubt, and over-ruled to their spiritual good. It would 
probably be remembered all the days of their lives. The 
things that we learn by smarting experience, abide in 
our memories, while truths heard with the ear are often 
forgotten. But we may be sure it was a bitter lesson 
at the time—We do not love to learn that we can do 
nothing without Christ. 

We need not look far to see many illustrations of this 
truth in the history of Christ’s people in every age. The 
very men who at one time have done great exploits in 
the cause of the Gospel, at another time have failed 
entirely, and proved weak and unstable as water. The 
temporary recantations of Cranmer and Jewell are 
striking examples. The holiest and best of Christians 
has nothing to glory of. His strength is not his own. 
He has nothing but what he has received. He has only 
to provoke the Lord to leave him for a season, and he 
will soon discover that his power is gone. Like Samson, 
when his hair was shorn, he is weak as any other man, 


182 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


. Let us learn a lesson of humility from the failure of 
the disciples. Let us strive to realize every day our 
need of the grace and presence of Christ. With Him we 
may do all things. Without Him we can do nothing 
at all. With Him we may overcome the greatest temp- 
tations. Without Him the least may overcome us. Let 
our cry be every morning, “leave us not to ourselves— 
we know not what a day may bring forth—if thy pre- 
sence go not with us we cannot go up.” 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 
how early in life we are liable to be injured by Satan. We 
read a fearful description of the miseries inflicted by 
Satan on the young man, whose case is here recorded. 
And we are told that he had been under this awful visi- 
tation from his very infancy. It came to him, ‘‘of achild.” 

There is a lesson of deep importance here which we 
must not overlook. We must labor to do good to our 
children even from their earliest years. If Satan begins 
so early to do them harm, we must not be behind him 
in diligence to lead them to God. How soon in life a 
child becomes responsible and accountable, is a difficult 
question to solve. Perhaps far sooner than many of us 
suppose. One thing, at all events, is very clear: it is never 
too soon to strive and pray for the salvation of the souls 
of children—never too soon to speak to them as moral 
beings, and tell them of God, and Christ, and right, and 
wrong. The devil, we may be quite sure, loses no time 
in endeavoring to influence the minds of young people. 
He begins with them even “of a child.” Let us work 
hard to counteract him. If young hearts can be filled 
by Satan, they can also be filled with the Spirit of God. 


MARK, CHAP. IX. 183 


Let us learn, in the third place, from these verses, 
how faith and unbelief can be mixed together in the same 
heart. The words of the child’s father set this truth 
before us in a touching way. ‘ Lord,” he cried, “I be- 
lieve ; help thou mine unbelief.” 

We see in those words a vivid picture of the heart of 
many a true Christian. Few indeed are to be found 
among believers, in whom trust and doubt, hope and 
fear, do not exist side by side. Nothing is perfect in 
a child of God, so long as he is in the body. His know- 
ledge, and love, and humility, are all more or less de- 
fective, and mingled with corruption. And as it is with 
his other graces, so it is with his faith. He believes, and 
yet has about him a remainder of unbelief. 

What shall we do with our faith ? We must use a. 
Weak, trembling, doubting, feeble as it may be, we must 
use it. We must not wait till it is great, perfect, and 
mighty, but like the man before us, turn it to account, 
and hope that one day it will be more strong. ‘ Lord,” 
he said, “I believe.” 

What shall we do with our unbelief ? We must resist 
it, and pray against it. We must not allow it to keep 
us back from Christ. We must take it to Christ, as we 
take all other sins and infirmities, and cry to Him for 
deliverance, Like the man before us, we must cry, 
“Tord, help mine unbelief.” : 

These are experimental truths. Happy are they who 
know something of them. The world is ignorant of 
them. Faith and unbelief, doubts and fears, are all 
foolishness to the natural man. But let the true Chris- 
tian study these things well, and thoroughly understand 


184 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


them. It is of the utmost importance to our comfort 
to know, that a true believer may be known by his in- 
ward warfare, as well as by his inward peace. 

Let us mark, in the last place, she complete dominion 
which our Lord exercises over Satan and all his agents. 
The spirit who was too strong for the disciples, is at once 
cast out by the Master. He speaks with mighty au- 
thority, and Satan at once is obliged to obey, “‘ I charge 
thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him.” 

We may leave the passage with comfortable feelings. 
Greater is He that is for us than all they that are against 
us. Satan is strong, busy, active, malicious. But Jesus 
is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God 
by Him—from the devil, as well as from sin—from the 
devil, as well as from the world Let us possess our souls 
in patience. Jesus still lives, and will not let Satan 
pluck us out of His hand. Jesus still lives, and will 
soon come again to deliver us entirely from the fiery. 
darts of the wicked one. The great chain is prepared. 
(Rev. xx. 1.) Satan shall one day be bound. The God 
of peace shall bruise Satan under our feet shortly.* 
(Rom. xvi. 20.) 


MARK IX. 30—87. 


30 And they departed thence, and | they shall kill him ; and after that he 
passed through Galilee ; and he would | is killed, he shall rise the third day. 
not that any man should know éé. 32 But they understood not that 

81 For he taught his disciples, and | saying, and were afraid to ask him. 
said unto them, The Son of man is} 383 And he came to Capernaum: 
delivered into the hands of men, and | and being in the house he asked them, 


* The expression “greatly amazed,” in the fifteenth verse of the 
passage now expounded, deserves some notice. The Greek word 


MARK, CHAP, IX. 185 


What was it that ye disputed among| 86 And he took a child, and set him 
yourselves by the way ? in the midst of them: and when he 
34 But they held their peace: for!had taken him in his arms, he said 
by the way they had disputed among} unto them, 
themselves,who should be the greatest.| 87 Whosoever shall receive one of 
85 And he sat down, and called the |such children in my name, receiveth 
twelve, and saith unto them, If any | me: and whosoever shall receive me, 
man desire to be first, ‘he same shall |receiveth not me, but him that sent 
be last of all, and servant of all. me. 
Ler us mark, in these verses, owr Lord’s renewed an- 
nouncement of His own coming, death, and resurrection, 
“* He taught His disciples, and said unto them, The Son 
of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they 
shall kill Him ; and after that He is killed, he shall rise 
the third day.” 

The dullness of the disciples in spiritual things ap- 
pears once more, as soon as this announcement was made. 
There was good in the tidings as well as seeming evil 
—sweet as well as bitter—life as well as death—the 
resurrection as well asthe cross. But it was all darkness 
to the bewildered twelve. ‘‘ They understood not that 
saying, and were afraid to ask.” Their minds were still 
full of their mistaken ideas of their Master’s reign upon 
earth. They thought that His earthly kingdom was 
immediately to appear. Never are we so slow to un- 
derstand, as when prejudice and pre-conveived opinions 
darken our eyes. 

The immense importance of our Lord’s death and 


resurrection comes out strongly in this fresh announce- 


is exceedingly strong, and implies a feeling much beyond that which 
the English word “amazed” conveys to our minds. It certainly 
seems as if some traces of visible glory, or, at any rate, some expres- 
sion of extraordinary majesty appeared in our Lord’s countenance, 
after the transfiguration. It reminds us of the face of Moses shining 
when he came down from the mount. 


186 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


ment which He makes, It is not for nothing that He 
reminds us again that He must die. He would have us’ 
know that His death was the great end for which He 
came into the world. He would remind us that by that 
death the great problem was to be solved, how God could 
be just, and yet justify sinners. He did not come upon 
earth merely to teach, and preach, and work miracles. 
He came to make satisfaction for sin, by His own 
blood and suffering on the cross. Let us never forget 
this. The incarnation, and example, and words of Christ, 
are all of deep importance. But the grand object which 
demands our notice in the history of His earthly minis- 
try, is His death on Calvary. 

Let us mark, in the second place, in these verses, the 
ambition and love of pre-eminence which the apostles exhibited. 
“¢ By the way they disputed among themselves who should 
be greatest.” 

How strange this sounds! Who would have thought 
that a few fishermen and publicans could have been over- 
come by emulation, and the desire of supremacy ? Who 
would have expected that poor men, who had given up 
all for Christ’s sake, would have been troubled by strife 
and dissension, as to the place and precedence which 
each one deserved ? Yet soit is. The fact is recorded 
for our learning. The Holy Ghost has caused it to be 
written down for the perpetual use of Christ’s Church. 
Let us take care that it is not written in vain. 

It is an awful fact, whether we like to allow it or not, 
that pride is one of the commonest sins which beset 
human nature. We are all born Pharisees. We all 
naturally think far better of ourselves than we ought. 


MARK, CHAP. IX. 187 


‘We all naturally fancy that we deserve something better 
than we have —lIt is an old sin. It began in the garden 
of Eden, when Adam and Eve thought they had not got 
everything that their merits deserved.—It is asubtle sin. 
It rules and reignsin many a heart without being detected, 
and can even wear the garb of humility—It is a most 
soul-ruining sin. It prevents repentance, keeps men 
back from Christ—checks brotherly love, and nips in the 
bud spiritual anxiety.—Let us watch against it, and be 
on our guard. Of all garments, none is so graceful, none 
wears so well, and none is so rare, as true humility. 

Let us mark, in the third place, the peculiar standard 
of true greatness which our Lord sets before His disciples. 
He says to them, “If any man desire to be first, the 
same shall be last of all, and servant of all.” 

These words are deeply instructive. They show us 
that the maxims of the world are directly contrary to the 
mind of Christ. The world’s idea of greatness is to rule, 
but Christian greatness consists in serving. The world’s 
ambition is to receive honor and attention, but the 
desire of the Christian should be to give rather than 
receive, and to attend on others rather than be attended 
on himself. In short, the man who lays himself out most 
to serve his fellow men, and to be useful in his day and 
generation, is the greatest man in the eyes of Christ.* 

- Let us strive to make a practical use of this heart- 
searching maxim. Let us seek to do good to our fellow 


* The words of Augustine on this point are worth reading. He says, 

“ A pishop’s office is a name of labor rather than of honor; so 
that he who coveteth pre-eminence rather than usefulness may under- 
stand that he is not a bishop.”—De Cwit. Dei. 


188 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


men, and to mortify that self-pleasing andself-indulgence, 
to which we are all so prone. Is there any service that 
we can render to our fellow Christians? Is there any 
kindness that we can dothem, to help them and promote 
their happiness ? If there is, let us do it without delay. 
Well would it be for Christendom, if empty boasts of 
churchmanship and orthodoxy were less frequent, and 
practical attention to our Lord’s words in this passage 
more common. The men who are willing to be last of 
all, and servants of all, for Christ’s sake, are always 
few. Yet these are the men who do good, break down 
prejudices, convince infidels that Christianity is a reality, 
and shake the world. 

Let us mark, in the last place, what encouragement our 
Lord gives us to show kindness to the least and lowest who 
believe in His name. He teaches this lesson in a very 
touching manner; He took a child in His arms, and 
said to His disciples, “‘ Whosoever shall receive one of 
such children in my name, receiveth me, and whosoever 
shall receive me, receiveth Him that sent me.” 

The principle here laid down is a continuation of that 
which we have just considered. It is one which is fool- 
ishness to the natural man. Flesh and blood can see no 
other way to greatness than crowns, and rank, and 
wealth, and high position in the world. The Son of 
God declares that the way lies in devoting ourselves to 
the care of the weakest and lowest of His flock. He 
enforces His declaration by marvellous words, which are 
often read and heard without thought. He tells us that 
to ‘receive one child in His name, is to receive Christ, 
and to receive Christ is to receive God.” 


MARK, OHAP. IX. 189 


There is rich encouragement here for sll who devote 
themselves to the charitable work of doing good to neg- 
lected souls. There is encouragement for every one who 
labors to restore the outcast to a place in society—to 
raise the fallen—to gather together tho ragged children, 
whom no man cares for—to pluck the worst of characters 
from a life of sin, like brands from the burning—and to 
bring the wanderers home. Let all such take comfort 
when they read these words. Their work may often be 
hard and discouraging. They may be mocked, ridiculed, 
and held up to scorn by the world. But let them know 
that the Son of God marks all they do, and is well 
pleased. Whatever the worid may think, these are they 
whom Jesus will delight to honor at the last day. 


MARE IX. 88—50. 


fire that never shall be quenched: 


88 And John answered him, saying, 
Master, we saw one casting out devils 
in thy name, and he followeth not us: 
and we forbad him, because he follow- 
eth not us. 

39 But Jesus said, Forbid him not: 
for there is no man which shall do a 
miracle in my name, that can lightly 
speak evil of me, 

40 For he that is not against us is 
on our part. 

41 For whosoever shall give you a 
eup of water to drink in my name, 
because ye belong to Christ, verily I 
say unto you, he shall not iose his 
reward. 

42 And whosoever shall offend one 
of these little ones that believe in me, 
it is better for him that a millstone 
were hanged about his neck and he 
were cast into the sea. 

43 And if thy hand offend thee, 
cut it off: it is better for thee to 
enter junto life maimed, than having 
two hands to go into hell, into the 


WE see in these verses, the 


44 Where their worm dieth not, 
and the fire is not quenched. 

45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut 
it off: it is better for thee to enter 
halt into life, than having two feet 
to be cast into hell, into the firet hat 
never shall be quenched : 

46 Where their worm dieth not, 
and the fire is not quenched. 

47 And if thine eye offend thee, 
pluck it out; it is better for thee 
to enter into the kingdom of God with 
one eye, than having two eyes to be 
cast into hell fire : 

48 Where their worm dieth not, 
and the fire is not quenched, 

49 For every one shall be salted 
with fire, and every sacrifice shall be 
salted with salt. 

50 Salt 2s good; but if the salt 
have lost his saltness, wherewith will 
ye season it? Have salt in your- 
selves, and have peace one with an- 
other. 


mind of Christ on the great 


190 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


sulyect of toleration in religion. The apostle John said to 
Him, ‘Master, we saw one casting out devils in Thy 
name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him, 
because he followeth not us.” The man was doing a 
good work without doubt. He was warring on the same 
side as the apostles, beyond question. But this did not 
satisfy John. He did not work in the company of the 
apostles. He did not fight in line with them. And 
therefore John had forbidden him.—But let us hear now 
what the great Head of the church decides! “ Jesus 
said, Forbid him not ; for there is no man which shall do 
a miracle in my name that can lightly speak evil of me. 
For he that is not against us, is on our part.” 

Here is a golden rule indeed, and one that human 
nature sorely needs, and has too often forgotten. Men 
of all branches of Christ’s Church are apt to think that 
no good can be done in the world, unless it is done by 
their own party and denomination. They are so narrow- — 
minded, that they cannot conceive the possibility of 
working on any other pattern but that which they fol- 
low. They make an idol of their own peculiar ecclesi- 
astical machinery, and can see no merit in any other. 
They are like him who cried when Eldad and Medad 
prophesied in the camp, ‘ My Lord Moses forbid them.” 
(Num. xi. 28.) 

To this intolerant spirit we owe some of the blackest 
pages of Church history. Christians have repeatedly 
persecuted Christians for no better reason than that 
which is here given by John. They have practically 
proclaimed to their brethren, “you shall either follow 
us, or not work for Christ at all.” 


MARK, CHAP, IX. 191 


Let us be on our guard against this feeling. It is 
only too near the surface of all our hearts. Let us study 
to realize that liberal, tolerant spirit which Jesus here 
recommends, and be thankful for good works wheresoever 
and by whosoever done. Let us beware of the slightest 
inclination to stop and check others, merely because they 
do not choose to adopt our plans, or work by our side. 
We may think our fellow Christians mistaken in some 
points. We may fancy that more would be done for 
Christ, if they would join us, and if all worked in the 
same way. We may see many evils arising from religious 
dissensions and. divisions—But all this must not prevent 
us rejoicing if the works of the devil are destroyed and 
souls are saved. Is our neighbor warring against Satan ? 
Is he really trying to labor for Christ ? This is the 
grand question. Better a thousand times that the work 
should be done by other hands than not done at all. 
Happy is he who knows something of the spirit of Moses, 
when he said, “Would God that all the Lord’s people 
were prophets ;”—and of Paul, when he says, “If Christ 
is preached, I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.”* (Num. 
ma,2013 Phil) i718.) 

* The remarks of Quesnel on this passage are interesting—and 
doubly so when we remember that the writer was a Roman Catho- 
lic. He says, “That which John here does, is an example of an in- 
discreet zeal for the interests of Christ. The most holy persons have 
sometimes occasion to secure themselves from secret emulations. We 
very easily mingle our own interests with those of God; and our 
vanity uses the glory of His name only as a veil. A preacher some- 
times imagines that his only desire is, that men should follow Christ, 
and adhere to His word; and it is himself whom he desires they 
should follow, and to whom he is very glad to find them adhere.” 


“Christ suffers many things in His Church, which are done with- 
out His mission; but He makes them contribute to the establishment 


192 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We see, for another thing, in these verses, the need of 
giving up anything that stands between us and the salvation 
of our souls. The “ hand” and the “‘ foot” are to be cut off, 
and the “ eye” to be plucked out, if they offend, or are 
occasions of falling. The things that are dear to us as 
eye, foot, or hand, are to be cast off and given up if they 
injure our souls, whatever pain the sacrifice may cost us, 

This is a rule that sounds stern and harsh at first sight. 
But our loving Master did not give the rule without cause. 
Compliance with it is absolutely necessary, since neglect 
of it is the sure way to hell. Our bodily senses are the 
channels through which many of our most formidable 
temptations approach us. Our bodily members are ready 
instruments of evil, but slow to that which is good. The 
eye, the hand, and the foot are good servants, when under 
right direction. But they need daily Watchingy lest they 
lead us into sin. 

Let us resolve by God’s grace to make a practical use of 
our Lord’s solemn injunction in this place. Let us regard © 
it as the advice of a wise physician, the counsel of a 
tender father, the warning of a faithful friend. How- 
ever men may ridicule us for our strictness and precise- 
ness, let us habitually ‘‘ crucify our flesh with its affections 
and lusts.” Let us deny ourselves any enjoyment, rather 
than incur peril of sinning against God. Let us walk in 
Job’s steps: he says, “I made a covenant with mine 
eyes.” (Job xxxi. 1.) Let us remember Paul: he says, 
of His kingdom. Whatever reason we may have to fear that some 
persons will not persevere in goodness, we must, notwithstanding, 
suffer them to continue their endeavors, when they appear to be any 


ways useful. God Himself authorizes such persons, since it is He 
who performs the good in them.” 


MARK, CHAP. IX, 193 


“I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection, 
lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, 
IT myself should be a cast away.” (1 Cor. ix, 27.) 

We see, in the last place, in these verses, the reality, 
awfulness, and eternity of future punishment. Three times 
the Lord Jesus speaks of “ hell.” Three times He men- 
tions the “ worm that never dies.” Three times He says 
that “ the fire is not quenched.” 

These are awful expressions. They call for reflection 
rather than exposition. They should be pondered, con- 
sidered, and remembered by all professing Christians. 
It matters little whether we regard them as figurative 
and emblematic. If they are so, one thing at least is 
very clear. The worm and the fire are emblems of real 
things. There is a real hell, and that hell is eternal. 

There is no mercy in keeping back from men the sub- 
ject of hell. Fearful and tremendous as it is, it ought 
to be pressed on all, as one of the great truths of Chris- 
tianity. Our loving Saviour speaks frequently of it. 
The apostle John, in the book of Revelation, often de- 
scribes it. The servants of God in these days must not 
be ashamed of confessing their belief in it. Were there 
no boundless mercy in Christ for all that believe in Him, 
we might well shrink from the awful topic. Were 
there no precious blood of Christ able to cleanse away 
all sin, we might well keep silence about the wrath to 
come. But there is mercy for all who ask in Christ’s 
name, There isa fountain open forall sin. Let us 
then boldly and unhesitatingly maintain that there is a 
hell, and beseech men to flee from it, before it be too 
late. “Knowing the terrors of the Lord,” the worm, and 
the fire, let us ‘ persuade men.” (1 Gor. v.11.) Itis 


194 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


not possible to say too much about Christ. But it is 
quite possible to say too little about hell. 

Let the concluding words of our Lord ring in our 
ears, as we leave the passage :—‘“‘ Have salt in yourselves, 
and have peace one with another.’ Let us make sure 
that we have in our hearts the saving grace of the Holy 
Ghost, sanctifying, puritying, preserving from corruption, 
our whole inward man. Let us watch the grace given 
to us with daily watchfulness, and pray to be kept from 
carelessness and sin, lest we be overtaken in faults, bring 
misery on our consciences, and discredit on our profession. 
Above all let us live in peace one with another, not 
seeking great: things, or striving for the pre-eminence, 
but clothed with humility, and loving all who love Christ 
in sincerity. These seem simple things. But in at- 
tending to them is great reward.* 


* The last verse but one in the passage now expounded, appeers 
to baffle all the commentators. I allude of course to the words, 
“ Hivery one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be 
salted with salt.” The true meaning of these words and their 
connexion with the context, are problems which seem not yet solved. 
At all events, not one of the many interpretations which have been 
hitherto proposed is entirely satisfactory. We must confess that 
it is one of those knots which are yet untied in the exposition of 
Scripture. 

1. Some think that our Lord is speaking only of the wicked and 
their future punishment, and that He means—“ Every lost soul shall 
be salted with the fire of hell, even as every sacrifice under the law 
of Moses is salted with salt.” This appears to be the view held by 
Whitby. 

2. Some think that our Lord is speaking only of the righteous 
and their fiery trials in this life, by which they are purified and ~ 
preserved from corruption, and that He means—“ Every true dis- 
ciple of mine shall be as it were salted and passed through the fire 
of tribulation, even as every sacrifice is salted with salt.” Of those 
who think that our Lord speaks only of the righteous, some think 


MARK, CHAP. X, 


195 


MARK X, 1—12. 


1 And he arose from thence, and 
cometh into the coasts of Judea, by 
the farther side of Jordan: and the 
poue resort unto him again ; and, as 

e was wont, he taught them again. 

2 And the Pharisees came to him, 
and asked him, Is it lawful for a man 
to put away is wife? tempting him. 

3 And he answered and said unto 
them, What did Moses command you ? 

4 And they said, Moses suffered to 
write a bill of divorcement, and to put 
her away. 

5 And Jesus answered and said unto 
them, For the hardness of your heart 
he wrote you this precept. 

6 But from the beginning of the crea- 
tion God made them male and female. 


7. For this cause shall a man leave 
his father and mother, and cleave to 
his wife ; 

8 And they twain shall be one flesh: 
so then they are no more twain, but 
one flesh. 

9 What therefore God hath joined 
together, let not man put asunder. 

10 And in the house his disciples 
asked him again of the same mat- 
ter. 

11 And he saith unto them, Who- 
soever shall put away his wife, and 
marry another, committeth adultery 
against her. 

12 And if a woman shall put away 
her hushand, and be married to an- 
other, she committeth adultery. 


THE opening verse of this passage shows us the patient 
perseverance of our Lord Jesus Christ as a teacher. We 
are told that He came “into the coasts of Judeea by the 


that the “fire” means not tribulation, and some the work of the Holy 
Spirit. Cartwright holds the last of these opinions, Junius the first. 

3. Some think that in the first clause of the verse, our Lord is 
speaking of all members of His church, both good and bad, and that 
His meaning is the same as that of St. Paul, where He says, “The 
fire shall try every man’s work of what sort it is.” (1 Cor. iii, 13.) 
The second clause, they think, describes the preserving effect of grace 
on the hearts of true believers. According to this view, the meaning 
of the verse would be—“ Every one shall be finally salted, tried, and 
tested by the fire of the last day; and every one who has offered 
himself as a living sacrifice to God, shall be salted with grace, and so 
finally preserved from death and corruption.” 

4, Some think that in the first clause of the verse our Lord is speaking 
of the wicked, and in the second clause of the righteous. According to 
this view, the sense would be—“ Every wicked man shall be salted 
with fire and punished for evermore ; and every living sacrifice to God, 
or godly man, shall be salted with grace, kept from the power of death, 
and saved for evermore.”—This is the view of Hammond and Manton. 

T offer no opinion and make no comment or any of the above views. 
The objections which might be made against every one of them 
are neither few nor small. Whether these objections are insuperable 
or not, is a point on which learned theologians differ widely, and a 
conclusion will perhaps never be attained until the Lord appears. 


196 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


farther side of Jordan : and the people resort unto Him 
again ; and, as He was wont, He taught them again.” 

Wherever our Lord went, He was always about His 
Father’s business, preaching, teaching, and laboring to 
do good to souls. He threw away no opportunity. In 
the whole history of His earthly ministry, we never read. 
of an idle day. Of Him it may be truly said, that He 
“ sowed beside all waters,” and that “in the morning He 
sowed his seed, and in the evening withheld not His 
hand.” (Isaiah xxxii. 20. Eccles. xi. 6.) 

And yet our Lord knew the hearts of allmen. He knew 
perfectly well that the great proportion of His hearers 
were hardened and unbelieving. He knew, as He spoke, 
that most of His words fell to the ground uncared for 
and unheeded, and that so far as concerned the salvation 
of souls, most of His labor was in vain. He knew all 
this, and yet He labored on. 

Let us see in this fact a standing pattern to all who try 
to do good to others, whatever their office may be. Let 
it be remembered by every minister and every missionary 
—by every schoolmaster and every Sunday-school teacher 
—by every district visitor and every lay agent—by every 
‘head of a house who has family prayers—and by every 
nurse who has the charge of children. Let all such 
remember Christ’s example, and resolve to do likewise. 
We are not to give up teaching, because we see no good 
done. We are not to relax our exertions; because we see 
no fruit of our toil. We are to work on steadily, kéep- 
ing before us the great principle, that duty is ours, and 
results are God’s. There must be ploughmen and sowers 


My own conviction is, that we must wait for more light, and regard 
the text at present as one of the “deep things” of God. 


“\. MARK, OAP. x, 197 


as well as reapers and binders of sheaves. The honest 
master pays his laborers. according to the work they do, 
and not acording to the crops that grow on his land, 
Our Master in heaven will deal with all His servants at 
the last day in like manner. He knows that success is 
not in their hands. He knows that they cannot change 
hearts. He will reward them according to their labor, 
and not according to the fruits which have resulted from 
their labor. It is not “the good and successful servant,” 
but “ the good and faithful servant,” to whom He will say, 
“Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”* (Matt. xxv. 21.) 

The greater portion of this passage is meant to show 
us the dignity and importance of the relation of marriage. 
It is plain that the prevailing opinions of the Jews upon 
this subject, when our Lord was upon earth, were lax and 
low in the extreme. The binding character of the marri- 
age tie was not recognized. Divorce for slight and trivial 
causes was allowable andcommon.}+ The duties of hus- 

* Some remarks of Bishop Latimer on this point are well worth 
reading. ‘They occur in a passage in one of his sermons on the par- 
able of the wedding garment. He says, “the man who had not the 
wedding garment was blamed because he professed one thing, and 
was indeed another. Why did not the king blame the preachers? 
There was no fault in them, they did their duties: they had no fur- 
ther commandment but to call men to the marriage. The garment 
he should have provided himself. Therefore he quarrelleth not with * 
the preachers, ‘ What doth this fellow here ? why suffered ye him to 
enter ?’ For their commission extended no further but only to call him. 
Many are grieved that there is so little fruit of their preaching. And 
when they are asked, ‘Why do you not preach, having so great gifts 
given you of God?’ ‘I would preach,’ say they, ‘but I see so little 
fruit, so little amendment of life, that it maketh me weary :’ a naughty 
answer: a very naughty answer. Thou art troubled with that which 
God gave thee no charge of: and leavest undone that which thou art 


charged with.”—-Latimer’s Works. Parker Society. Vol. I. p. 286. 
+ The extent to which the Jews allowed divorce for absurd and 


198 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


bands towards wives, and of wives towards husbands, as 
a natural consequence, were little understood. ‘To cor- 
rect this state of things, our Lord sets up a high and 
holy standard of principles. He refets to the original in- 
stitution of marriage at the creation, as the union of 
one man and one woman. He quotes and endorses the 
solemn words used at the marriage of Adam and Eve, 
as words of perpetual significance, “a man shall leave 
his father and mother, and cleave to his wife : and they 
twain shall be one flesh.’ He adds a solemn comment 
to these words— What God hath joined together, let 
not man put asunder.” And finally, in reply to the 
inquiry of His disciples, he declares that divorce followed 
by re-marriage, except for the cause of unfaithfulness, 


is a breach of the seventh commandment.* 

frivolous causes, would be almost incredible, if we had not the evi- 
dence of their own Rabbinical writings on the subject. A full ac- 
count of the matter will be found in Lightfoot’s Horse Hebraicee on 
St. Matthew v.31. One passage quoted by him will be sufficient 
to give the reader an idea of Jewish customs about divorce: “The 
school of Hilleth saith, If the wife cooks her husband’s food ill by 
over-salting it, or over-roasting it, she is to be put away.” 

* T am aware that the opinions I have expressed at the close of 
this paragraph are contrary to that of some learned divines. I can 
only say that I have arrived at them deliberately, after calm investi- 
gation of the parallel passage in Matt. xix. 9, and of the words of 
our Lord in Matt. v. 32. I decidedly believe that the re-marriage 
forbidden by Christ, is re-marriage after a divorce for trivial and friv- 
olous causes, and that His words do not apply to re-marriage after 
divorce on account of unfaithfulness. Re-marriage after divorce for 
frivolous causes is clearly adultery, for one simple reason—the di- 
vorce never ought to have taken place, and the divorced party is 
stilla married person in the sight of God.—Re-marriage after divorce 
for unfaithfulness, by the same process of reasoning, is not adultery. 
Unfaithfulness dissolves the marriage tie altogether, and places the 
husband and wife once more in the position of unmarried people, or 
of a widower or widow. 


48 


4 
‘“. MARK, CHAP “x, 199 


The importance ofthe whole subject, on which our 
Lord here pronounces judgment, can hardly be overrated. 
We ought to be very thankful that we have so-clear and 
full an exposition of His mind\uponit. The marriage 
relation lies at the very root ofthe social system of 
nations. The public morality of a people, and the 
private happiness of the families which compose a& peo-— 
ple, are deeply involved in the whole question of the law 
of marriage. The experience of all nations confirms the 
wisdom of our Lord’s decision in this passage in the most 
striking manner. It is a fact clearly ascertained, that 
polygamy, and permission to obtain divorce on slight 
grounds, have a direct tendency to promote immorality. 
In short, the nearer a nation’s laws about marriage 
approach to the law of Christ, the higher has the moral 
tone of that nation always proved to be. 

It becomes all those who are married, or purpose mar- 
riage, to ponder well the teaching of our Lord Jesus 
Christ in this passage. Of all relations of life, none 
ought to be regarded with such reverence, and none 
taken in hand so cautiously as the relation of husband 
and wife. In no relation is so much earthly happiness 
to be found, if it be entered upon discreetly, advisedly, 
and in the fear of God. In none is so much misery 
seen to follow, if it be taken in hand unadvisedly, 
lightly, wantonly, and without thought. From no step 
in life does so much benefit come to the soul, if people 
marry “in the Lord.” From none does the soul take so 
much harm, if fancy, passion, or any mere worldly mo- 
tive is the only cause which produce the union. Solo- 
mon was the wisest of men. ‘Nevertheless even him 
did outlandish women cause to sin.” (Neh, xili. 26.) 


200 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is, unhappily, only too much necessity for im- 
pressing these truths upon people. It is a mournful fact, 
that few steps in life are generally taken with so much 
levity, self-will, and forgetfulness of God as marriage. 
Few are the young couples who think of inviting Christ 
to their wedding! It is a mournful fact that unhappy 
marriages are one great cause of the misery and sorrow 
of which there is so much in the world. People find out 
too late that they have made a mistake, and go in bit- 
terness all their days. Happy are they, who in the mat- 
ter of marriage observe three rules. The /irst is to 
marry only in the Lord, and after prayer for God’s 
approval and blessing. The second is not to expect too 
much from their partners, and to remember that mar- 
riage is, after all, the union of two sinners, and not of 
two angels. The third rule is to strive first and foremost 
for one another’s sanctification. The more holy married 
people are, the happier they are. “ Christ loved the 
church, and gave Himself for it, that He might sanctify 
it,”* (Eph. v. 25, 26.) 

* There is an expression in this passage which claims special ob- 
servation. The Pharisees told our Lord, that “Moses suffered to 
write a bill of divorcement and to put her away.” The answer of our 
Lord is very remarkable. He says, “ for the hardness of your hearts 
he wrote you this precept.” And He then goes on to show that this 
permission to divorce was a proof that their forefathers had fallen be- 
low the original standard of marriage, and were dealt with as being 
in a weak and diseased state of soul. For He says, “But from the 
beginning of the creation God made them male and female.” 

The expression throws much light on some portions of the civil law 
of Moses. It shows us that it was an institution which in some of 
its requirements was specially adapted to the state of mind in which 
the Israelites were, on first leaving the land of Egypt. It was not 


intended in all its minute particulars to be a code of perpetual obliga- 
tion. It was meant to lead on to something better and higher, when 


MARK, CHAP. X. 201 


MARK X. 13—16. 


18 And they brought young chil-| not; for of such is the kingdom of God. 
dren to him, that he should touch| 15 Verily I say unto you, Whoso- 
them: and his disciples rebuked |ever shall not receive the kingdom of 
those that brought them. God as a little child, he shall not en- 

14 But when Jesus saw it, he]ter therein. 
was much displeased, snd saidj 16 And he took them up in his 
unto them, Suffer the little children] arms, put his hands upon them, and 
to come unto me, and forbid them| blessed them. 


THE scene brought before us in these four verses *is 
deeply interesting—We see young children brought to 
Christ, “ that He should touch them,” and the disciples 
rebuking those that brought them. We are told that 
when Jesus saw this He was “much displeased,” and 
rebuked His disciples in words of a very remarkable tenor. 
And finally we are told, that “‘ He took them up in His 
arms, put His hands upon them, and blessed them.” 


the people were able to bear it. The possession of it was undoubt- 
edly a great privilege, and one of which the Jews might justly glory. 
Yet in glorying they were to remember also, that their law contained 
some grounds for humiliation. Its very permission to obtain di- 
vorce on light grounds, was a standing witness of the hardness and 
cruelty of the people. It was thought better to tolerate such divor- 
ces, than to have the nation filled with murder, adultery, cruelty, and 
desertion. In short, the very law of which the Jew boasted, was 
shown by our Lord to contain permissive statutes, which were in 
reality written to his shame. 
The expression throws light on the position of God’s people in this 
world of sin. It shows us that there may be things tolerated and 
permitted by God, both in churches and states, not because they are 
the best things, but because they are the things best suited to the 
church or state in which they are found. It is vain to expect per- 
fection in any government or in any church. If we have the essen- 
tials of justice in the one, and of truth in the other, we may be 
content. God tolerated many things in the government of Israel, 
until the time of reformation. Surely we may tolerate many things 
too. To spend our lives in searching after an imaginary state of per- 
fection, either civil or ecclesiastical, is, at best, a waste of time. If 
God was pleased to suffer some things in Israel “for the hardness of 
their hearts,” we may well endure some things in churches and states 
g* 


202 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us learn, for one thing, from this passage, how 
much attention the souls of children should receive from 
the Church of Ohrist. The Great Head of the Church 
found time to take special notice of children, Al- 
though His time on earth was precious, and grown-up 
mtn and women were perishing on every side for lack 
of knowledge, He did not think little boys and girls 
of small importance. He had room in His mighty heart 
even forthem. He declared by His outward gesture and 
deed, His good will toward them. And not least, He has 
left on record words concerning them, which His Church 
should never forget, “Of such is the kingdom of God.” 

We must never allow ourselves to suppose that little 
children’s souls may be safely let alone. Their charac- 
ters for life depend exceedingly on what they see and 
hear during their first seven years. They are never too 
young to learn evil and sin. They are never too young 
to receive religious impressions. They think in their 
childish way about God, and ¢heir souls, and a world to — 
come, far sooner and far more deeply than most people 
areaware. They are far more ready to respond to appeals 
to their feeling of right and wrong than many suppose. 
They have each a conscience. God has mercifully not 
left Himself without a witness in their hearts, fallen and 
corrupt as their natures are. They have each a soul 
which will live for ever in heaven or in hell. We cannot 
begin too soon to endeavor to bring them to Christ. 

These truths ought to be diligently considered by every 
branch of the Church of Christ. It is the bounden duty 


which we do not quite like. There is a balance of evil in every po- 
sition in the world. There are imperfections everywhere. The 
state of perfection is yet to come, 


MARK, CHAP. X. 208 


of every Christian congregation to make provision for the 
spiritual training of its children. The boys and girls of 
every family should be taught as soon as they can learn— 
should be brought to public worship as soon as they can 
behave with propriety—should be regarded withaffection- 
ate interest as the future congregation, which will fill our 
places when we are dead. We may confidently expect 
Christ’s blessing on all attempts to do good to children. 
No church can be regarded as being in a healthy state 
which neglects its younger members, and lazily excuses 
itself on the plea, that ‘young people will be young,” 
and that it is useless to try todo them good. Sucha 
church shows plainly that it has not the mind of Christ. 
A congregation which consists of none but grown ‘up 
people, whose children are idling at home or running 
wild in the streets or fields, is a most deplorable and un- 
satisfactory sight. The members of such a congregation 
may pride themselves on their numbers, and on the 
soundness of their own views. They may content them- 
selves with loud assertions that they cannot change their 
children’s hearts, and that God will convert them some 
day if he thinks fit. But they have yet to learn that 
Christ regards them as neglecting a solemn duty, and 
that Christians who do not use every means to bring 
children to Christ are committing a great sin. 

Let us learn, for another thing, from this passage, how 
much encouragement there is to bring young children to be 
baptized. Of course it is not pretended that there is any 
mention of baptism, or even any reference to it in the 
verses before us. All we mean to say is that the ex- 

pressions and gestures of our Lord in this passage, are a 
strong indirect argument in favor of infant baptism. It 


204 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


is on this account that the passage occupies a prominent 
place in the baptismal service of the Church of England. 

The subject of infant baptism is undoubtedly a delicate 
and difficult one. Holy and praying men are unable to 
see alike upon it. Although they read the same Bible, 
and profess to be led by the sume Spirit, they arrive at 
different conclusions about this sacrament. The great 
majority of Christians hold that infant baptism is scrip- 
tural and right. A comparatively small section of the 
Protestant Church, but one containing many eminent 
saints among its members, regards infant baptism as 
unscriptural and wrong. The difference is a melancholy 
proof of the blindness and infirmity which remain even 
in the saints of God. 

But the difference now referred to must not make 
members of the Church of England shrink from holding 
decided opinions on the subject. That church has de- 
clared plainly, in its Articles, that ‘the baptism of 
young children is in any wise to be retained, as most 
agreeable with the institution of Christ.” To this opin- 
ion we need not be afraid to adhere. 

It is allowed on all sides that infants may be elect and 
chosen of God unto salvation—may be washed in Christ’s 
blood, born again of the Spirit, have grace, be justified, 
sanctified, and enter heaven. If these things be so, it 
is hard to see why they may not receive the outward 
sign of baptism. 

It is allowed furthermore that infants are members of 
Christ’s visible church, by virtue of their parents’ Chris- 
tianity. What else can we make of St. Paul’s words, 
“now are they holy” (1 Cor. vii. 14.) If this be so, it 


MARK, CHAP. X. 205 


is difficult to understand why an infant may not receive 
the outward sign of admission into the church, just as the 
Jewish child received the outward sign of circumcision. 

The objection that baptism ought only to be given to 
those who are old enough to repent and believe, does not 
appear a convincing one. We read in the New Testa- 
ment that the “houses” of Lydia and Stephanus were 
baptized, and that the jailer of Philippi and “all his” 
were baptized. It is very difficult to suppose that in no 
one of these three cases were there any children. (Acts 
xvi. 15, 33. 1 Cor. i. 16.) 

The objection that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself never 
directly commanded infants to be baptized is not a weighty 
one. The church of the J ews, to which He came, had 
always been accustomed to admit children into the church 
by the sign of circumcision. The very fact that Jesus 
says nothing about the age for baptizing, goes far to 
prove that He intended no change to be made.* 


* In considering the arguments in favor of infant baptism, there 
are two facts which ought to be duly pondered. They are extra- 
scriptural facts, and I have therefore purposely omitted them in the 
Expository Thoughts on this passage. But they are weighty facts, 
and may help some minds in coming to a conclusion, 

1. One fact is the testimony of history to the almost universal 
practice of infant baptism in the early church. The proof of this is 
to be found in Wall’s History of Infant Baptism. If infant, baptism is 
so entirely opposed to the mind. of Christ, as some say that it is, it is 
least a curious circumstance, that the early church should have been 
so ignorant on the subject. 

2. The other fact is the notorious practice of baptizing the infant 
children of proselytes in the Jewish Church. The proof of this is to 
be found in Lightfoot’s Horse Hebraice on St. Matthew i. 6. He 
says, for instance, “The Anabaptists object, ‘it is not commanded to 
baptize infants—therefore they are not to be baptized.’ To whom I 
answer, ‘it is not forbidden to baptize infants—therefore they are to 


206 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The subject may be safely left here. Few controversies 
have done so much harm, and led to so little spiritual fruit 
as the controversy about baptism. On none has so much 
been said and written without producing conviction. On 
none does experience seem to show that Christians had 
better leave each other alone, and agree to differ. 

The baptism that it concerns us all to know, is not so 
much the baptism of water as the baptism of the Holy 
Ghost. Thousands are washed in baptismal waters who 
are never renewed by the Spirit. Have we been born 
again ? Have we received the Holy Spirit, and been 
made new creatures in Jesus Christ ? If not, it matters 
little when, and where, and how we have been baptized ; 
we are yet in our sins. Without a new birth there can 
be no salvation. May we never rest till we know and 
feel that we have passed from death to life, and are in- 
deed born of God ! 


be baptized.’ And the reason is plain. For when Pedobaptism in the 
Jewish Church was so known, usual, and frequent in the admission 
of proselytes, there was no need to strengthen it with any precept, 
when baptism passed into an evangelical sacrament. For Christ took 
baptism into His own hands, and into evangelical use as He found it; 
this only added, that He might promote it to a worthier end, and 
larger use. The whole nation knew well enough that little children 
used to be baptized: there was no need of a precept for that which 
had ever, by common use, prevailed.” 

“On the other hand, there was need of a plain and open prohibi- 
tion, that infants and little children should not be baptized, if our 
Saviour would not have had them baptized. For since it was most 
common, in all ages foregoing, that little children should be baptized, 
if Christ had minded to abolish the custom He would have openly 
forbidden it. Therefore His silence, and the silence of Scripture, 
confirm Peedobaptism, and continue it unto all ages.”—Lightfoot’s 
Works. Vol. xi. p. 59. Pitman’s edition. 


MARK, CHAP. X. 


207 


MARK X. 17—27. 


_ 17 And when he was gone forth 
into the way, there came one running, 
and kneeled to him, and asked him, 
Good Master, what shall I do that I 
may inherit eternal life? 

18 And Jesus said unto him, Why 
callest thou me good? there is none 
good but one, that is, God. 

19 Thou knowest the command- 
ments, Do not commit adultery, Do 
not kill, Do not steal, Do not bear 
false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy 
father and mother. 

20 And he answered and said unto 
him, Master, all these have I observed 
from my youth. 

21 Then Jesus beholding him loved 
him, and said unto him, One thing 
thou lackest: go thy way, sell what- 
soever thou hast, and give to the 

oor, and thou shalt have treasure in 
eaven : and come, take up the cross, 
and follow me. 

22 And he was sad at that saying, 





and went away grieved: for he had 
great possessions. 

23 And Jesus looked round about, 
and saith unto his disciples, How 
hardly shall they that have riches 
enter into the kingdom of God! 

24 And the disciples were aston- 
ished at his words. But Jesus an- 
swereth again, and saith unto them, 
Children, how hard is it for them 
that trust in riches to enter into the 
kingdom of God! 

25 It is easier for a camel to go 
through the eye of a needle, than for 
a rich man to enter into the kingdom 
of God. 

26 And they were astonished out 
of measure, saying ee} themselves, 
Who then can be saved ? 

27 And Jesus looking upon them 
saith, With men ¢ 7s impossible, but 
not with God: for with God all things 
are possible. 


THe story we have now read is recorded no less than 
three times in the New Testament. Matthew, Mark, 
and Luke were all inspired by one Spirit to write it for 
our learning. There is no doubt a wise purpose in this 
three-fold repetition of the same simple facts. It is in- 
tended to show us that the lessons of the passage deserve 
particular notice from the Church of Christ. 

Let us learn for one thing from this passage, the sel/- 
ignorance of man. 

We are told of one who “ came running” to our Lord, 
and - kneeled to him and asked” the solemn question, 
‘‘ what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?” At 
first sight there was much that was promising in this 
man’s case. He showed anxiety about spiritual things, 
while most around him were careless and indifferent. 
He showed a disposition to reverence our Lord, by 


208 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


kneeling to Him, while Scribes and Pharisees despised 
Him. Yet all this time this man was profoundly igno- 
rant of his own heart. He hears our Lord recite those 
commandments which make up our duty to our neighbor, 
and at once declares, ‘‘ All these have I observed from my 
youth.” The searching nature of the moral law, its 
application to our thoughts, and words, as well as actions, 
are matters with which he is utterly unacquainted. 

The spiritual blindness here exhibited is unhappily 
most common. Myriads of professing Christians at the 
present day have not an idea of their own sinfulness 
and guilt in the sight of God. They flatter themselves 
that they have never done anything very wicked.—“ They 
have never murdered, or stolen, or committed adultery, 
or borne false witness. They cannot surely be in much 
danger of missing heaven.” —They forget the holy nature 
of that God with whom they have todo, They forget 
how often they break His law in temper, or imagination, 
even when their outward conduct is correct. They never 
study such portions of Scripture as the fifth chapter of 
St, Matthew, or at any rate they study it with a thick 
veil over their hearts, and do not apply it to themselves, 
The result is that they are wrapped up in self-righteous- 
ness. Like the church of Laodicea, they are “ rich and 
increased with goods, and have need of nothing.” (Rev. 
iii. 17.) Self-satisfied they live, and self-satisfied too 
often they die. 

Let us beware of this state of mind. So long as we 
think that we can keep the law of God, Christ profits us 
nothing. Let us pray for self-knowledge. Let us ask 
for the Holy Spirit to convince us of sin, to show us our 


MARK, CHAP. X. 209 


own hearts, to show us God’s holiness, and so to show us 
our need of Christ. Happy is he who has learned by 
experience the meaning of St. Paul’s words, “I was alive 
without the law once ; but when the commandment 
came, sin revived, and I died.” (Rom. vii. 9.) Igno- 
rance of the Law and ignorance of the Gospel will gene- 
rally be found together. He whose eyes have really been 
opened to the spirituality of the commandments, will 
never rest till he has found Christ. 

Let us learn, for another thing, from this passage, the 
love of Christ towards sinners. 

This is a truth which is brought out in the expres- 
sion used by’ St. Mark, when, in his account of this 
man’s story, he says, that “‘ Jesus beholding him, loved 
him.” That love, beyond doubt, was a love of pity and 
compassion. Our Lord beheld with pity the strange 
mixture of earnestness and ignorance which the case be- 
fore Him presented. He saw with compassion a soul 
struggling with all the weakness and infirmity entailed 
by the fall—the conscience ill at ease, and sensible that 
it wanted relief—the understanding sunk in darkness 
and blinded as to the first principles of spiritual religion. 
Just as we look with sorrow at some noble ruin, roofless, 
and shattered, and unfit for man’s use, yet showing many 
a mark of the skill with which it was designed and 
reared at first, so may we suppose that Jesus looked 
with tender concern at this man’s soul. 

We must never forget that Jesus feels love and com- 
passion for the souls of the ungodly. Without con- 
troversy He feels a peculiar love for those who hear His 
voice and follow Him. They are His sheep, given to 


210 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


Him by the Father, and watched with a special care. 
They are His bride, joined to Him in an everlasting 
covenant, and dear to Him as part of Himself. But the 
heart of Jesus is a wide heart. He has abundance of 
pity, compassion, and tender concern even for those who 
are following sin and the world. He who wept over un- 
believing Jerusalem is still the same. He would still 
gather into his bosom the ignorant and self-righteous, the 
faithless and impenitent, if they were only willing to be 
gathered. (Matt. xxiii. 37.) We may boldly tell the 
chief of sinners that Christ loves him. Salvation is ready 
for the worst of men, if they will only come to Christ. 
If men are lost, it is not because Jesus’ does not love 
them, and is not ready to save. His own solemn words 
unravel the mystery, ‘‘ Men love darkness rather than 
light.” “Ye will not come unto me that ye might have 
life.” (John iii, 19 ; v. 40.) 

_ Let us learn, in the last place, from this passage, the 
immense danger of the love of money. This is a lesson — 
which is twice enforced on our notice. Once it comes out 
in the conduct of the man whose history is here related. 
With all his professed desire after eternal life, he loved 
his money better than his soul. “He went away 
grieved,.”—Once it comes out in the solemn words of our 
Lord to His disciples, “‘ How hard is it for them that 
have riches to enter into the kingdom of God.” “It is 
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than 
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.” The 
last day alone will fully prove how true those words are. 

Let us watch against the love of money. It is a snare 
to the poor as well as to the rich. It is not so much the 


MARK, CHAP. X, 211 


having money, as the trusting in it, which ruins the soul. 
Let us pray for contentment with such things as we 
have. The highest wisdom is to be of one mind with 


St. Paul, “TI have learned, in whatsoever state I am, 
therewith to be content.” (Phil. iv. 11.) 


MARK X. 28—84. 


28 Then Peter began to sa, 
him, Lo, we have lett all, an 


unto 


32 And they were in the way going 
have 


up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went 


followed thee. 

29 And Jesus answered and said, 
Verily I say unto you, There is no 
man that hath left house, or brethren, 
or sisters, or father, or mother, or 
wife, or children, or lands for my 
sake, and the Gospel’s, 

80 But he shall receive an hundred- 
fold now in this time, houses, and 
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, 
and children, and lands, with perse- 
cutions; and in the world to come 
eternal life. 

81 But many that are first shall be 
last; and the last first. 





before them ; and they were amazed ; 
and as they followed, they were afraid. 
And he took again the twelve, and 
began to tell them what thins should 
happen unto him, 

33 Saying, Behold, we go up to 
Jerusalem ; and the Son of man shall 
be delivered unto the Chief Priests 
and unto the Scribes; and they shall 
condemn him to death, and shall de- 
liver him tothe Gentiles : 

84 And they shall mock him, and 
shall scourge him, and shall spit upon 
him, and shall kill him: and the third 
day he shall rise again. 


Tue first thing which demands our attention in these 
verses, is the glorious promise which they contain. The 
Lord Jesus says to His apostles, “‘ Verily I say unto you, 
There is no man that hath left house, or brethren, or 
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, 
for my sake, and the Gospel’s, but he shall receive’ an 
hundred-fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, 
and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with 
persecutions ; and in the world to come eternal life.” 
There are few wider promises than thisin the word of 
God. There is none certainly in the New Testament 
which holds out such encouragement for the life that 
now is. Let every one that is fearful and faint-hearted 


212 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


in Christ’s service look at this promise. Let all who 
are enduring hardness and tribulation for Christ’s sake, 
study this promise well, and drink out of it comfort. 

To all who make sacrifices on account of the Gospel, 
Jesus promises “an hundred-fold now in this time.” 
They shall have not only pardon and glory in the world 
to come, They shall have even here upon earth, hopes, 
and joys, and sensible comforts sufficient to make up for 
all that they lose. They shall find in the communion 
of saints, new friends, new relations, new companions, 
more loving, faithful, and valuable than any they had 
before their conversion, Their introduction into the 
family of God shall be an abundant recompense for ex- 
clusion from the society of this world. This may sound 
startling and incredible to many ears. But thousands 
have found by experience that it is true. 

To all who make sacrifices on account of the Gospel, 
Jesus promises “ eternal life in the world to come.” As 
soon as they put off their earthly tabernacle, they shall 
enter upon a glorious existence, and in the morning of 
the resurrection shall receive such honor and joy as 
pass man’s understanding. Their light afflictions for a 
few years shall end in an everlasting reward. Their 
fights and sorrows while in the body, shall be exchanged 
for perfect rest and a conqueror’s crown. ‘They shall. 
dwell in a world where there is no death, no sin, no 
devil, no cares, no weeping, no parting, for the former 
things will have passed away. God has said it, and it 
shall all be found true. 

Where is the saint who will dare to say in the face of 
these glorious promises, that there is no encouragement 


MARK, CHAP. X. 213 


to serve Christ ? Where is the man or woman whose 
hands are beginning to hang down, and whose knees are 
beginning to faint in the Christian race ? Let all such 
ponder this passage, and take fresh courage. The time 
is short. The end is sure. Heaviness may endure for 
a night, but joy cometh in the morning. Let us wait 
patiently on the Lord. 

The second thing, which demands our attention in 
these verses, is the solemn warning which they contain. 
The Lord Jesus saw the secret self-conceit of His 
apostles. He gives them a word in season to check 
their high thoughts. ‘“‘ Many that are first shall be last, 
and the last first.” 

How true were these words, when applied to the 
twelve apostles! There stood among those who heard 
our Lord speak, a man who at one time seemed likely to 
be one of the foremost of the twelve. He was one who 
appeared more careful and trustworthy than any. He 
had the charge of the bag, and kept what was put in it. 
And yet that man fell away and came to a disgraceful 
end. His name was Judas Iscariot. Again, there did 
not stand among our Lord’s hearers that day one who at 
a later period did more for Christ than any of the twelve. 
At the time when our Lord spoke he was a young Pha- 
risee, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and zealous 
for nothing so much as the law. And yet that young 
man in the end was converted to the faith of Christ, was 
not behind the chiefest apostles, and labored more abund- 
antly than all. His name was Saul. Well might our 
Lord say, “the first shall be last ; and the last first.” 

How true were these words, when we apply them te 


214 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the history of Christian churches! There was a time 
when Asia Minor, and Greece, and Northern Africa, 
were full of professing Christians, while England and 
America were heathen lands. Sixteen hundred years 
have made a mighty change. The churches of Africa 
and Asia have fallen into complete decay. The English 
and American churches are laboring to spread the Gos- 
pel over the world. Well might our Lord say, “‘the 
first shall be last, and the last first.” 

How true these words appear to believers, when they 
look back over their own lives, and remember all they 
have seen from the time of their own conversion! How 
many began to serve Christ at the same time with them- 
selves and seemed to run well for a season. But where 
are they now ? The world has got hold of one. False 
doctrine has beguiled another. A mistake in marriage 
has spoiled a third. Few indeed are the believers who 
cannot call to mind many such cases. Few have failed 
to discover, by sorrowful experience, that ‘‘ the last are 
often first, and the first last.” 

Let us learn to pray for humility, when we read texts 
like this. Itis not enough to begin well, We must 
persevere, and go on, and continue in well-doing. We 
must not be content with the fair blossoms of a few 
religious convictions, and joys, and sorrows, and hopes, 
and fears. Wemust bear the good fruit of settled habits 
of repentance, faith, and holiness. Happy is he who 
counts the cost, and resolves, having once begun to walk 
in the narrow way, by God’s grace never to turn aside. 

The last thing that demands our attention in this pas- 
sage, is owr Lord’s clear foreknowledge of His own sufferings 


MARK, CHAP. X, 915 


and death, Calmly and deliberately He tells His disci- 
ples of His coming passion at Jerusalem. One after 
another He describes all the leading circumstances which 
would attend His death. Nothing is reserved. Nothing 
is kept back. 

Let us mark this well. There was nothing involun- 
tary and unforeseen in our Lord’s death. It was the 
result of his own free, determinate, and deliberate choice. 
From the beginning of His earthly ministry He saw the 
cross before Him, and went to it a willing sufferer. He 
knew that His death was the needful payment that must 
be made to reconcile God and man. That payment He 
had covenanted and engaged to make at the price of His 
own blood. And so when the appointed time came, like 
a faithful surety, He kept His word, and died for our 
sins on Calvary. 

Let us ever bless God that the Gospel sets before us 
such a Saviour, so faithful to the terms of the covenant 
—so ready to suffer—so willing to be reckoned sin, and 
a curse in our stead. Let us not doubt that He who 
fulfilled his engagement to suffer, will also fulfil His 
engagement to save all who come to Him. Let us not 
only accept Him gladly as our Redeemer and Advocate, 
but gladly give ourselves, and all we have, to His ser- 
vice. Surely, if Jesus cheerfully died for us, it isa 
small thing to require Christians to live for Him. 





MARK X. 35—45. 


85 re James and John, the sons|do for us whatsoever we shall desire, 
of Zebedee, come unto him, saying,| 86 And he said unto them, What 
Master, we would that thou shouldest| would ye that I should do for yon? 


216 


87 They said unto him, Grant unto 
us, that we may sit, one on thy right 
hand, and the other on thy left hand, 
in thy glory. 

88 But Jesus said unto them, Ye 
know not what ye ask: can ye drink 
of the cup that I drink of? and be 
baptized with the baptism that I am 
baptized with ? 

89 And they said unto him, We 
can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye 
shall indeed drink of the cup that I 
drink of: and with the baptism that 
I am baptized withal shall ye be bap- 
tized : 

40 But to sit on my right hand and 
on my left hand is not mine to give; 
but it shall be given to them for whom 





EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


41. And when the ten heard #¢, they 
began to be much displeased with 
James and John. 

42 But Jesus called them to lim, 
and saith unto them, Ye know that 
they which are accounted to rule over 
the Gentiles exercise lordship over 
them: and their great ones exercise 
authority upon them. 

43 But so shall it not be among 
you: but whosoever will be great 
among you, shall be your minis- 
ter: 

44 And whosoever of you will be 
the chiefest, shall be servant of all. 

45 For even the Son of man came 
not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give his lifea ransom 
for many. 


itis prepared. 


Lzt us mark in this passage, the ignorance of our Lord’s 
disciples. We find James and John petitioning for the 
first places in the kingdom of glory. We find them 
confidently declaring their ability to drink of their Mas- 
_ter’s cup and be baptized-with their Master’s baptism. 
In spite of all the plain warnings of our Lord, they 
clung obstinately to the belief that Christ’s kingdom on 
earth was immediately going to appear. Notwithstand- 
ing their many shortcomings in Christ’s service, they had 
no misgivingsas to their power to endure any thing which 
might come upon them. With all their faith, and grace, 
and love to Jesus, they neither knew their own hearts, 
nor the nature of the path before them. They still 
dreamed of temporal crowns, and earthly rewards. They 
still knew not what manner of men they were. 

There are few true Christians who do not resemble 
James and John, when they first begin the service of 
Christ. We are apt to expect far more present enjoy- 
ment from our religion, than the Gospel warrants us to 
expect. We are apt to forget the cross, and the tribula- 


—s 


MARK, CHAP. X. - 217 


tion, and to think only of the crown. We form an 
incorrect estimate of our own patience and power of 
endurance. We misjudge our own ability to stand 
temptation and trial. And the result of all is that 
we often buy wisdom dearly, by bitter experience, after 
many disappointments, and not a few falls. 

Let the case before us teach us the importance of a 
solid and calm judgment in our religion. Like James 
and John, we are right in coveting the best vifts, and in 
telling all our desires to Christ. Like them we are right 
in believing that Jesus is King of kings, and will one day 
reign upon the earth. But let us not, like them, forget 
that there is a cross to be borne by every Christian, and 
that “through much tribulation we must enter into the 
kingdom of God.” (Acts xiv. 22.) Let us not, like them, 
be over-confident in our own strength, and forward in 
professing that we can do any thing that Christ requires. 
Tet us, in short, beware of a boastful spirit, when we first 
begin to run the Christian course. If we remember this, 
it may save us many a humbling fall. 

Let us mark, secondly, in this passage, what praise our 
Lord bestows on lowliness, and devotion to the good of others. 
It seems that the ten were much displeased with James 
and John, because of the petition which they made to 
their Master. Their ambition and love of pre-eminence 
were once more excited at the idea of any one being 
placed above themselves, Our Lord saw their feelings, 
and, like a wise physician, proceeded at once to supply 
a corrective medicine. He tells them that their ideas of 
greatness were built on a mistaken foundation, He 
repeats with renewed emphasis, the lesson already laid 

10 


218 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


down in the preceding chapter, ‘‘ Whosoever of you will 
be the chiefest shall be servant of all.’ And He backs 
up all by the overwhelming argument of His own exam- 
ple: ‘“‘ ven the Son ad man came not to be ministered 


unto, but to minister.” 

Let all who desire to sinks Christ, watch and pray 
against'self-esteem. It isa feeling which is deeply rooted 
in our hearts. Thousands have come out from the 
world, taken up the cross, professed to forsake their own 
righteousness, and believe in Christ, who have felt 
irritated and annoyed, when a brother has been more 
honored than themselves. These things ought not so 
to be. We ought often to ponder the words of St. Paul, 
“‘Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory ; but 
in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better than 
themselves.” (Philipp. ii. 3.) Blessed is that man who 


* The remarks of Quesnel on this passage are worth reading. He 
says, “The ambition of clergymen is a great scandal in the church, 
and is frequently an occasion of emulations, enmities, pees 
schisms, and wars; of all which the displeasure of the spouttes gives us 
an imperfect eaigacly and resemblance. If apostles, trained up in the 
school of humility and charity, are not free from this vice, what effects 
will not ambition produce in souls wholly immersed in flesh and 
blood, which have no motion but from their passions, no law but that 
of their own desires ?” 

“Men strangely forget themselves, when, as a ministry appointed 
only for the sake of heaven, they are contending with the great ones 
of the earth in haughtiness and grandeur. It is very difficult to sup- 
port equally the double character of a spiritual pastor and a temporal 
prince; and to join humility with grandeur, meekness with do- 
minion, and the constant application of a pastor with the care of 
secular affairs.” 

“The greatest prelate in the church, is he who is most conforma- 
ble to the example of Christ, by humility, charity, and continual 
attendance on his flock, and who looks on himself as a servant to the 
children of God.” 


MARK, CHAP. X. 219 


ean sincerely rejoice when others are exalted, though he 
himself is overlooked and passed by ! 

Above all, let all who desire to walk in Christ’s steps 
labor to be useful to others. Let them lay themselves 
out to do good in their day and generation. There is 
always a vast field for doing it, if men have the will 
and inclination. Let them never forget, that true great- 
ness does not consist in being an adwiral, or a general— 
a statesman, or an artist. It consists in devoting our- 
selves, body, and soul, and spirit to the blessed work of 
making our fellow men more holy and more happy. It 
is those whoexert themselves by the useof Scripture means 
to lessen the sorrow, and increase the joy of all around 
them—the Howards, the Wilberforces, the Martyns, 
the Judsons of a country—who are truly great in the 
sight of God. While they- live they are laughed at, 
mocked, ridiculed, and often persecuted. But their me- 
morial is on high. Their names are written in heaven. 
Their praise endureth for ever. Let us remember these 
things, and while we have time do good unto all men, 
and be servants of all for Christ’s sake. Let us strive to 
leave the world better, holier, happier than it was when 
we were born. A life spent in this way is truly Christ- 
like, and brings its own reward. 

Let us mark, lastly, in this passage, the language which 
our Lord uses in speaking of His own death. He says, 
“The Son of Man came to give His life a ransom for 
many.” 

This is one of those expressions which ought to be 
carefully treasured up in the minds of all true Christians. 
It is one of the texts which prove incontrovertibly the 


220 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


atoning character of Christ’s death. That death was no 
common death, like the death of a martyr, or of other 
holy men. It was the public payment, by an Almighty 
Representative, of the debts of sinful man to a holy 
God. It was the ransom which a Divine Surety under- 
took to provide, in order to procure liberty for sinners, 
tied and bound by the chain of their sins. By that 
death Jesus made a full and complete satisfaction for 
man’s countless transgressions. He bore our sins in His 
own body on the tree. The Lord laid on Him the ini- 
quity of us all. When He died, He died for us. When 
He suffered, He suffered in our stead. When He hung 
on the cross, He hung there as our Substitute. When 
His blood flowed, it was the price of our souls. 

Let all who trust in Christ take comfort in the thought 
that they build on a sure foundation. It is true that we 
ure sinners, but Christ has borne our sins. It is true 
that we are poor helpless debtors, but Christ has paid 
our debts. It is true that we deserve to be shut up for 
ever in the prison of hell. But thanks be to God, Christ 
hath paid a full and complete ransom for us. The door 
is wide open. The prisoners may go free. May we all 
know this privilege by heartfelt experience, and walk 
in the blessed liberty of the children of God.* 


* The manner in which our Lord uses the word baptism in the 
passage now expounded, deserves careful notice. He says to two 
disciples, who were already baptized with water, “Can ye be bap- 
tized with the baptism that I am baptized with?” The expression 
is very remarkable. It is a clear proof that in the New Testament 
a sacramental dipping or sprinkling with water is not always neces- 
sarily implied by the word baptism. It establishes the fact that there 
is such a thing as being baptized, in a certain sense, without the use 
of any outward ordinance at all. 


MARK, CHAP. Xx, 


221 


MARK X. 46—52, 


40 And they came to Jericho: and 
as he went out of Jericho with his 
sob and a great number of people, 
blind Bartimaeus, the son of Timaus, 
sat by the highway side begging. 

47 And when he heard that it was 
Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry 
out, and say, Jesus, thow Son of Da- 
vid, have mercy on me. 

48 And many charged him that he 
should hold his peace: but he cried 
the more a great deal, Zhou Son of 
David have mercy on me. 

49 And Jesus stood still, and com- 





call the blind man, saying unto him, 
- of good comfort. rise; he calleth 
ee. 

50 And he, casting away his gar- 
ment, rose, and came to Jesus. 

51 And Jesus answered and said 
unto Him, What wilt thou that I 
should do unto thee? The blind man 
said unto him, Lord, that I might re- 
ceive my sight. 

52 And Jesussaid unto him, Go thy 
way ; thy faith hath made thee whole. 
And immediately he received his 
sight, and followed Jesus in the 


manded him to be called. And they 'way. 


WE read in these verses an account of one of our Lord’s 
miracles. Let us see in it, as we read, a vivid emblem 
of spiritual things. We are not studying a history which 
concerns us personally any more than the exploits of Cesar 
or Alexander. We have before us a picture which ought 
to be deeply interesting to the soul of every Christian. 


This is a point that ought to be remembered in interpreting some 
of the passages in the Epistles where the words “baptism” and 
“baptized” are used. In such texts, for instance, as “baptism doth 
save us,” (1 Peter iii. 21,) or “as many as have been baptized into 
Christ have put on Christ,” (Gal. iii. 27,) it is clear that something 
more is contained than any mere outward ordinance. In both cases, 
the baptism of water is undoubtedly meant, but it is no less evident 
that something is implied also of deeper moment than any ordinance 
administered by man. In both cases it is a baptism which is accom- 
panied by true faith, and a heart-reception of Christ, such as was the 
baptism of the Philippian jailer, To quote such texts in support of 
what is commonly called the baptismal regeneration of infants, is to 
wrest and pervert them from their proper meaning. The conclusion 
of the text in St. Peter, for example, seems to place this beyond ques- 
tion. He emphatically warns us not to suppose that he means nothing 
more than the washing of water, or bodily reception of a sacrament, 
by the word baptism. 

It has been a wise act on the part of translators of the New Tes- 
‘ament to adhere to the Greek words “ baptize” and “baptism” in 
rendering the Bible into the vernacular tongue of each nation. No 
other words could possibly imply all that the two Greek words 


299, EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


In the first place, we have here an example of strong 
foith. Weare told that as Jesus went out of Jericho, 
a blind man named Bartimeeus “sat by the wayside 
begging. And when he heard that it was Jesus of Na- 
zvareth, he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou Son 
of David, have mercy on me.” 

Bartimaeus was blind in body, but not in soul. The 
eyes of his understanding were open. He saw things 
which Annas and Caiaphas, and hosts of letter-learned 
Scribes and Pharisees, never saw at all. He saw that 
Jesus of Nazareth, as our Lord was contemptuously 
called—Jesus, who had lived for thirty years in an 
obscure Galilean village—this very Jesus was the Son 
of David—the Messiah of whom prophets had prophesied 
long ago. He had witnessed none of our Lord’s mighty 
miracles. He had not had the opportunity of beholding 
dead people raised with a word, and lepers healed by a 
touch. Of all these privileges, his blindness totally de- 
prived him. But he had heard the report of our Lord’s 
mighty works, and hearing had believed. He was satis- 
fied from mere hear-say, that He of whom such wonderful 
things were reported, must be the promised Saviour, and 
must be able to heal him. And so when our Lord drew 
convey. All other expressions would either weaken the sense of 
the inspired writers, or convey a false impression to the mind of the 
reader. ‘To take one solitary instance, what conld be more meagre 
or unsatisfactory than to render the passage now before us in the fol- 
lowing way, “Can ye be sprinkled with the sprinkling, or dipped 
with the dipping, that I am sprinkled or dipped with ?”—The firm- 
ness of the British and Foreign Bible Society on this point, ought 
to be cause of thankfulness to all the Protestant churches. In re- 


solving to use the Greek words “baptize” and “ baptism,” in all their 
versions, they have exercised a wise discretion. 


MARK, CHAP. X, 223 


near, he cried, “ Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy 
on me,” 

Let us strive and pray that we may have like precious 
faith. We too are not allowed to see Jesus with our 
bodily eyes. But we have the report of His power, and 
grace, and willingness to save, in the Gospel. We have 
exceeding great promises from His own lips, written down 
for our encouragement. Let us trust those promises 
implicitly, and commit our souls to Christ unhesitatingly. 
Let us not be afraid to repose all our confidence on His 
own gracious words, and to believe that what He has 
engaged to do for sinners, He will surely perform. What 
is the beginning of all saving faith, but a soul’s venture 
on Christ ? What is the life of saving faith, when once 
begun, but a continual leaning on an unseen Saviour’s 
word ? What is the first step of a Christian, but a 
crying, like Bartimzus, ‘‘ Jesus have mercy on me ?” 
What is the daily course of a Christian, but keeping up 
the same spirit of faith? “ Though now we see Him 
not, yet believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and 
full of glory.” (1 Peter i. 8.) 

We have, in the second place, in these verses, an ex- 
ample of determined perseverance in the face of difficulties. 
We are told that when Bartimzus began to cry out, 
“ Jesus, thou Son of David have mercy on me,” he met 
with little encouragement from those who were near him. 
On the contrary, ‘‘ many charged him that he should hold 
his peace.” But he was not to be stopped. If others 
did not know the misery of blindness, he did. If others 
did not think it worth while to take such trouble, in order 
to obtain relief, he, at any rate, knew better. He cared 


924 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


not for the rebukes of unfeeling bystanders. He heeded 
not the ridicule which his importunity probably brought 
onhim. “ He cried the more a great deal,” and so cry- 
ing obtained his heart’s desire, and received his sight. 

Let all who wish to be saved, mark well this conduct 
of Bartimzeus, and walk diligently in his steps. Like 
him, we must care nothing what others think and say of 
us, when we seek the healing of our souls. There never 
will be wanting people who will tell us that it is “too 
soon,” or “ too late’—that we are going “ too fast,” or 
“too far’—that we need not pray so much, or read our 
Bibles so much—or be so anxious about salvation. We 
must give no heed to such people. Like Bartimzeus, we 
must cry the more, “ Jesus have mercy on me.” 

What is the reason that men are so half-hearted in 
seeking Christ ? Why are they so soon deterred, and 
checked, and discouraged in drawing near to God ? The 
answer, is short and simple. They do not feel sufficiently — 
their own sins. They are not thoroughly convinced of 
the plague of their own hearts, and the disease of their 
own souls. Once let a man see his own guilt, as it really 
is, and he will never rest till he has found pardon and 
peace in Christ. It is they who, like Bartimeus, really 
know their own deplorable condition, who persevere, like 
Bartimeeus, and are finally healed. 

In the last place, we have, in these verses, an example 
of the constraining influence which gratitude to Christ ought 
to have upon our souls. Bartimeeus did not return home 
as soon as he was restored to sight. He would not leave 
Him from whom he had received such mercy. At once 
he devoted the new powers, which his cure gave him, to 


MARK, CHAP. X. 225 


the Son of David who had worked the cure. His history 
concludes with the touching expression, he “ followed 
Jesus in the way.” 

Let us see in these simple words, a lively emblem of 
the effect that the grace of Christ ought to have on every 
one who tastes it. It ought to make him a follower of 
Jesus in his life, and to draw him with mighty power into 
the way of holiness. Freely pardoned, he ought to give 
himself freely and willingly to Christ’s service. Bought 
at so mighty a price as the blood of Christ, he ought to 
devote himself heartily and thoroughly to Him who re- 
deemed him. Grace really experienced will make a man 
feel daily, ‘‘ What shall I render to the Lord for all His 
benefits.” It did so for the apostle Paul: he says, ‘the 
love of Christ constraineth us.” (2 Cor. v.14) It will 
do so for all true Christians at the present day. The 
man who boasts of having an interest in Christ, while he 
does not follow Christ in his life, is a miserable self- 
deceiver, and is ruining his own soul. “As many as are 
led by the Spirit of God, they,” and they only, “‘ are the 
sons of God.” (Rom. viii. 14.) 

Have we had our eyes opened by the Spirit of God ? 
Have we yet been taught to see sin, and Christ, and 
holiness, and heaven, in their true light ? Can we say, 
One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see? 
If so, we shall know the things of which we have been 
reading, by experience. If not, we are yet in the broad 
way that leadeth to destruction, and have every thing to 
learn. 


226 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK XI. 1—11. 


1 And when sii came nigh to Je- 
rusalem, unto Bet: piuge and Beth- 
any, at the mount of Olives, he send- 
eth torth two of his disciples, 

“2 And saith unto them, Go your 
way into the village over against 
ou: and as soon as ye be entered 
Into it, ye shall find a colt tied where- 
on never man sat; loose him and 
bring him, 

8 And if any man say unto you 
Why do ye this? say ye that the ord 
hath need of him; and straightway 
he will send him hither. 

4 And they went their way, and 
found the colt tied by the door with- 
out in a place where two ways met ; 
and they loose him. 

5 And certain of them that stood 
there said unto them, What do ye 
loosing the colt ? 

6 And they said unto them even as 


Jesus had commanded: anc they let 
them go. 

7 And they brought the colt to 
Jesus, and cast their garments on 
him ; and he sat upon him. 

8 And many spread their garments 
in the way: and others cut down 
branches off the trees, and strawed 
them in the way. 

9 And they that went before, and 
they that followed, cried, saying, 
Hosanna; Blessed 7s he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord: 

10 Blessed be the kingdom of our 
father David, that cometh in the name 
of the Lord : Hosanna in the highest. 

11 And Jesus entered into Jerusa- 
lem, and into the temple: and when 
he had looked round about upon all 
things, and now the eventide was 
come, he went out unto Bethany with 
the twelve. 


THE event described in these verses, is a singular ex- 
ception in the history of our Lord’s earthly ministry. 
Generally speaking, we see Jesus withdrawing Himself 
from public notice—often passing His time in the remote 
parts of Galilee—not unfrequently abiding in the wilder- — 
ness—and so fulfilling the prophecy, that He should “‘ not 
cry, nor strive, nor let His voice be heard in the streets.” 
Here, and here only, our Lord appears to drop His 
private character, and of His own choice to call public 
attention to Himself. He deliberately makes a public 
entry into Jerusalem, at the head of His disciples. He 
voluntarily rides into the holy city, surrounded by a vast 
multitude, crying, Hosanna, like king David returning to 
his palace in triumph. (2 Sam. xix. 40.) All this too was 
done at a time when myriads of Jews were gathered out 
of every land to Jerusalem, to keep the Passover. We 
may well believe that the holy city rang with the 


MARK, CHAP. XI. 227 


tidings of our Lord’s arrival. It is probable there was 
not a house in Jerusalem in which the entry of the prophet 
of Nazareth was not known and talked of that night. 

These things should always be remembered in reading 
this portion of our Lord’s history. It is not for nothing 
that this entry into Jerusalem is four times related in 
the New Testament. It is evident that it is a scene in 
the earthly life of Jesus, which Christians are intended 
to study with special attention. Let us study it in that 
spirit, and see what practical lessons we may learn from 
the passage for our own souls. 

Let us observe, in the first place, how public our Lord 
purposely made the last act of His hfe. He came to 
Jerusalem to die, and He desired that all Jerusalem 
should know it. When He taught the deep things of the 
Spirit, He often spoke to none but His apostles. When 
He delivered His parables, He often addressed none but 
a multitude of poor and ignorant Galileans. When He 
worked His miracles, He was generally at Capernaum, or 
in the land of Zebulon and Napthali. But when the 
time came that He should die, He madé a public entry 
into Jerusalem. He drew the attention of rulers, and 
priests, and elders, and Scribes, and Greeks, and Romans 
to Himself. He knew that the most wonderful event 
that ever happened in this world was about to take place, 
The eternal Son of God was about to suffer in the stead 
of sinful men—the great sacrifice for sin about to be offered 
up—the great Passover Lamb about to be slain—the 
great atonement for a world’s sin about to be made. He 
therefore ordered it so that His death was eminently a 
public death. He over-ruled things in such a way that 


228 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the eyes of all Jerusalem were fixed upon Him, and 
when He died, He died before many witnesses. 

Let us see here one more proof of the unspeakable 
importance of the death of Christ. Let us treasure up 
His gracious sayings. Let us strive to walk in the steps 
of His holy life. Let us prize His intercession. Let us 
long for his second coming. But never let us forget 
that the crowning fact in all we know of Jesus Christ, is 
His death upon the cross. From that death flow all our 
hopes. Without that death we should have nothing 
solid beneath our feet. May we prize that death more 
and more every year we live ; and in all our thoughts 
about Christ, rejoice in nothing so much as the great fact 
that He died for us! 

Let us observe, in the second place, in this passage, 
the voluntary poverty which our Lord underwent, when He 
was upon earth, How did He enter Jerusalem when He 
came to it on this remarkable occasion ? Did He come 
in a royal chariot, with horses, soldiers, and a retinue - 
around Him, like the kings of this world ? Weare told 
nothing of the kind. We read that He borrowed the colt 
of an ass for the occasion, and sat upon the garments of 
His disciples for lack of a saddle. This was in perfect 
keeping with all the tenor of His ministry, He never had 
any of the riches of this world. When He crossed the sea 
pt Galilee, it was in a borrowed boat. When He rode into 
the holy city, it was on a borrowed beast. When He 
was buried, it was in a borrowed tomb. 

We have in this simple fact, an instance of Pe 
marvellous union of weakness* and power, riches and 


* T use the word “weakness” in this passage advisedly. There is 


MARK, CHAP. XI. - 229 


poverty, the godhead and the manhood, which may be so 
often traced in the history of our blessed Lord. Who 
that reads the Gospels carefully can fail to observe, that 
He who could feed thousands with a few loaves, was 
Himself sometimes hungry—and He who could heal the 
sick and infirm, was Himself sometimes weary—that He 
who could cast out devils with a word, was Himself 
tempted—and He who could raise the dead, could Him- 
self submit to die? We see the very same thing in the 
passage before us. We see the power of our Lord in 
His bending the wills of a vast multitude to conduct Him 
into Jerusalem in triumph. We see the poverty of our 
Lord in His borrowing an ass to carry Him when He 
made His triumphal entry. It is all wonderful, but there 
is a fitness in it all. It is meet and right that we should 
never forget the union of the divine and human natures 
in our Lord’s person. If we saw His divine acts only, 


scriptural warrant for it in the text, “He was crucified through 
weakness.” (2 Cor. xiii. 4.) Nevertheless I wish it to be distinctly 
understood, that I utterly disclaim the idea of there being any moral 
weakness in the human nature of Christ. The only weakness I mean 
is that sinless infirmity which is inseparably connected with flesh and 
blood, and from which Adam, before the fall, was not exempt. Of 
all such weakness, I believe, our Lord was partaker tothe fullest extent. 

Whether or not our Lord’s riding upon an ass instead of a horse, 
was a mark of humiliation, is a point on which opinions differ widely. 
Some dwell on the fact that the ass in oriental countries was an ani- 
mal that even kings rode, and refer to Judges v. 10. “Speak, ye that 
ride on white asses,”&c. Others think that the choice of an ass was 
purposely made as emblematic of our Lord’s lowly nature. Gerhard 
in his commentary, refers to a saying of Tertullian, that the Gentiles 
called Christians “ asinarii,” in ridicule, because they believed im Christ 
who rode on an ass, and even calumniously charged them with wor- 
shipping an ass’s head! 


930 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


we might forget that He was man. If we saw His 
seasons of poverty and weakness only, we might forget 
that He was God. But we are intended to sce in Jesus 
divine strength and human weakness united in one per- 
son. We cannot explain the mystery ; but we may take 
comfort in the thought, “this is our Saviour, this is our 
Christ—one able to sympathize, because He is man, 
but one Almighty to save, because He is God.” 

Finally, let us see in the simple fact, that our Lord 
rode on a borrowed ass, one more proof that poverty 
is in itself no sin. The causes which occasion much 
of the poverty there is around us, are undoubtedly 
very sinful. Drunkenness, extravagance, profligacy, dis- 
honesty, idleness, which produce so much of the des- 
titution in the world, are unquestionably wrong in the 
sight of God. But to be born a poor man, and to inherit 
nothing from our parents—to work with our own hands 
for our bread, and to have no land of our own—all this 
is not sinful at all. The honest poor man is as honor- . 
able in the sight of God as the richest king. The Lord 
Jesus Christ Himself was poor. Silver and gold He had 
none. He had often nowhere to lay His head. Though 
He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor. To be 
lke Him in circumstances, cannot be in itself wrong. 
Let us do our duty in that state of life to which God has 
called us, and if He thinks fit to keep us poor let us not 
be ashamed. The Saviour of sinners cares for us as well 
as for others. The Saviour of sinners knows what it is 
to be poor, 


MARK, OHAP. XI, 


231 


MARK XI. 12—21. 


12 And on the morrow, when they 
were come from Bethany, he was 
hungry : 

13 And seeing a fig tree afar off 
having leaves, he came, if haply he 
might find any thing thereon: and 
when he came to it, he found nothing 
but leaves; for the time of figs was 
not yet. 

14 And Jesus answered and said 
unto it, No man eat fruit of thee here- 
after for ever And his disciples heard 
a. 

15 And they come to Jerusalem: 
and Jesus went into the temple, 
and began to cast out them that 
sold and bought in the temple, and 
overthrew the tables of the money- 
changers, and the seats of them that 
sold doves ; , 

16 And would not suffer that any 


man should carry any vessel through 
the temple. 

17 And he taught, saying unto 
them, Is it not written, Mt house 
shall be called of all nations the house 
of prayer? but ye have made it a den 
of thieves. 

18 And the Scribes and Chief 
Priests heard i¢, and sought how they 
might destroy him: for they feared 
him, because all the people were aston- 
ished at his doctrine. 

19 And when even was come, he 
went out of the city. : 

20 And in the morning, as they 
passed by, they saw the fig tree dried 
up from the roots. 

21 And Peter calling to remem- 
brance, saith unto him, Master, be- 
hold, the fig tree which thou cursedst 
is withered away. 


WE see in the beginning of this passage, one of the many 


proofs that our Lord Jesus Christ was really man. 
read that ‘He was hungry.” 


We 
He had a nature and 


bodily constitution, like our own in all things, sin only 
excepted. He could weep, and rejoice, and suffer pain. 
He could be weary and need rest. He could be thirsty, 
and need drink. He could be hungry, and need food. 
Expressions like this should teach us the condescen- 
sion of Christ. How wonderful they are when we reflect 
upon them! He who is the eternal God—He who made 
the world and all that it contains—He from whose hand 
the fruits of the earth, the fish of the sea, the fowls of 
the air, the beasts of the field, all had their beginning 
—He, even He was pleased to suffer hunger, when He 
came into the world to save sinners. This is a great 
mystery. Kindness and love like this pass man’s under- 
standing. No wonder that St. Paul speaks of the ‘ un- 
searchable riches of Christ.” (Hiphes. ui. 8.) 
Expressions like this should teach us Christ’s power 


232 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to sympathize with His believing people on earth. He 
knows their sorrows by experience. He can be touched 
with the feeling of their infirmities. He has had ex- 
perience of a body and its daily wants. He has suffered 
Himself the severe sufferings that the body of man is 
liable to. He has tasted pain, and weakness, and weari- 
ness, and hunger, and thirst. When we tell Him of 
these things in our prayers, He knows what we mean, 
and is no stranger to our troubles. Surely this is just 
the Saviour and Friend that poor aching, groaning, 
human nature requires ! 

We learn, in the second place, from these verses, the 
great danger of unfruitfulness and formality im religion. 
This is a lesson which our Lord teaches in a remarkable 
typical action. Weare told that coming to a fig tree in 
search of fruit, and finding “on it nothing but leaves,” 
He pronounced on it the solemn sentence, “‘ No man eat 
fruit of thee hereafter for ever.” And we are told that 
the next day the fig tree was found “dried up from the 
roots.” We cannot doubt for a moment that this whole 
transaction was an emblem of spiritual things. It was a 
parable in deeds, as full of meaning as any of our Lord’s 
parables in words.* 


* There are two difficulties connected with the story of the with- 
ered fig tree, which weigh considerably on some minds, and therefore 
deserve notice. 

1. It is a difficulty with some persons that our Lord should have 
pronounced any curse at allon the fig tree. They say, that it looks 
like needless destruction of an innocent and unoffending creature, and 
out of keeping with the spirit of Deut. xx. 19. 

Such objectors appear to forget that the withering of the fig 
tree was not a mere empty exhibition of power, like the pretended 
miracles of Mahomet and other false prophets. It was a mighty typi- 
cal act, teaching deep spiritual lessons, lessons of such importance as 


MARK, CHAP. XI. 233 


But who were they to whom this withered fig tree was 
intended to speak ? It was a sermon of three-fold ap- 
plication, a sermon that ought to speak loudly to the 
consciences of all professing Christians. Though withered 
and dried up, that fig tree yet speaks.—There was a 
voice in it for the Jewish Church. Rich in the leaves of 
a formal religion, but barren of all fruits of the Spirit, 
that Chuch was in fearful danger, at the very time when 
this withering tock place. Well would it have been for 


might well justify the destruction of one of God’s unintelligent crea- 
tures, in order to convey them. Remembering this, we have no more 
right to object to it, than to object to the daily offering of a lamb 
under the Mosaic law. In that offering the life of an innocent and 
unoffending creature was daily taken away. But the great end of 
daily setting before the eyes of man the one sacrifice for sin, justified 
the taking away the life of the lamb. Just in the same way we may 
justify our Lord’s taking away the life of the tree. 

2. It is a difficulty with some persons that the account of St. Mark 
contains the words, “ the time of figs was not yet.” They ask to be 
told why our Lord should have gone to the tree seeking fruit, when 
the season for figs had not yet arrived ? 

The answers to this difficulty are various. The simplest of them 
appears to be as follows. “The time of figs, as a general rule, had not 
yet come. But our Lord seeing a fig tree covered with leaves, wnlike 
the other fig trees, had a right to suppose that figs were to be found 
on it, and therefore came to it.”—It is no small recommendation of 
this view that it supplies an exact illustration of the state of the 
Jewish Church, when our Lord was upon earth. The time of figs 
was not yet, that is, the nations of the earth were all in darkness, 
and bore no fruit to the glory of God.—But among the nations, 
there was one covered with leaves, that is the Jewish Church, full 
of light, knowledge, privileges and high profession.—Seeing this fig 
tree full of leaves, our Lord came to it seeking fruit, that is, He came to 
the Jews justly expecting them to have fruit according to their outward 
profession.—But when our Lord came to this leafy Jewish fig tree, 
He found it utterly destitute of fruit, faithless and unbelieving —And 
the end was that He pronounced sentence on it, gave it over to be 
destroyed by the Romans, and scattered the Jews over the earth. 


234 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the Jewish Church if it had had eyes to see its peril ! 
—There was a voice in the fig tree for all the branches of 
Christ’s visible Church in every age, and every part of 
the world. There was a warning against an empty-pro- 
fession of Christianity unaccompanied by sound doctrine 
and holy living, which some of those branches would 
have done well to lay to heart.—But above all there was 
a voice in that withered fig tree for all carnal, hypocri- 
tical, and false-hearted Christians. Well would it be 
for all who are content with a name to live while in 
reality they are dead, if they would only see their own 
faces in the glass of this passage. 

Let us take care that we each individually learn the 
lesson that this fig tree conveys. Let us always remem- 
ber, that baptism, and church-membership, and reception 
of the Lord’s Supper, and a diligent use of the outward 
forms of Christianity, are not sufficient to save our souls. 
They are leaves, nothing but leaves, and without fruit will 
add to our condemnation. Like the fig leaves of which © 
Adam and Eve made themselves garments, they will not 
hide the nakedness of our souls from the eye of an all- 
seeing God, or give us boldness when we stand before 
Him at the last day. No! we must bear fruit, or be lost 
for ever. There must be fruit in our hearts and fruit in 
our lives, the fruit of repentance toward God, and faith 
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and true holiness in our 
conversation. Without such fruits as these a profession 
of Christianity will only sink us lower into hell. 

We learn, in the last place, from this passage, how 
reverently we ought to use places which are set apart for 
public worship. This is a trath which is taught us in a 


| MARK, CHAP. Xt. 235: 


striking manner by our Lord Jesus Christ’s conduct, 
when He went into the temple. We are told that “ He 
cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and 
overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats 
of them that sold doves.” And we are told that He 
enforced this actioh by warrant of Scripture, saying, “Is 
it not written, My house shall be called of all nations 
the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of 
thieves,” 

We need not doubt that there was a deep meaning 
in this action of our Lord on this occasion. Like the 
cursing of the fig tree, the whole transaction was emi- 
nently typical. But in saying this, we must not allow 
ourselves to lose sight of one simple and obvious lesson 
which lies on the surface of the passage. That lesson is 
the sinfulness of careless and irreverent behavior in the 
use of buildings set apart for the public service of God. 
It was not so much as the house of sacrifice, but as the 
“house of prayer,” that our Lord purified the temple. 
His action clearly indicates the feeling with which every 
“house of prayer’ should be regarded. A Christian 
place of worship no doubt is in no sense so sacred as the 
Jewish tabernacle, or temple. Its arrangements have no 
typical meaning. It is not built after a divine model, 
and intended to serve as an example of heavenly things. 
But it does not follow because these things are so, that 
a Christian place of worship is to be used with no more 
reverence than a private dwellmg, or a shop, or an inn, 
There is surely a decent reverence, which is due to a 
place where Christ and His people regularly meet to- 
gether and public prayer is offered up—a reverence which 


236 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


it is foolish and unwise to brand as superstitious, and 
confound with Popery. There is a certain feeling of 
sanctity and solemnity which ought to belong to all pla- 
ces where Christ is preached, and souls are born again, 
a feeling which does not depend on any consecration of 
man, and ought to be encouraged rather than checked. 
At all events the mind of the Lord Jesus in this passage 
seems very plain. He takes notice of men’s behavior in 
places of worship, and all irreverence or profanity is an 
offence in His sight. 

Let us remember these verses whenever we go to 
the house of God, and take heed that we go in a serious 
frame, and do not offer the sacrifice of fools, Let us 
call to mind where we are—what we are doing—what 
business we are about—and in whose presence we are 
engaged. Let us beware of giving God a mere formal 
service, while our hearts are full of the world. Let us 
leave our business and money at home, and not carry 
them with us to church. Let us beware of allowing’ 
any buying and selling in our hearts, in the midst of 
our religious assemblies. The Lord still lives, who cast 
out buyers and sellers from the temple, and when He 
sees such conduct He is much displeased. 


MARK XI, 22—26. 


22 And Jesus answering saith unto 
them, Have faith in God. 

23 For verily I say unto you, That 
whosoever shall say unto this moun- 
tain, Be thou removed, and be thou 
east Into the sea; and shall not doubt 
in his heart, but shall believe that 
those things which he saith shall 
come to pass ; he shall have whatso- 
ever he saith. 

24 Therefore I say unto you, What 





things soever ye desire, when ye pra: 
believe that ye receive Tha ae 4 
shall have them. 

25 And when ye stand praying, 
forgive, if ye have ought against any ; 
that your Father also which is in 
heaven may forgive you your tres- 
passes. 

26 But if ye do not forgive, neither 
will your Father which is in heaven 
forgive your trespasses. 


MARK, CHAP. XI. 237 


Ler us learn from these words of our Loid Jesus Christ, 
the immense importance of faith. 

This is a lesson which our Lord teaches first by a 
proverbial saying. Faith shall enable a man to accom- 
plish works, and overcome difficulties, as great and 
formidable as the “removing of a mountain, and casting 
it into the sea.”* Afterwards the lesson is impressed 
upon us still further, by a general exhortation to exercise 
faith when we pray. ‘‘ What things soever ye desire, 
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall 
have them.” This promise must of course be taken with 
a reasonable qualification. It assumes that a believer 
will ask things which are not sinful, and which are in 
accordance with the will of God. When He asks such 
things, he may confidently believe that his prayer will be 
answered. ‘To use the words of St. James, “ Let him 
ask in faith, nothing wavering.” (James i. 6.) 

The faith here commended must be distinguished from 


* Jt is clear that a promise like this of “removing mountains” 
must be taken in a figurative sense. It appears to be a proverbial 
expression, and to be used as such by St. Paul, 2 Cor. xiii. 11. More- 
over it is a promise that must be interpreted with sober and reasona- 
ble limitations. We have no right to expect that whatever we take 
it into our heads to ask of God shall at once be done for us, whether 
it be for His glory and our sanctification or not. We have no war- 
rant for presuming that in every difficulty and trouble, God will at 
once work a miracle and deliver us from our anxiety as soon as we 
make it a subject of prayer. The things about which we pray, must 
be things having special reference to our own vocation and providen- 
tial position. Moses at the head of the twelve tribes of Israel—Hl- 
jah on Mount Carmel—Paul in the Philippian prison, might confi- 
dently expect miraculous interpositions in answer to prayer, in a way 
that private individuals may not expect in our days. Above all, we 
must not think to prescribe to God the time and way in which He 
shall “remove mountains” for us. 


938 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


that faith which is essential to justification. In principle 
undoubtedly all true faith is one and the same. It is 
always trust or belief. But in the object and operations 
of faith, there are diversities, which it is useful to under- 
stand. Justifying faith is that act of the soul by which 
a man lays hold on Christ, and has peace with God. — Its 
special object is the atonement for sin which Jesus made 
on the cross. The faith spoken of in the passage now 
before us is a grace of more general signification, the fruit 
and companion of justifying faith, but still not to be con- 
founded with it. It is rather a general confidence in 
God’s power, wisdom, and goodwill towards believers. 
And its special objects are the promises, the word, and 
the character of God in Christ. 

Confidence in God’s power and will to help every be- 
liever in Christ, and in the truth of every word that God 
has spoken, is the grand secret of success and prosperity 
In our religion. In fact, it is the very root of saving 
Christianity. ‘‘ By it the elders obtained a good report.” 
“He that cometh unto God must believe that He is, 
-and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek 
Him.” To know the full worth of it in the sight of God, 
we should often study the eleventh chapter of the Epis- 
tle to the Hebrews, 

Do we desire to grow in grace, and in the knowledge 
of our Lord Jesus Christ ? Do we wish to make progress 
in our religion, and become strong Christians, and not 
mere babes in spiritual things ? Then let us pray daily 
for more faith, and watch our faith with most jealous 
watchfulness. Here is the corner-stone of our religion. 

A flaw or weakness here will affect the whole condition 


MARK, OHAP. XI. 239 


of our inner man. According to our faith will be the 
degree of our peace, our hope, our joy, our decision in 
Christ’s service, our boldness in confession, our strength 
in work, our patience in trial, our resignation in trouble, 
our sensible comfort in prayer. All, all will hinge on the 
proportion of our faith. Happy are they who know how 
to rest their whole weight continually on a covenant God, 
and to walk by faith, not by sight. ‘* He that believeth 
shall not make haste.” (Isai. xxviii. 16.) 

Let us learn, for another thing, from these verses, the 
absolute necessity of a forgiving spirit towards others, . This 
lesson is here taught us in a striking way. There is ‘no 
immediate connection between the importance of faith, of 
which our Lord had just been speaking, and the subject 
of forgiving injuries. But the connecting link is prayer. 
First we are told that faith is essential to the success of 
our prayers. But then it is added, no prayers can be 
heard which do not come from a forgiving heart. “ When 
ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any, 
that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive 
you your trespasses,” 

The value of our prayers, we can all understand, de- 
pends exceedingly on the state of mind in which we 
offer them. But the point before us is one which re- 
ceives far less attention than it deserves. Our prayers 
must not only be earnest, fervent, and sincere, and in the 
name of Christ. They must contain one more ingredient 
besides. They must come from a forgiving heart. We 
have no right to look for mercy, if we are not ready to 
extend mercy to our brethren. We cannot really feel 
‘the sinfulness of the sins we ask to have pardoned if we 


240 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


cherish malice towards our fellow men. We must have 
the heart of a brother toward our neighbor on earth, 
if we wish God to be our Father in heaven. We must 
not flatter ourselves that we have the Spirit of adoption 
if we cannot bear and forbear. 

This is a heart-searching subject. The quantity of 
malice, bitterness, and party spirit among Christians is 
fearfully great. No wonder that so many prayers seem 
to be thrown away and unheard. It is a subject which 
ought to come home to all classes of Christians. All 
have not equal gifts of knowledge and utterance in their 
approaches to God. But all can forgive their fellow-men. 
It is a subject which our Lord Jesus Christ has taken 
special pains to impress on our minds. He has given it 
a prominent place in that pattern of prayers, the Lord’s 
prayer. We are all familiar from our infancy with the 
words, ‘‘ forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that 
trespass against us.” Well would it be for many, if neg 
would consider what those words mean ! 

Let us leave the passage with serious self-inquiry. 
Do we know what it is to be of a forgiving spirit? Can 
we look over the injuries that we receive from time to 
time in this evil world ? Can we pass over a transgres- 
sion and pardon an offence ? If not, where is our 
Christianity ? If not, why should we wonder that our 
souls do not prosper ? Let us resolve to amend our ways 
in this matter. Let us determine by God’s grace to 
forgive, even as we hope to be forgiven. This is the 
nearest approach we can make to the mind of Christ 
Jesus. This is the character which is most suitable to a 
poor sinful child of Adam. God’s free forgiveness of sins 


MARK, CHAP. XI. 241 


is our highest privilege in this world. God’s free for- 
giveness will be our only title to eternal life in the 
world to come. Then let us be forgiving during the 


few years that we are here upon earth.* 





MARK XI. 27—33. 


27 And they come again to Jerusa- 
lem: and as he was walking in the 
temple, there come to him the Chief 
Priests, and the Scribes, and the eld- 
ers, 
28 And say unto him, By what au- 
thority doest thou these things? and 
who gave thee this authority to do 
these things ? 

29 And Jesus answered and said 
unto them, I will also ask of you one 
question, and answer me, and I will 
tell you by what authority I do these 
things ? 





30 The baptism of John, was 7 
from heaven, or of men? answer me. 

31 And they reasoned with them- 
selves, saying, If we shall say, From 
heaven; he will say, Why then did 
ye not believe him ? 

32 But if we shall say of men; they 
feared the people ; for all men counted 
John, that he was a prophet indeed. 

83 And they answered and said un- 
to Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus 
answering, saith unto them, Neither 
do I tell you by what authority I do 
these things. 


Let us observe in these verses how much spiritual blind- 
ness may be in the hearts of those who hold high ecclesiastical 
office. Wesee ‘the chief priests and scribes and elders” 
coming to our Lord Jesus, and raising difficulties and 
objections in the way of His work. 

These men, we know, were the accredited teachers and 


* The expression “ when ye stand praying,” in this passage, ought 
not to be overlooked. It is one of those forms of speech in the Bible, 
which ought to teach all Christians not to be dogmatical in laying 
down minute rules about the. externals of religion, and especially 
about the precise manner, gesture, or posture in which a believer 
ought to pray. If a man is fully persuaded that he can hold closer 
communion with God, and pour out his heart more freely and with- 
out distraction, in the attitude of standing than in that of kneeling, I 
dare not tell him that he is wrong. The great point to insist on us is 
the absolute necessity of praying with the heart. The last words of 
Sir Walter Raleigh to his executioner on the scaffold are a beautiful 
illustration of the right view of the question: “ Friend, it matters lit- 
tle how a man’s head lies, if his heart be right in the sight of God.” 


* 


242, EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


rulers of the Jewish Church. They were regarded by 
the Jews as the fountain and spring-head of religious 
knowledge. They were, most of them, regularly or- 
dained to the position they held, and could trace their 
orders by regular descent from Aaron. And yet we find 
these very men, at the time when they ought to have 
been instructors of others, full of prejudice against the 
truth, and bitter enemies of the Messiah !* 

These things are written to show Christians that they 
must beware of depending too much on ordained men. 
They must not look up to ministers as Popes, or regard 
them as infallible. The orders of no church confer infalli- 
bility, whether they be Episcopal, Presbyterian, or Inde- 
pendent. Bishops, priests, and deacons, at their best, are 
only flesh and blood, and may err, both in doctrine and 
practice, as well as the chief priests and elders of the Jews, 
Their acts and teaching must always be tested by the word 
of God. They must be followed so far as they follow 
Scripture, and no further. There is only one Priest and 
Bishops of souls, who makes no mistakes. That one is 


* The following remarks from Gerhard’s commentary are wortk 
reading ! 

“The Church is not tied to those teachers who are in the regular 
succession, for they frequently err from the path of truth. In such 
cases the Church ought not to follow their errors, but to embrace the 
truth as set forth in the word. Thus, Aaron setting up the golden 
calf—Urijah the high priest, in the time of Ahaz, building a new al- 
tar—Pashur and the other priests in Jeremiah’s time, all erred most 
grievously. And in this very passage, the priests sitting in Moses’ 
seat reject the Messiah Himself, and impugn His authority. But if 
those who succeeded Aaron in the divinely- appointed priesthood of 
the Old Testament, could err, and, in fact, did occasionally err, how 
much more likely to err are the Hines of Rome, who cannot prove 
from God’s word that the Pope’s office has been eee by Christ 
in the New Testament.” 


» 


MARK, CHAP. XI, 243 


the Lord Jesus Christ. In Him alone is no weakness, no 
failure, no shadow of infirmity, Let us learn to lean more 
entirely on Him. Let us “call no man father on earth.” 
(Matt. xxiii, 9.) So doing, we shall never be disappointed. 

Let us observe, in the second place, how envy and unbe- 
hef make men throw discredit on the commission of those who 
work for God. These chief priests and elders could not 
deny the reality of our Lord’s miracles of mercy. They 
could not say that His teaching was contrary to Holy 
Scripture, or that His life was sinful. What then did 
they do? They attacked His claim to attention, and 
demanded His authority—‘ By what authority doest 
thou these things ? and who gave thee this authority ?”* 

There can be no doubt whatever that, as a general 
principle, all who undertake to teach others, should be 


* Brentius has some sensible remarks on the unreasonableness of 
the chief priests and Pharisees, who would neither keep the temple 
from the encroachment of the buyers and sellers, nor let others do it 
for them. They would neither exercise the lawful authority which 
was in their hands, nor allow of our Lord exercising it for them. He 
shows the similarity of their conduct to that of the Greek and Ro- 
man churches, and to that of a foolish head of a family, who neither 
corrects his children himself, nor likes any one to correct them for 
him. And he concludes by saying, “Let us learn that every one 
should do his own duty, or else yield up his place to another, Let 
us not be like the dog in the manger, who would neither eat the hay 
himself, nor yet allow the ox to eatit.” The history of the church 
of Christ contains only too much of the dog in the manger! Minis- 
ters and teachers have often neglected the souls of their people shame- 
fully, and yet found fault with any one who has tried to do good, 
and haughtily demanded his authority! 

The reflections of the Roman Catholic writer, Quesnel, on this sub- 
iect, are remarkable: “Those who find themselves vanquished by 
truth, generally endeavor to reject authority. There are wo persons 
more forward to demand of others a reason for their actions, than 
those who think they may do every thing themselves without control” 


944 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


regularly appointed to the work, St. Paul himself de- 
clares that this was the case with our Lord, in the matter 
of the priestly office : “ No man taketh this honor unto 
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” 
(Heb. v. 4.) And even now, when the office of the sac- 
rificing priest no longer exists, the words of the twenty- 
third Article of the Church of England are wise and 
scriptural: “It is not lawful for any man to take upon 
him the office of public preaching, or ministering the 
sacraments in the congregation, before he be lawfully 
called and sent to execute the same.” But it is one 
thing to maintain the lawfulness of an outward call to 
minister in sacred things, and quite another to assert 
that it is the one thing needful, without which no work 
for God can be done. This is the point on which the 
Jews evidently erred in the time of our Lord’s earthly 
ministry, and on which many have unhappily followed 
them down to the present day. 

Let us beware of this narrow spirit, and specially in 
these last ages of the world. Unquestionably we must 
not undervalue order and discipline in the church, Itis 
just as valuable there as it is in an army. But we 
must not suppose that God is absolutely tied to the use 
of ordained men. We must not forget that there may 
be an inward call of the Holy.Ghost without any out- 
ward call of man, no less than an outward call of man 
without any inward call of the Holy Ghost. The first 
question after allis this: “Is a man for Christ, or against 
Him? What does he teach ? How does he live? Is 
he doing good ?” If questions like these can be answered 
satisfactorily, let us thank God and be content. We 


MARK, OHAP, XI. 245 


must remember that a physician is useless, however high 
his degree and diploma, if he cannot cure diseases, and 
a soldier useless, however well dressed and drilled, if he 
will not face the enemy in the day of battle. The best 
doctor is the man who can cure, and the best soldier the 
man who can fight. 

Let us observe, in the last place, what dishonesty and 
equivocation unbelievers may be led into by prejudice against 
the truth, The chief priests and elders dared not answer 
our Lord’s question about John’s Baptism. They dared 
not say, it was “‘ of men,” because they feared the people. 
They dared not confess that it was “ of heaven,” because 
they saw our Lord would say, “ Why did ye not believe 
him ? He testified plainly of me.” What then did they 
do? ‘They told a direct lie. They said, “ We cannot 
tell.” 

It is a melancholy fact, that dishonesty like this is far 
from being uncommon among unconverted people. There 
are thousands who evade appeals to their conscience by 
answers which are not true. When pressed to attend to 
their souls, they say things which they know are not 
correct. They love the world and their own way, and 
like our Lord’s enemies are determined not to give them 
up, but like them also are ashamed to say the truth. 
Andso they answer exhortations to repentance and decision 
by false excuses. One man pretends that he “cannot 
understand” the doctrines of the Gospel. Another assures 
us that he really “tries” to serve God, but makes no 
progress. A third declares that he has every wish to 
serve Christ, but ‘has no time.” All these are often 
nothing better than miserable equivocations. As ageneral 


246 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


rule, they are as worthless as the chief priest’s answer, 
“We cannot tell.” ue 

The plain truth is that we ought to be very slow to 
give credit to the unconverted man’s professed reasons 
for not serving Christ. We may be tolerably sure that 
when he says “I cannot,” the real meaning of his heart 
is “T will not.” A really honest spirit in religious 
matters is a mighty blessing. Once let a man be willing 
to live up to his light, and act up to his knowledge, and 
he will soon know of the doctrine of Christ, and come 
out from the world. (John vii. 17.) The ruin of thou- 
sands is simply this, that they deal dishonestly with 
their own souls. They allege pretended difficulties as 
the cause of their not serving Christ, while in reality 
they ‘‘love darkness rather than light,” and have no 
honest desire to change. (John iii. 19.) 





MARK XII. 1—12. 


1 And he began to speak unto them 
by parables. A certain man planted 
a vineyard, and set an hedge about 
at, and digged a place for the winefat, 
and built a tower, and let it out to 
husbandmen, and went into a far 
country. 

2 And at the season he sent to the 
husbandmen a servant, that he might 
receive from the husbandmen of the 
fruit of the vineyard. 

8 And they caught him, and beat 
him, and sent him away empty. 

4 And again he sent unto them an- 
other servant; and at him they cast 
stones, and wounded Aim in the head, 
aa sent him away shamefully hand- 

ed. 

5 And again he sent another; and 
him they killed, and many others; 
beating some and killing some. 

6 Having yet therefore one son, his 
well-beloved, he sent him also last 





unto them, saying, They will rever- 
ence my son. 

7 But those husbandmen saidamong ~ 
themselves, This is the heir; come, 
let us kill him, and the inheritance 
shall be our’s. 

8 And they took him, and killed 
him, and cast him out of the vineyard. 

9 What shall therefore the lord of 
the vineyard do? he will come and 
destroy the husbandmen, and will 
give the vineyard unto others. 

10 And have ye not read this Scrip- 
ture; The stone which the builders 
rejected is become the head of the 
corner : 

11 This was the Lord’s doing, and 
it is marvellous in our eyes ? 

12 And they sought to lay hold on 
him, but feared the people: for they 
knew that he had spoken the parable 
against them: and they left him, and 
went their way. 


MARK, CHAP, XII. 247 


THE verses before us contain an historical parable. The 
history of the Jewish nation, from the day that Israel 
left Egypt down to the time of the destruction of Jeru- 
salem, is here set before us as in a glass. Under the 
figure of the vineyard and the husbandmen, the Lord 
Jesus tells the story of God’s dealings with His people 
for fifteen hundred years. Let us study it attentively, 
and apply it to ourselves. 

Let us observe, in the first place, God’s special kind- 
ness to the Jewish Church and nation. He gave to them 
peculiar privileges. He dealt with them as a man deals 
with a piece, of land which he separates and hedges in 
for “‘a vineyard.” He gave them good laws and ordinances. 
He planted them in a goodly land, and cast. out seven 
nations before them. He passed by greater and mightier _ 
nations to show them favor. He let alone Egypt, and 
Assyria, and Greece, and Rome, and showered down 
mercies on a few millions of people in Palestine. The 
vineyard of the Lord was the house of Israel. No family 
under heaven ever received so many signal and distin- 
guishing privileges as the family of Abraham. 

And we too, who live in Great Britain, can we say 
that we have received no special mercies from God ? 
We cannot say so. Why are we not a heathen country, 
like China? Why are we not a land of idolaters, like 
Hindostan ? We owe it all to the distinguishing favor 
of God. It is not for our goodness and worthiness, but 
of God’s free grace, that England is what England is 
among the nations of the earth. Let us be thankful for 
our mercies, and know the hand from which they come. 
Let us not be high-minded, but humble, lest we provoke 


248 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


God to take our mercies away. If Israel had peculiar 
national privileges, so also has England. Let English- 
men mark this well, and take heed lest that which 
happened to Israel should happen also to them. 

Let us observe, in the second place, Gfod’s patience and 
longsuffering towards the Jewish nation. What is their 
whole history as recorded in the Old Testament, but a 
long record of repeated provocations, and repeated par- 
dons ? Over and over again we read of prophets being 
sent to them, and warnings being delivered, but too 
often entirely in vain. One servant after another came 
to the vineyard of Israel, and asked for fru. One ser- 
vant after another was “‘sent away empty” by the Jew- 
ish husbandmen, and no fruit borne by the nation to the 
glory of God. ‘‘ They mocked the messengers of God, 
and despised His words, and misused His prophets.” (2 
Chron. xxxvi, 16.) Yet hundreds of years passed away 
before “ the wrath of the Lord arose against His people, 
till there was no remedy.” Never was there a people so 
patiently dealt with as Israel. 

And we too, who dwell in Great Britain, have we no 
longsuffering of God to be thankful for? Beyond doubt, 
we have abundant cause to say that our Lord is patient. 
He does not deal with us according to our sins, or reward 
us according to our iniquities, We have often provoked 
Him to take our candlestick away, and to deal with us 
as He has dealt with Tyre, and Babylon, and Rome. 
Yet His longsuffering and lovingkindness continue still. 
Let us beware that we do not presume on His goodness 
too far. Let us hear in His mercies a loud call to us to 
bear fruit, and let us strive to abound in that righteous- 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 249 


ness which alone exalteth a nation, (Prov. xiv. 34.) 
Let every family in the land feel its responsibility to 
God, and then the whole nation will be seen showing 
forth His praise. 

Let us observe, in the third place, the hardness and 
wickedness of human nature, as exemplified in the history 
of the Jewish people. 

It is difficult to imagine a more striking proof of this 
truth, than the summary of Israel’s dealings with God’s 
messengers, which our Lord sketches in this parable. 
Prophet after prophet was sent to them in vain. Miracle 
after miracle was wrought among them, without any 
lasting effect. The Son of God Himself, the well be- 
loved, at last came down to them, and was not believed. 
God Himself was manifest in the flesh, dwelling among 
them, and ‘‘ they took Him and killed Him.” 

There is no truth so little realized and believed as the 
“desperate wickedness” of the human heart. Let the 
parable before us this day be always reckoned among the 
standing proofs of it. Let us see in it what men and 
women can do, in the full blaze of religious privileges— 
in the midst of prophecies and miracles—in the presence 
of the Son of God Himself. ‘‘ The carnal mind is enmity 
against God.” (Rom. viii. 7.) Men never saw God face to 
face but once, when Jesus became a man, and lived upon 
earth. They saw Him holy, harmless, undefiled, going 
about doing good. Yet they would not have Him, rebelled 
against Him, and at last killed Him. Let us dismiss 
from our minds the idea that there is any innate goodness 
or natural rectitude, in our hearts, Let us put away the 
common notion that seeing and knowing what is good 

i Gh 


950 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


is enough to make a man a Christian. The great ex- 
periment has been made in the instance of the Jewish 
nation. We, too, like Israel, might have among us 


. miracles, prophets, and the company of Christ Himself 


in the flesh, and yet, like Israel, have them in vain. 
Nothing but the Spirit of God can change the heart. 
“We must be born again.” (John iii. 7.) 

Let us observe, in the last place, that men’s consciences 
may be pricked, and yet they may continue impenitent. The 
Jews, to whom our Lord addressed the solemn historical 
parable which we have been reading, saw clearly that it 
applied to themselves, They felt that they and their 
forefathers were the husbandmen to whom the vineyard 
was let, and who ought to have rendered fruit to God. 
They felt that they and their forefathers were the wicked — 
laborers, who had refused to give the Master of the vine- 
yard His dues, and had “ shamefully handled” His ser- 
vants, ‘beating some, and killing some.” Above all, 
they felt that they themselves were planning’ the last 
crowning act of wickedness, which the parable described. 
They were about to kill the well-beloved Son, and “ cast 
Him out of the vineyard.” All this they knew perfectly 
well. “They knew that He had spoken the parable 
against them.” Yet though they knew it, they would 
not repent. Though convicted by their own conscien- 
ces, they were hardened in sin. 

Let us learn from this awful fact, that knowledge and 
conviction alone save no man’s soul. It is quite possible 
to know that we are wrong, and be unable to deny it, 
and yet to cleave to our sins obstinately, and perish 
miserably in hell. The thing that we all need, is a 


MARK, CHAP. XII, 251 


change of heart and will. For this let us pray ear- 
nestly, Tull we have this, let us never rest. Without 
this, we shall never be real Christians, and reach hea- 
ven. Without it we may live all our lives, like the 
Jews, knowing inwardly that we are wrong, and yet, like 
the Jews, persevere in our own way, and die in our sins. 





e MARK XII. 13—17. 


13 And they send unto him certain 
of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, 
to catch him in his words. 

14 And when they were come, they 
say unto him, Master, we know that 
thou art true, and carest for no man: 
for thou regardest not the person of 
men, but teachest the way of God in 
truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to 
Ceesar or not? 


risy, said unto them, Why tempt ye 
me? bring me a penny, that I may 
see it. 

16 And they brought it. And he 
saith unto them, Whose 7s this image 
and superscription? And they said 
unto him, Czesar’s. 

17 And Jesus answering said unto 
them, Render to Cesar the things 
that are Cesar’s, and to God the 


15 Shall we give or shall we not 


, things that are God’s. And they 
give? But he, knowing their hypoc- ; 


marvelled at him. 


Lev us observe in the beginning of this passage, how men 
of different religious opinions can unite in opposing Christ. 
We read of “‘ Pharisees and Herodians” coming together 
to “‘catch our Lord in His words,” and perplex Him 
with a hard question, The Pharisee was a superstitious 
formalist, who cared for nothing but the outward cere- 
monies of religion. The Herodian was a mere man of 
the world, who despised all religion, and cared more for 
pleasing men than God. Yet when there came among 
them a mighty teacher who assailed the ruling passions 
of both alike, and spared neither formalist nor worldling, 
we see them making common cause, and uniting in a 
common effort to stop His mouth. 

It has always been so from the beginning of the world. 
We may see the same thing going on at the present day. 


952 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Worldly men and formalists have little real sympathy 
with one another. They dislike one another’s principles, 
and despise one another’s ways. But there is one thing 
which they both dislike even more, and that is the pure 
Gospel of Jesus Christ. And hence, whenever there is 
a chance of opposing the Gospel, we shall always see the 
worldly man and the formalist combine and act together. 
We must expect no mercy from them: they will show 
none. We must never reckon on their divisions: they 
will always patch up an alliance to resist Christ. 

Let us observe, for another thing in this passage, the 
exceeding subtlety of the question propounded to our Lord, 
His enemies asked him, “Is it lawful to give tribute to 
Cesar, the Roman emperor, or not ? Shall we give, or 
shall we not give ?” Here was a question, which it 
seemed at first sight impossible to answer without peril. 
If our Lord had replied “ Give,’ the Pharisees would 
have accused him before the priests, as one who regarded 
the Jewish nation as under subjection to Rome.—If our 
Lord had replied, “‘ Do not give,” the Herodians would 
have accused him before Pilate, asa seditious person who 
taught rebellion against the Roman government. The 
trap was indeed well planned. Surely we may see in it 
the cunning hand of one greater than man. That old 
serpent the devil was there. 

We shall do well to remember, that of all questions 
which have perplexed Christians, none have ever proved 
so intricate and puzzling, as the class of questions 
which the Pharisees and Herodians here propounded.* 


* “Nothing is more likely to ensnare ministers, than bringing 
them to meddle with controversies about civil rights, and to settle 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 253) 


What are the dues of Cesar, and what are the dues 
of God — where the rights of the church end, and 
where the rights of the state begin—what are lawful 
civil claims and what are lawful spiritual claims — all 
these are hard knots and deep problems which Christians 
have often found it difficult to untie, and almost im- 
possible to solve. Let us pray to. be delivered from them. 
Never does the cause of Christ suffer so much as when 
the devil succeeds in bringing churches into collisions 
and law-suits with the civil power. In such collisions 
precious time is wasted—energies are misapplied— 
ministers are drawn off from their proper work — the 
souls of people suffer, and a church’s victory often proves 
only one degree better than a defeat. ‘‘ Give peace in 
our time, O Lord,” is a prayer of wide meaning, and one 
that should often be on a Christian’s lips. 

Let us observe, in the last place, the marvellous wisdom 
which our Lord showed in His answer to His enemies. 

Their flattering words did not deceive Him, He 
“ knew their hypocrisy.” His all-seeing eye detected the 
“ notsherds covered with silver dross” which stood before 
Him, (Prov. xxvi. 23.) He was not imposed upon, as 
too many of His people are, by glowing language and 
fine speeches. 

He made the daily practice of His own enemies supply 
Him with an answer to their cunning questions. He tells 
them to “ bring Him a penny,” acommon coin which they 
themselves were in the habit of using. He asks them 
“‘ whose image andsuperscription” are stamped upon that 
landmarks between the prince and the subjects, which it is fit 


should be done, while it is not at all fit that they should have the 
doing of it.”-—Mattheu' Henry. 


954 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


penny ? They are obliged to reply, “ Ceesar’s.” They were 
themselves using a Roman coin, issued and circulated by 
the Roman government. By their own confession they 
were in some way under the power of the Romans, or 
this Roman money would not have been current among 
them. At once our Lord silences them by the memorable 
words, ‘‘ Render unto Cesar the things that are Ceesar’s, 
and unto God the things that are God’s.” He bids them 
pay tribute to the Roman government in temporal things, 
for by using its money they allowed themselves bound to 
do so. Yet He bids them give obedience to God in spir- 
itual things, and not to suppose that duty to an earthly. 
sovereign anda heavenly sovereign are incapable of being 
reconciled one with the other. In short, He bids the 
proud Pharisee not to refuse his dues to Cesar, and the 
worldly Herodian not to refuse his dues to God. 

Let us learn from this masterly decision the great 
principle, that true Christianity was never meant to 
interfere with a man’s obedience to the civil power. So- 
far from this being the case it ought to make him a quiet, 
loyal, and faithful subject. He ought to regard the 
powers that be as “ ordained of God,” and to submit to 
their rules and regulations so long as the law is enforced, 
though he may not thoroughly approve of them. If the 
law of the land and the law of God come in collision, no 
doubt his course is clear—he must obey God rather than 
man. Like the three children, though he serves a heathen 
king, he must not bow down to an idol. Like Daniel, 
though he submits to a tyrannical government, he must 
not give over praying in order to please the ruling powers.* 


* Sibelius quotes a passage from Augustine on the Psalms, which 


“MARK, CHAP, XII. 255 


~~ Let us often pray for a larger measure of that spirit of 
wisdom which dwelt so abundantly in our blessed Lord. 
Many are the evils which have arisen in the Church of 
Christ, from a morbid and distorted view of the relative 
positions of the civil government and of God. Many are 
the rents and divisions which have been occasioned by 
lack of sound judgment as to their comparative claims. 
Happy is he who remembers our Lord’s decision in this 
passage, understands it rightly, and makes a practical 
application of it to his own times, 


MARK XII. 18—27. 
18 Then come unto him the Sad-|she be of them? for the seven had 


ducees, which say there is no resur- 
rection; and they asked him, saying, 

19 Master, Moses wrote unto us, If 
a man’s brother die, and leave his wife 
behind him, and leave no children, 
that his brother should take his wife, 
and raise up seed unto his brother. 

20 Now there were seven brethren: 
and the first took a wife, and dying 
left no seed. : 

21 And the second took her, and 
died, neither left he any seed; and 
the third likewise. ' 

22 And the seven-had her, and left 
no seed: last of all the woman died 
also. 

23 In the resurrection therefore 
when they shall rise, whose wife shall 


her to wife. 

24 And Jesus answering said unto 
them, Do ye not therefore err, because 
ye know not the Scriptures, neither 
the power of God ? 

25 For when they shall rise from 
the dead, they neither marry, nor are 
given in marriage; but are as the 
angels which are in heaven. 

26 And as touching the dead, that 
they rise: have ye not read in the 
book of Moses, how in the bush God 
spake unto him, saying, I am the God 
of Abrabam, and the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob ? 

27 He is not the God of the dead, 
but the God of the living: ye there- 
fore do greatly err. 


is worth reading, as an illustration of the subject now before us, 
“ Julian was an unbelieving emperor. He was an apostate, a wicked 
man, and an idolater. And yet Christian men served as soldiers un- 
der this unbelieving emperor. When the cause of Christ was con- 
cerned, they acknowledged no commander but Him that was in 
heaven. When the emperor wished them to worship idols or burn 
incense to them, they preferred honoring God before him. But when 
he said, ‘draw out in order of battle, march against that nation,’ 
they obeyed him. They drew a distinction between their eternal 
master, and their temporal master; and yet were submissive to their 
temporal master for their eternal master’s sake.” 


256 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


TuEsE verses relate a conversation between our Lord 
Jesus Christ and the Sadducees. The religion of these 
men, we know, was little better than infidelity. They 
said there was ‘‘no resurrection.” They too, like the 
Pharisees, thought to entangle and perplex our Lord with 
hard questions, The Church of Christ must not expect 
to fare better than its Master. Formalism on one side 
and infidelity on another, are two enemies for whose 
attacks we must always be prepared. 

We learn from this passage, how much unfairness may 
often be detected in the arguments of infidels. 

The question propounded by the Sadducees is a strik- 
ing illustration of this. They tell him of a woman who 
married seven brothers in succession, had no children, 
and outlived her seven husbands. ‘They ask, “‘ whose 
wife” of all the seven the woman would be “in the res- 
urrection ?” It may well be surmised that the case was 
a supposed and not a real one. On the face of it there 
is the strongest appearance of improbability. The 
chances against such a case occurring in reality, any ac- 
tuary would tell us, are almost infinite. But that was 
nothing to the Sadducees. All they cared for was to raise 
a difficulty, and if possible to put our Lord to silence. 
The doctrine of the resurrection they had not the face 
manfully to deny. The possible consequences of the 
doctrine were the ground which they chose to take up 

There are three things which we shall do well to re- 
member, if unhappily we have at any time to argue with 
infidels. For one thing, let us remember that an infidel 
will always try to press us with the difficulties and ab- 
struse things of religion, and especially with those which 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 257 


are connected with the world to come. We must avoid 
this mode of argument as far as possible. It is leaving 
the open field to fight in a jungle. We must endeavor, 
as far as we can, to make our discussion turn on the great 
plain facts and evidences of Christianity. For another 
thing, let us remember, we must be on our guard against 
unfairness and dishonesty in argument. It may seem hard 
and uncharitable to say this. But experience proves that 
it is needful. Thousands of professed infidels have con- 
fessed in their latter days that they had never studied 
the Bible which they pretended to deny, and though 
well read in the works of unbelievers and sceptics, had 
never calmly examined the foundations of Christianity. 
Above all, let us remember that every infidel has a con- 
science. To this we may always appeal confidently. 
The very men who talk most loudly and disdainfully 
against religion, are often feeling conscious, even while 
they talk, that they are wrong. The very arguments 
which they have sneered at and ridiculed, will often 
prove at last not to have been thrown away. 

We learn, in the second place, from this passage, how 
much of religious error may be traced to ignorance of the Bible 
Our Lord’s first words in reply to the Sadducees declare 
this plainly. He says, ‘‘ Do ye not err, because ye know 
not the Scriptures ?” 

The truth of the principle here laid down, is proved by 
facts in almost every age of church history. The re- 
formation in Josiah’s day was closely connected with the 
discovery of the book of the law. The false doctrines of 
the Jews in our Lord’s time were the result of neglecting 
the Scriptures. The dark ages of Christendom were 


258 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


times when the Bible was kept back from the people, 
The Protestant Reformation was mainly effected by 
translating and circulating the Bible. The churches 
which are most flourishing at this day, are churches 
which honor the Bible. The nations which enjoy most 
moral light, are nations in which the Bible is most 
known. The parishes in our land where there is most 
true religion, are those in which the Bible is most studied. 
The godliest families are Bible-reading families. The 
holiest men and women are Bible-reading people. These 
are simple facts which cannot be denied. 

Let these things sink deeply into our hearts, and bear 
fruit in our lives. Let us not be ignorant of the Bible, 
lest we fall into some deadly error. Let us rather read 
it diligently, and make it our rule of faith and practice. 
Let us labor to spread the Bible over the world. The 
more the book is known, the better the world will be. 
Not least, let us teach our children to value the Bible. 
‘The very best portion we can give them, is a knowledge 
of the Scriptures, 

We learn, in the last place, from this passage, how differ- 
ent will be the state of things after the resurrection, from the state 
in which we live now. Our Lord tells us, that “when they 
shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given 
in marriage ; but are as the angels which are in heaven.” 

It would be foolish to deny that there are many dif- 
ficulties connected with the doctrine of the life to come. 
It must needs be so. The world beyond the grave is a 
world unseen by mortal eye, and therefore unknown. The 
conditions of existence there, are necessarily hidden from 
us, and if more were told, we should probably not under- 
stand it. Let it suffice us to know that the bodies of the 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 259 


saints shall be raised, and, though glorified, shall be like 
their bodies on earth—so like, that those who knew them 
once shall know them again. But though raised with a 
real body, the risen saint will be completely freed from 
every thing which is now an evidence of weakness and’ 
infirmity. There shall be nothing like Mahomet’s gross 
and sensual Paradise in the Christian’s future existence. 
Hunger and thirst being no more—there shall be no need 
of food. Weariness and fatigue being no more—there 
shall be no need of sleep. Death being no more—there 
shall be no need of births to supply the place of those 
who are removed. Enjoying the full presence of God 
and His Christ—men and women shall no more need the 
marriage union, in order to help one another. Able to 
serve God without weariness, and attend on Him without 
distraction—doing His will perfectly, and seeing His 
face continually—clothed in a glorious body—they shall 
be “fas the angels which are in heaven.” 

There is comfort in all this for the true Christian. In the 
body that he now has he often “ groans, being burdened,” 
from a daily sense of weakness and imperfection. (2 Cor.v. 
4.) He is now tried by many cares about this world—what 
to eat, and what to drink, and what to, put on—how to 
manage his affairs, where to live, and what company to 
choose. In the world to come, all shall be changed. 
Nothing shall be lacking to make his happiness complete. 

One thing only we must carefully bear in mind. Let us 
take heed that we rise again in “the resurrection of life,” 
and not in “the resurrection of condemnation.” (John 
v. 29.) To the believer in the Lord Jesus, the resurrec- 
tion will be the greatest of blessings. To the worldly, 

_the godless, and the profane, the resurrection will be a 


260 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


misery and a curse. Let us never rest till we are one 
with Christ and Christ in us, and then we may look for- 
ward with joy to a life to come.* 


* The text by which our Lord silenced the Sadducees, and proved 
the resurrection to be a scriptural doctrine—has been a cause of sur- 
prise to many Bible readers. Some have wondered that our Lord 
should have chosen this text, when others far more plain might have 
been adduced. Some have been unable to see the force and cogency 
of the text as any proof at all of the resurrection of the body. 

As to the particular fitness of the text, as a proof, compared to 
others we are perhaps very poor judges. It may well be suspected 
that there is a fulness of meaning in some texts of Scripture, which 
in our hasty and superficial reading we have not yet fathomed. At 
any rate it is clear that to a Jewish hearer of the Lord the argument 
was so forcible as to be unanswerable. This quotation and the fa- 
mous one in John x. 34, go far to show that the Jewish mind saw a 
depth of meaning in scriptural expressions which many of us in 
modern times have not at all seen yet. It is a matter in which we 
have much to learn. 

As to the text, “Iam the God of Abraham, &c.,” being a con- 
vineing proof of the resurrection of the body, there is a passage in 
Bishop Pearson, which is worth reading. He says of this text as 
quoted by our Lord, “ With the force of this argument the multitude. 
was astonished, and the Sadducees silenced. For under the name of 
God was understood a great benefactor, a God of promise, and to be 
‘their God’ was to bless them and reward them ; as in them to be ‘his 
servants,’ and ‘his people’ was to believe in him and obey him. Now 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had not received the promise which they 
expected, and therefore God after their death desiring still to be 
called ‘their God,’ he thereby acknowledgeth that he had a blessing 
and a reward for them still, and consequently that he will raise them 
to another life, in which they may receive it. So that the argument 
of our Saviour is the same which the Jews have drawn from another 
place of Moses. (Exod. vi. 3, 4.) ‘I appeared unto Abraham, unto 
Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the name of God Almighty, but by my 
name Jehovah was I not made known to them. Nevertheless I have 
established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan.’ 
It is not said ‘to give their sons,’ but ‘to give them the land,’ and 
therefore because while they lived here they enjoyed it not, they 
must rise again that they may receive the promise.” 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 261 


MARK XII. 28—34., 


28 And one of the Scribes came, | as thyself. There is none other com- 
and having heard them reasoning mandment greater than these. 
together, and perceiving that he had| 82 And the Scribe said unto him, 
answered thenf well, asked him, | Well, Master, thou hast said the truth: 
Which is the first commandment of | for there is one God ; and there is none 
all ? other but He: 

29 And Jesus answered him, The! 83 And to love him with all the 
first of all the commandments 7s, | heart, and with allthe understanding, 
Hear, O Israel; The Lord our Godis and with all the soul, and with all 
one Lord : | the strength, and to love Aisneighbor 

380 And thou shalt love the Lord as himself, is more than all whole 
thy God with all thy heart, and with | burnt offerings and sacrifices. 
all thy soul, and with all thy mind,| 84 And when Jesus saw that he 
and with all thy strength : this 7s the answered discreetly, he said unto him, 
first commandment. | Thou art not far from the kingdom 

31 And the second és like, namely of God. And no man after that durst 
this, Thou shalt love thy neighbor | ask him any question. 





THESE verses contain a conversation between our Lord 
Jesus Christ and “ one of the Scribes.” For the third 
time in one day we see our Lord tried by a hard question. 
Having put to silence the Pharisees and Sadducees, He 
is asked to decide a point on which much difference of 
opinion prevailed among the Jews: “‘ Which is the first 
commandment of all.”. We have reason to bless God 
that so many hard questions were propounded to our 
Lord. Without them the marvellous words of wisdom 
which His three answers contain, might never have been 
spoken at all. Here, as in many other cases, we see 
how God can bring good out of evil. He can make the 
most malicious assaults of His enemies work round to 
the good of His church, and redound to His own praise. 
He can make the enmity of Pharisees and Sadducees 
and Scribes minister instruction to His people. Little 
did the three questionersin this chapter think what benefit 
their crafty questions would confer on all Christendom. 
“ Out of the eater came forth meat.” (Judges xiv. 14.) 


262 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. . 


Let us observe, in these verses, how high is our Lord 
Jesus Christ’s standard of duty to God and man. 

The question that the Scribe propounded was a very 
wide one: “ Which is the first commandment of all ?” 
The answer he received was probably very unlike what 
he expected. At any rate, if he thought that our Lord 
would commend to him the observance of some outward 
form or ceremony, he was mistaken. He hears these 
solemn words: “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with 
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, 
and with all thy strength: this is the first command- 
ment. And the second is like, namely this, thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself.” 

How striking is our Lord’s description of the feeling 
with which we ought to regard both God and our neigh- 
bor! We are not merely to obey the one, or to abstain. 
from injuring the other. In both cases we are to give 
far more than this. We are to give love, the strongest 
of all affections, and the most comprehensive. A rule 
like this includes every thing. It makes all petty details 
unnecessary. Nothing will be intentionally lacking where 
there is love. 

How striking again is our Lord’s description of the 
measure in which we should love God and our neighbor ! 
We are to love God better than ourselves, with all the 
powers of our inward man. We cannot love Him too 
well. We are to love our neighbor as ourselves, and to 
deal with him in all respects as we would like him to 
deal-with us. The marvellous wisdom of this distinction 
is clear and plain. We may easily err in our affections 
toward others, either by thinking too little or too much 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 263 


of them. We therefore need the rule to love them as 
ourselves, neither more nor less. We cannot err in 
our affection toward God in the matter of excess. He 
is worthy of all we can give Him. We are therefore to 
love Him with all our heart. , 

Let us keep these two grand rules continually before 
our minds, and use them daily in our journey through 
life. Let us see in them a summary of all that we 
ought to aim at in our practice, both as regards God and 
man. By them let us try every difficulty of conscience 
that may happen to beset us, as to right and wrong, 
Happy is that man who strives to frame his life accord- 
ing to these rules. 

Let us learn from this brief exposition of the true stand- 
ard of duty, how great is the need in which we all natu- 
. rally stand of the atonement and mediation of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Where are the men or women who can 
say with truth, that they have perfectly loved God and 
perfectly loved man? Where is the person on earth 
who must not plead “guilty,” when tried by such a law 
as this? No wonder that the Scripture says, ‘ there is 
none righteous, no ! not one.” ‘‘ By the deeds of the law 
shall no flesh be justified.” (Rom. i. 10, 20.) It is 
only gross ignorance of the requirements of God’s law 
which makes people undervalue the Gospel. The man 
who has the clearest view of the moral law, will always 
be the man who has the highest sense of the value of 
Christ’s atoning blood. 

Let us observe, for another thing, in these verses, how 
far a man may go in religion, and yet not be a true disciple 


of Christ. 


264 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The Scribe, in the passage now before us, was evi- 
~ dently aman of more knowledge than most of his equals. 
He saw things which many Scribes and Pharisees never 
saw at all, His own words are a strong proof of this. 
“ There is one God: and there is none other but He: 
and to love Him with all the heart, and with all the 
understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the 
strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more 
than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.” These 
words are remarkable in themselves, and doubly remark- 
able when we remember who the speaker was, and the 
generation amongst whom he lived. No wonder that we 
read next, that our Lord said, “thou art not far from the 
kingdom of God.” 

But we must not shut our eyes to the fact, that we are 
nowhere told that this man became one of our Lord’s 
disciples. On this point there is a mournful silence. 
The parallel passage in St. Matthew throws not a gleam 
of light on his case. The other parts of the New Testa- 
ment tell us nothing about him. We are left to draw 
the painful conclusion that, like the rich young man, he 
could not make up his mind to give up all and follow 
Christ ; or that, like the chief rulers, elsewhere mentioned, 
he ‘‘loved the praise of men more than the praise of 
God.” (John xii. 48.) In short, though “not far from 
the kingdom of God,” he probably never entered into’ 
it, and died outside. 

Cases like that of this Scribe, are unhappily far 
from being uncommon. There are thousands on every 
side, who, like him, see much and know much of 
religious truth, and yet live and die undecided. There 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 265 


dre few things which are so much overlooked as the 
length to which people may go in religious attainments, 
and yet never be converted and never saved. May we 
all mark well this man’s case, and take care ! 

Let us beware of resting our hopes of salvation on 
mere intellectual knowledge. We live in days when 
there is great danger of doing so. Education makes 
children acquainted with many things in religion, of 
which their parents were once utterly ignorant. But 
education alone will never make a Christian in the sight 
of God. We must not only know the leading doctrines 
of the Gospel with our heads, but receive them into our 
hearts, and be guided by them in our lives. May we 
never rest till we are inside the kingdom of God, till we 
have truly repented, really believed, and have been made 
new creatures in Christ Jesus. If we rest satisfied with 
being “not far from the kingdom,” we shall find at last 
that we are shut out for evermore. 


MARK XII. 35—44. 


85 And Jesus answered and said, 
while he taught in the temple, How 
say the Scribes that Christ is the son 
of David # 

86 For David himself said by the 
Holy Ghost, The Lorp said to m 
Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till 
_I make thine enemies thy footstool. 

87 David therefore himself calleth 
him Lord; and whence is he then his 
son¢ And the common people heard 
him gladly. 

38 And he said unto them in his 
doctrine, Beware of the Scribes, which 
love to go in long clothing, and love 
salutations in the marketplaces, 

89 And the chief seats in the syn- 
agogues, and the uppermost rooms at 
feasts : 





40 Which devour widows’ houses, 
and for a pretence make long prayers : 
these shall receive greater damnation, 

41 And Jesus sat over against the 
treasury, and beheld how the people 
cast money into the treasury: and 
many that were rich cast in much. 

42 And there came a certain poor 
widow, and she threw in two mites, 
which make a farthing. 

43 And he called wato him his dis- 
ciples, and saith unto them, Verily I 
say unto you, That this poor widow 
hath cast more in, than a they which 
have cast into the treasury. 

44 For all they did cast in of their 
abundance ; but she of her want did 
cast in all that she had, even all her 
living. ; 


iy. 


266 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


‘We have seen in the former part of this chapter, how 
the enemies of our Lord endeavored to “ catch Him in 
His words.” We have seen how the Pharisees, the Sad- 
ducees, and the Scribes successively propounded to Him 
hard questions—questions we can hardly fail to observe, 
more likely to minister strife than edification. The pas- 
sage. before us begins with a question of a very different 
character. Our Lord Himself propounds it. He asks 
His enemies about Christ and the meaning of Holy 
Scripture. Such questions are always truly profitable. 
Well would it be for the church if theological discus- 
sions were less about trifles, and more about weighty 
matters, and things necessary to salvation. 

Let us learn, in the first place, from these verses, how 
much there is about Christ in the Old Testament Scriptures. 
- Our Lord desires to expose the ignorance of the Jewish 
teachers about the true nature of the Messiah. He does 
it by referring to a passage in the book of Psalms, and 
showing that the Scribes did not rightly understand it. 
And in so doing He shows us that one subject, about 
which David was inspired by the Holy Ghost to write, 
was Christ. 

We know, from our Lord’s own words in another place, 
that the Old Testament Scriptures “‘ testify of Christ.” 
(John v. 39.) They were intended to teach men about 
Christ, by types, and figures, and prophecy, till He Him- 
self should appear on earth. We should always keep this 
in mind, in reading the Old Testament, but never so 
much as in reading the Psalms. Christ is undoubtedly 
to be found in every part of the Law and the Prophets, 
but nowhere is He so much to be found, as in the book 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 267 


of Psalms. His experience and sufferings at His first 
coming into the world—His future glory, and His final 
triumph at His second coming—are the chief subjects 
of many a passage in that wonderful part of God’s word. 
It is a true saying, that we should look for Christ quite 
as much as David, in reading the Psalms. 

Let us beware of undervaluing, or despising the Old 
Testament. In its place and proportion, the Old Testa- 
ment is just as valuable as the New. There are probably 
many rich passages in that part of the Bible which have 
never yet been fully explored. There are deep things 
about Jesus in it, which many walk over like hidden 
gold mines, and know not the treasures beneath their 
feet. Let us reverence ali the Bible. All is given by 
inspiration, and all is profitable. One part throws light 
upon another, and no part can ever be neglected without - 
loss and damage to our souls. A boastful contempt 
for the Old Testament Scriptures has often proved the 
first step towards infidelity. 

Let. us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 
how odious is the sin of hypocrisy in the sight of Christ. 
This is a lesson which is taught us by our Lord’s warn- 
ing against the Scribes. He exposes some of their noto- 
rious practices—their ostentatious manner of dressing— 
their love of the honor and praise of man rather than 
God—their love of money, disguised under a pretended 
concern for widows—their long-protracted public devu- 
tions, intended to make men think them eminently 
godly. And He winds up all by the solemn declaration, 
‘‘these shall receive greater damnation.” . 

Of all the sins into which men can fall, none seem so 


268 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


exceedingly sinful as false profession and hypecrisy. At 
all events, none have drawn from our Lord’s mouth such 
strong language, and such heavy denunciations. It is 
bad enough to be led away captive by open sin, and to 
serve divers lusts and pleasures. But it is even worse to 
pretend to have a religion, while in reality we serve the 
world. Let us beware of falling into this abominable 
sin. Whatever we do in religion, let us never wear a 
cloak. Let us be real, honest, thorough, and sincere in 
our Christianity. We cannot deceive an all-seeing God. 
We may take in poor short-sighted man by a little talk 
and profession, and a few cant phrases, and an affecta- 
tion of devoutness. But God is not mocked. He is a 
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. His 
ali-seeing eye pierces through the paint, and varnish, 
and tinsel, which cover the unsound heart. The day of 
judgment will soon be here. The “joy of the hypocrite 
is but for a moment.” (Job xx. 5.) His end will be 
shame and everlasting contempt. 

One thing, however, must never be forgotten i in con- 
nection with the subject of hypocrisy. Let us not 
flatter ourselves, because some make a false profession 
of religion, that others need not make any profession at 
all. This is a common delusion, and one against which 
we must carefully guard. It does not follow, because 
some bring Christianity into contempt by professing what 
they do not really believe and feel, that we should run 
into the other extreme, and bring it into contempt bya 
cowardly silence and by keeping our religion out of sight. 
Let us rather be doubly careful to adorn our doctrine by 
our lives. Let us prove our sincerity by the consistency 


| MARK, CHAP, XII, 269 


of our conversation. Let us show the world that there 
is true coin, as well as counterfeit coin, and that the 
visible Church contains Christians who can witness a good 
confession, as well as Pharisees and Scribes. Let us con- 
fess our Master modestly and humbly, but firmly and de- 
cidedly, and show the world that although some men may 
be hypocrites, there are others who are honest and true. 

Let us learn, in the last place, from these verses, how 
pleasing to Christ is self-denying liberality in giving. This 
is a lesson which is taught us in a striking manner, by 
our Lord’s commendation of a certain poor widow. We 
are told that He ‘‘ beheld how the people cast in” their 
voluntary contributions for God’s service into the public 
collecting box or “‘ treasury.” He saw “‘ many that were 
rich castingin much.” At last he saw this poor widow 
cast in all that she had for her daily maintenance. And 
then we hear Him pronounce the solemn words, “ This 
poor woman hath cast more in than they all’—more in 
the sight of Him who looks not merely at the amount 
given, but at the ability of the giver—not merely at the 
quantity contributed, but at the motive and heart of 
the contributor. 

There are few of our Lord’s sayings so much over- 
looked as this. There are thousands who remember all 
His doctrinal discourses, and yet contrive to forget this 
little incident in His earthly ministry. The proof of 
this is to be seen in the meagre and sparing contributions 
which are yearly made by Christ’s church to do good in 
the world. The proof is to be seen in the miserably 
small incomes of all the missionary societies, in propor- 
tion to the wealth of the churches. The proof is to be 


270 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


seen in the long annual lists of self-complacent guinea 
subscribers, of whom many could easily give hundreds 
of pounds. The stinginess of professing Christians in all 
matters which concern God and religion, is one of the 
crying sins of the day, and one of the worst signs of the 
times. The givers to Christ’s cause are but a small sec- 
tion of the visible church. Not one baptized person in — 
twenty, probably, knows any thing of being ‘‘rich to- 
wards God.” (Luke xii. 21.) The vast majority spend 
pounds on themselves, and give not even pence to Christ. 
Let us mourn over this state of things, and pray God 
to amend it. Let us pray Him to open men’s eyes, and 
awake men’s hearts, and stir up a spirit of liberality. 
Above all, let us each do our own duty, and give liber- 
ally and gladly to every Christian object while we can. 
There will be no giving when we are dead. Let us give 
as those who remember that the eyes of Christ are upon 
us. He still sees exactly what each gives, and knows 
exactly how much is left behind. Above all let us give 
as the disciples of a crucified Saviour, who gave Himself 
for us, body and soul, on the cross. Freely we have 
received. Let us freely give.* . 


* It is ede according to Arias Montanus and Brenius, that 
the words “all her living,” mean “all her daily income,” and not all 
her property. 

It may be well to remark in this connection, that nothing can be 
more absurd than to say, as some do, that ey contribute “ their 
mite” to an object, when they protatiy contribute some trifling sum 
which they do not miss, and which bears not the most remote pro- 
portion to the widow’s scale of liberality—A man contributes “his 
mite” when he contributes half his daily income, and not till then. 


-MARK, CHAP. XIII. 


271 


MARK XIII. 1—8. 


1 And as he went out of the tem- 
ee one of his disciples saith unto 

m, Master, see what manner of 
stones and what buildings are here / 

2 And Jesus answering said unto 
him, Seest thou these great build- 
ings ? there shall not be left one stone 
upon another, that shall not be thrown 
down. 

8 And as he sat upon the mount of 
Olives over against the temple, Peter 
and James and John and Andrew 
asked him privately ; 

4 Tell us, when shall these things 
be? and what shail be the sign when 
these things shall be fulfilled? 





5 And Jesus answemng them began 
to say, Take heed lest any man de- 
ceive you: 

6 For many shall come in my name, 
saying, lam Christ ; and shall deceive 
many. 

7 And when ye shall hear of wars 
and rumors of wars, be ye not troub- 
led: for such things must needs be ; 
but the end shail not be yet. 

8 For nation shall rise against na- 
tion, and kingdom against kingdom: 
and there shall be earthquakes in di- 
vers places, and there shall be famines 
and troubles ; these are the beginnings 
of sorrows. 


Tux chapter we have now begun is full of prophecy— 
prophecy of which part has been fulfilled, and part re- 
mains to be accomplished. Two great events form the 
subject of this prophecy. One is the destruction of 
Jerusalem, and the consequent end of the Jewish dis- 
pensation. The other is the second coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and the winding up of the state of things 
under which we now live. The destruction of Jerusalem 
was an event which happened only forty years after our 
Lord was crucified. The second coming of Christ is an 
event which is yet to come, and we may yet live to see it 
with our own eyes,* 

* T think it right to repeat here what I said in commenting on the 
report of our Lord’s prophecy given by St. Matthew, respecting the 
destruction of Jerusalem. I believe that in the prophecy now under 
consideration, our Lord had in view a second siege of Jerusalem, and 
a second tribulation accompanying that siege, as well as the first siege 
and tribulation when the city was taken by Titus, That such a siege 
is to be expected, the fourteenth chapter of Zechariah appears to me 
to be unanswerable proof. 

I see no other way of explaining the close connection which ap- 


pears in the prophecy, between the “affliction” here foretold, and the 
“coming of the Son of Man in the clouds with power and great 


272 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


Chapters like this ought to be deeply interesting to 
every true Christian. No history ought to receive so 
much of our attention as the past and future history of 
the Church of Christ. The rise and fall of worldly em- 
pires are events of comparatively small importance in 
the sight of God. Babylon, and Greece, and Rome, and 
France, and England, are as nothing in His eyes by the 
side of the mystical body of Christ. The march of ar- 
mies and the victories of conquerors are mere trifles in 
comparison with the progress of the Gospel, and the final 
triumph of the Prince of Peace. May we remember 
this in reading prophetical Scripture! ‘“‘ Blessed is he 
that readeth.” (Rev. 1. 3.) 

The first thing that demands our attention in the 
verses before us, is the prediction of our Lord concerning 
the temple at Jerusalem. 

The disciples, with the natural pride of Jews, had 
called their Master’s attention to the architectural splen- 
dor of the temple. ‘See,” they said, ‘ what manner 
of stones and what buildings are here!”’* They re- 
glory.” ‘To interpret that “ coming of the Son of Man,” as the com- 
ing of the Roman army in judgment on the Jews, appears to me 
positive trifling with Scripture. 

The view that our Lord is prophesying of two sieges of Jerusalem, 
and two tremendous tribulations which would fall especially on the 
Jews, and of His own second coming as an event which would im- 
mediately follow the second siege, makes the whole chapter plain 
and intelligible. 

All these events ought to be deeply interesting to believers; and 
would be especially so to Jewish believers, like the apostles, in whose 
time the temple was yet standing, the Jewish dispensation not yet 
put aside, and Jerusalem not yet destroyed. 

* It may be well to remark that the temple here spoken of, was, 


in a certain sense, the third temple in order which had been built 
at Jerusalem. The first was built by Solomon, and destroyed by 


MARK, CHAP. XIII. 273 


ceived an answer from the Lord very different from 
what they expected, a heart-saddening answer, and one 
well calculated to stir up inquisitive thoughts in their 
minds. No word of admiration falls from His lips. He 
expresses no commendation of the design or workman- 
ship of the gorgeous structure before Him. He appears 
to lose sight of the form and comeliness of the material 
building, in His concern for the wickedness of the nation 
to which it belonged. “ Seest thou,” He replies, “ these 
great buildings ? There shall not be left one stone 
upon another, that shall not be cast down.” 

Let us learn from this solemn saying, that the true glory 
of a Church does not consist inits buildings for public wor- 
ship, but in the faith and godliness of its members, The 
eyesof our Lord Jesus Christ could find no pleasure in look- 
ing at the very temple which contained the holy of holies, 
and the golden candlestick, and the altar of burnt offering. 
Much less, may we suppose, can he find pleasure in the 
most splendid places of worship among professing Chris- 
tians, if His Word and His Spirit.are not honored in it. 

We shall all do well to remember this. We are 
naturally inclined to judge things by*the outward ap- 
pearance, like children who value poppies more than corn. 
We are too apt to suppose that where there is a stately 
ecclesiastical building and a magnificent ceremonial— 
carved stone and painted glass—fine music and gorge- 
ously-dressed ministers, there must be some real religion. 
Nebuchadnezzar. The second was built by Ezra and Nehemiah. The 
third, if it may be so called, was enlarged and almost re-built, about the 
time of our Lord Jesus Christ’s birth, by Herod. The enormous size 
of the stones used in building it, and the general magnificence of the 


whole fabric are attested not only by Josephus, but by heathen writers, 
12* 


O14 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


And yet there may be no religion at all. It may be all 
form, and show, and appeal to the senses. ‘There may 
be nothing to satisfy the conscience—nothing to cure 
the heart. It may prove on inquiry that Christ is not 
preached in that stately building, and the Word of God 
not expounded. The ministers may perhaps be utterly 
ignorant of the Gospel, and the worshippers may be dead 
in trespasses and sins. We need not doubt that God 
sees no beauty in such a building as this. We need not 
doubt the Parthenon had no glory in God’s sight com- 
pared to the dens and caves where the early Christians 
worshipped, or that the meanest room where Christ is 
preached at this day, is more honorable in his eyes than 
the cathedral of St. Peter’s at Rome. 

Let us however not run into the absurd extreme of 
supposing that it matters not what kind of building we 
set apart for God’s service. There is no Popery in making 
a church handsome. There is no true religion in having 
a dirty, mean, shabby, and disorderly place of worship. 
“Let all things be done decently and in order.” (1 Cor. 
xiv. 40.) But let it be a settled principle in our religion, 
however beautiful’we make our churches, to regard pure 
doctrine and holy practice as their principal ornaments. 
Without these two things, the noblest ecclesiastical edi- 
fice is radically defective. It has no glory if God is not 
there. With these two things, the humblest brick cot- 
tage where the Gospel is preached, is lovely and beauti- 
ful, It is consecrated by Christ’s own presence, and the 
Holy Spirit’s own blessing. 

The second thing that demands our attention in 
these verses, is the remarkable manner in which our Lord 
commences the great prophecy of this chapter. 


MARK, CHAP. XIII, 275 


We are told that four of His disciples, aroused no 
doubt by His warning prediction about the temple, ap- 
plied to Him for further information. ‘Tell us,” they 
said, “when shall these things be ? and what shall be 
the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled ?” 

The answer which our Lord gives to these questions, 
begins at once with a prediction of coming false doctrine 
and coming wars. If His disciples thought He would 
promise them immediate success and temporal prosperity 
in this world, they were soon undeceived. So far from 
bidding them expect a speedy victory of truth, He tells 
them to look out for the rise of error. ‘Take heed lest 
any man deceive you.u—Many shall come in my name, 
saying, I am Christ.” So far from bidding them expect 
a general reign of peace and quietness, He tells them to 
prepare for wars and troubles. ‘‘ Nation shall rise against 
nation, and kingdom against kingdom.—There shall be 
earthquakes in divers places, and there shall be famines 
and troubles: these are the beginnings of sorrows.” 

There is something deeply instructive in this opening 
of our Lord’s prophetical discourse. It seems like the 
key note of what His Church is to expect between His 
first and second advents. It looks as if it were specially 
intended to correct the mistaken views, not only of His 
apostles, but of the vast body of professing Christians 
in every age. It looks asif our Lord knew well that 
man is always catching at the idea of a “‘ good time 
coming,” and as if He would give us plain notice that 
there will be no “ good time” till He returns. It may not 
be pleasant to us to hear such tidings. But it is in strict 
accordance with what we read in the prophet Jeremiah : 


276 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


“ The prophets that have been before, prophesied of war, 
and of evil, and of pestilence. The prophet which prophe- 
sieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come 
to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord 
hath truly sent him.” (Jer. xxviii. 8, 9.) 

Let us learn from our Lord’s opening prediction to be 
moderate in our expectations. Nothing has created so 
much. disappointment in the Church of Christ, as the 
extravagant expectations in which many of its members 
have indulged. Let us not be carried away by the 
common idea, that the world will be converted before 
the Lord Jesus returns, and the earth filled with the 
knowledge of the Lord. It will not be so. There is 
nothing in Scripture to justify such expectations. Let us 
cease to expect a reign of peace. Let us rather look for 
wars. Let us cease to expect all men to be made holy by 
any existing instrumentality—schools, missions, preach- 
ing, or any thing of the kind. Let us rather look for the 
rise of Antichrist Himself. Let us understand that we 
live in a day of election, and not of universal conversion. 
There will be no universal peace till the Prince of Peace 
appears. There will be no universal holiness till Satan 
is bound. It may cost us much to hold such opinions 
as these. But there is not a church or congregation on 
earth, whose state does not show that these opinions are 
true, and that while “ many are called, few are chosen.” 
It may bring on us the unkind remarks and the un- 
favorable judgment of many. But the end will prove 
who is right and who is wrong. For that end let us 
wait patiently. Let us labor, and teach, and work, 
and pray, But let it not surprise us if we find our 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 


277 


Lord’s word strictly true: “Narrow is the way which 
leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” (Matt. 


v. 14.) 





MARK XIII. 9—18. 


9 But take heed to yourselves: for 
they shall deliver you up to councils; 
and in the Bige S ines ye shall be 
beaten; and ye shall be brought be- 
fore rulers and kings for my sake, for 
a testimony against them. 

10 And the Gospel must first be 
published among all nations. 

11 But when they shall lead you 
and deliver you up, take no thought 


ever shall be given you in that hour, 
that speak ye: for it is not ye that 
speak, but the Holy Ghost. * 

12 Now the brother shall betray the 
brother to death, and the father the 
son; and children shall rise up «gainst 
their purents, and shall cause them 
to be put to death. 

18 And ye shall be hated of all men 
for my name’s sake: but he that shall 


beforehand what ye shall speak, nei- 


endure unto the end, the same shall 
ther do ye premeditate ; but whatso- 


be saved. 


In reading the prophecies of the Bible concerning Christ’s 
Church, we shall generally find judgment and mercy 
blended together. They are seldom all bitter without 
any sweet—seldom all darkness without any light. The 
Lord knows our weakness, and readiness to faint, and 
has taken care to mingle consolations with threatenings 
—kind words with hard words, like warp and woof in a 
garment. We may remark this throughout the book of 
Revelation. We may see it all through the prophecy 
we are now considering. We may note it in the few 
verses which we have just read. 

Let us observe, in the first place, what troubles our 
Lord bids His people expect between the time of His first 
and second comings. Trouble, no doubt, is the portion of 
all men, since the day that Adam fell. It came in with 
the thorns and thistles. ‘‘ Man is born to trouble as the 
sparks fly upwards.” (Job v. 7.) But there are special 


278 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


troubles to which believers in Jesus Christ are liable, 
and of these our Lord gives them plain warning. 

They must expect trouble from the world. They 
must not look for the help of “rulers and kings.” They 
will find their ways and their doctrines bring them no 
favor in high places. On the contrary, they will often 
be imprisoned, beaten, and brought before judgment 
seats as malefactors, for no other reason than their ad- 
herence to the Gospel of Christ. 

They must expect trouble from their own relations. 
** Brother shall betray brother to death, and the father the 
son.” Their own flesh and blood will often forget to love 
them, from hatred to their religion. They will find some- 
times that the enmity of the carnal mind against God, 
is stronger than even the ties of family and blood. 

We shall do well to lay these things to heart, and to 
“count the cost” of being a Christian. We must think 
it no strange thing if our religion brings with it some bit- 
ter things. Our lot, no doubt, is cast in favorable times. 
The lines of a British Christian are fallen in pleasant 
places. We have no reason to be afraid of death or 
imprisonment, if we serve Christ. But, for all that, we 
must make up our minds to endure a certain proportion 
of hardship, if we are real, thorouch, and decided Chris- 
tians. We must be content to put up with laughter, rid- 
icule, mockery, slander, and petty persecution. We must 
even bear hard words and unkindness from our nearest 
and dearest relations. The “‘ offence of the cross” is not 
ceased. “ The natural man receiveth not the things of 
the Spirit of God.” They that are “born after the flesh” 
will persecute those that are “born after the Spirit.” (1 


MARK, CHAP. XIII. 279 


* Cor.ii.14 Gal. iv. 29.) The utmost consistency of life will 
not prevent it. Ifwe are converted, we must never be 
surprised to find that we are hated for Christ’s sake. 

Let us observe, in the second place, what rich encour- 
agement the Lord Jesus holds out to His persecuted people. 
Hesets before them three rich cordials to cheer their souls, 

For one thing He tells us that “ the Gospel must first 
be preached among all nations.” It must be, and it shall 
be. In spite of men and devils, the story of the cross 
of Christ shall be told in every part of the world. The 
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Notwithstand- 
ing persecution, imprisonment, and death, there never 
shall be wanting a succession of faithful men, who shall 
proclaim the glad tidings of salvation by grace. Fewmay 
believe them. Many of their hearers may continue hard- 
ened in sin. But nothing shall prevent the Gospel being 
preached. The word shall never be bound, though those 
who preach it may be imprisoned and slain. (2 Tim. ii. 9.) 

For another thing, our Lord tells us, that those who 
are placed in special trial for the Gospel’s sake, shall 
have special help in their time of need. The Holy 
Ghost shail assist them in making their defence. They 
shall have a mouth and wisdom which their adversaries 
shall not be able to gainsay or resist. As it was with 
Peter and John and Paul, when brought before Jewish 
and Roman councils, so shall it be with all true-hearted 
disciples. How thoroughly this promise has been ful- 
filled, the histories of Huss, and Luther, and Latimer, 
and Ridley, and Baxter abundantly prove. Christ has 
been faithful to His word. 

-For another thing, our Lord tells us that patient per- 


280 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


severance shall result in final salvation. “He that shall 
endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.” Not 
one of those who endure tribulation shall miss his reward. 
All shall at length reap a rich harvest. Though they 
sow in tears, they shall reap in joy. Their light afflic- 
tion, which is but for a moment, shall lead to an eternal 
weight of glory. 

Let us gather comfort from these comfortable promises 
forall true-hearted servants of Christ. Persecuted, vexed, 
and mocked, as they are now, they shall find at length 
they are on the victorious side. Beset, perplexed, tried, 
as they sometimes are, they shall never find themselves 
entirely forsaken. Though cast down, they shall not be 
destroyed. Let them possess their souls in patience. 
The end of all that they see going on around them is 
certain, fixed, and sure. The kingdoms of this world 
shall yet become the kingdoms of their God and of his 
Christ. And when the scoffers and ungodly, who so of- 
ten insulted them, are put to shame, believers shall re~ 
ceive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.* : 


* There is a promise in the passage now expounded which is often 
much perverted: I allude to the implied promise contained in the 
words, “Take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither 
do ye premeditate : but whatsoever shall be given you in that time, 
that speak ye.” 

The perversion I mean, consists in supposing that this passage 
warrants ministers in getting up to preach unprepared every Sunday, 
and in expecting special help of the Holy Ghost in addressing regu- 
lar congregations, when they have neither meditated, read, nor taken 
pains about their subject. 

A moment’s reflection must show any reader, that such an ap- 
plication of the passage before us is utterly unjustifiable. The 
passage has no reference whatever to the regular Sabbath sermon 


MARK, CHAP, XIII. 


281 


MARK XIII. 14—93, 


14 But when ye shall see the abom- 
ination of desolation, spoken of by 
Daniel the prophet, standing where 
it ought not, det him that readeth 
understand,) then let them that be in 
Judea flee to the mountains: 

15 And let him that is on the 
housetop not go down into the house, 
neither enter therein, to take any 
thing out of his house: 

16 And let him that is in the field 
not turn back again for to take up his 
garment. : 

17 But woe to them that are with 
child, and to them that give suck in 
those days! 

18 And pray ye that your flight be 
not in the winter. 





19 For in those days shall be afflic- 
tion, such as was not from the begin- 
ning of the creation which God crea- 
ted unto this time, neither shall be. 

20 And except that the Lord had 
shortened those days, no flesh should 
be saved: but for the elect’s sake, 
whom he hath chosen, he hath short- 
ened the days. 

21 And then if any man shall say 
to you, Lo, here zs Christ; or, lo, he 
is there; believe him not: 

22 For false Christs and false pro- 
phets shall rise, and shall show signs 
and wonders, to seduce, if 2 were 
possible, even the elect. 

23 But take ye heed: behold, I have 
foretold you all things. 


WE are taught in these verses the law/fulness of using 
means to provide for our own personal safety. The lan- 
guage of our Lord Jesus Christ on the subject is clear 
and unmistakeable: “‘ Let them that be in Judea flee 
to the mountains—let him that is on the housetop not 
go down into the house—let him that is in the field not 
turn back again—pray ye that your flight be not in the 
winter.” Not a word is said to make us suppose that 
flight from danger, in certain circumstances, is unworthy 
of a Christian. As to the time prophesied of in the 
passage before us, men may differ widely. But as to 
the lawfulness of taking measures to avoid peril, the 
teaching of the passage is plain. 

of a minister, and only holds out the promise of special help in special 
times of need. 

It would be well for the Church if this was more remembered than 
itis. At present it may be feared this promise is not unfrequently 
made an excuse for ministerial idleness, and undigested sermons. 
Men seem to forget, when they enter the pulpit, that what costs no- 


thing is worth nothing, and that the “foolishness of preaching” and 
foolish preaching, are widely different things. 


282 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


The lesson is one of wide application, and of much 
usefulness. A Christian is not to neglect the use of 
means, because he is a Christian, in the things of this 
life, any more than in the things of the life to come. A 
believer is not to suppose that God will take care of him, 
and provide for his wants, if he does not make use of 
means and the common sense which God has given him, 
as well as other people. Beyond doubt he may expect 
the special help of his Father in heaven, in every time 
of need. But he must expect it in the diligent use of 
lawful means. To profess to trust God, while we idly 
sit still and do nothing, is nothing better than enthusi- 
asm and fanaticism, and brings religion into contempt. 

The word of God contains several instructive examples 
on this subject, to which we shall do well to take heed. 
The conduct of Jacob, when he went to meet his brother 
Hsau, is a striking case in point. He first prays a most 
touching prayer, and then sends his brother a carefully 
arranged present. (Gen. xxxii, 9—13.) The. conduct 
of Hezekiah, when Sennacherib came against Jerusalem, 
is another case. ‘‘ With us,” he tells the people, “is — 
the Lord our God, to fight our battles.” And yet, 
at the same time, he built up the walls of the city, 
and made darts and shields. (2 Chron. xxxii. 5.) The 
conduct of St. Paul is another.case. Frequently we read 
of his fleeing from one place to another, to preserve life. 
Once we see him let down from the walls of Damascus 
by a basket. Once we hear him telling the soldiers on 
board the Alexandrian corn ship, “‘ Except the shipmen 
abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved.” (Acts xxvii. 31.) 
We know the great apostle’s faith and confidence. We 


MARK, CHAP. XIII. 283 


know his courage and reliance on his Master. And yet 
we see ihat even he never despised the use of means. 
Let us not be ashamed to do likewise. 

One thing only let us bear in mind. Let us not rest 
upon means while we use them. Let us look far beyond 
them to the blessing of God. It is a great sin to be like 
Asa, and seek not to the Lord but to the physicians, To 
use all means diligently, and then leave the whole event 
in the hand of God, is the mark at which a true believer 
ought to aim. 

We are taught, for another thing, in these verses, the 
great privileges of God’s elect. Twice in the passage our 
Lord uses a remarkable expression about them. He says 
of the great tribulation, ‘Except that the Lord had 
shortened those days, no flesh should be saved ; but for 
the elect’s sake, whom He hath chosen, He hath short- 
ened the days.” He says again of the false Christs and 
false prophets, that they “ shall show signs and wonders, 
to deceive, if it were possible, the elect.” 

It is plain from this, and other passages in the Bible, 
that God has an elect people in the world. They are 
those, according to the seventeenth article of our church, 
whom “ He has constantly decreed by His counsel, secret 
to us, to deliver from curse and damnation ; those whom 
He hath chosen in Christ out of mankind, and decreed 
to bring by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels 
made to honor.” ‘To them, and them only, belong the 
great privileges of justification, sanctification, and final 
glory. They, and they only, are “called by the Spirit 
in due season.” They, and they only, “‘ obey the calling. 
They are made sons of God by adoption. They are 


284 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


made like the image of God’s only-begotten Son, Jesus 
Christ. They walk religiously in good works, and at 
length, by God’s mercy, attain to everlasting felicity.” 
To them belong the precious promises of the Gospel. 
They are the bride, the Lamb’s wife. They are the 
Holy Catholic Church, which is Christ’s body. They 
are those whom God especially cares for in the world. 
Kings, princes, noblemen, rich men, are all nothing in 
God’s eyes, compared to His elect. These things are 
plainly revealed in Scripture. The pride of man may 
not like them. But they cannot be gainsaid. 

The subject of election is, no doubt, deep and myste- 
rious. Unquestionably it has been often sadly perverted. 
and abused. But the misuse of truths must not prevent 
us from using them. Rightly used, and fenced with 
proper cautions, election is a doctrine “‘ full of sweet, 
pleasant, and unspeakable comfort.” Before we leave the 
subject, let us see what these cautions are. | 

For one thing, we must never forget that God’s elec- 
tion does not destroy man’s responsibility and accounta- 
bleness for his own soul. The same Bible which speaks 
of election, always addresses men as free agents, and 
calls on them to repent, to believe, to seek, to pray, to 
strive, to labor. ‘In our doings,” most wisely says the 
seventeenth article, ‘that will of God is to be followed, 
which we have expressly declared unto us in the word 
of God.” 

For another thing, let us never forget that the great 
thing we have to do, is to repent and believe the Gospel. 
We have no right to take any comfort from God’s elec- 
tion, unless we can show plain evidence of repentance 


MARK, CHAP. XII. 285 


and faith. We are not to stand still, troubling ourselves 
with anxious speculations whether we are elect or not, 
when God commands us plainly to repent and believe. 
(Acts xvii. 30. 1 John iii. 23.) Let us cease to do evil. 
Let us learn to do well. Let us break off from sin. Let 
us lay holdon Christ. Let us draw near to God in prayer. 
So doing, we shallsoon knowand feel whether weare God’s 
elect. To use the words of an old divine, we must begin at 
the grammar school of repentance and faith before we gq to 
the university of election. It was when Paul remembered 
the faith, and hope, and love of the Thessalonians, that he 
said, ‘I know your election of God.”* (1 Thess. i. 4.) 


MARK XIII. 24—381. 


24 But in those days, after that 
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, 
and the moon shall not give her light 

25 And the stars of heaven shall 
fall, and the powers that arein heaven 
shall be shaken. 

26 And then shall they see the Son 
of man coming in the clouds with 
great power and glory. 

QT d then shall he send his an- 
gels, and shall gather together his) 
elect from the four winds, from the | 
uttermost part of the earth to the ut- 
termost part of heaven. 





28 Now learn a parable of the fig 
tree; When her branch is yet tender, 
and putteth forth leaves, ye know 
that summer is near; 

29 So ye in like manner, when ye 
shall see these things come to pass, 
know that it is migh, even at the 
doors. 4 

30 Verily I say unto you, that this 
generation shall not pass, till all these 
things be done. 

81 Heaven and earth shall pass 
away: but my words shall not pass 


| away. 


* The meaning of the “ abomination of desolation,” in this passage, 
has always perplexed the commentator. The most common view 
undoubtedly is, that it signifies the Roman armies, who executed 
God’s judgment on the Jewish nation. 

_ It may be questioned whether this interpretation completely ful- 
fils the prophecy. I venture, though with much diffidence, to sug- 
gest that a more complete and literal accomplishment yet remains to 
come. The remarkable words of St. Paul to the Thessalonians, ap- 
pear to me scarcely to have received yet a complete fulfilment: “ He, 
as God, sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God.” 
(2 Thess. ii.4.) I own that it seems to me by no means improbable 


286. EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Tuis part of our Lord’s prophecy on the Mount of Olives 
is entirely unfulfilled. The events described in it are 
all yet to take place. They may possibly take place in 
ourown day. The passage therefore is one which we 
ought always to read with peculiar interest. | 

Let us observe, in the first place, what solemn majesty 
will attend our Lord Jesus Christ's second coming to this 
world, The language that is used about the sun, moon, 
and stars, conveys the idea of some universal convulsion 
of the universe at the close of the present dispensation. 
It reminds us of the apostle Peter’s words, “‘ the heavens 
shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements 
shall melt with fervent heat.” (2 Pet. iii. 10.) At such 
a time as this, amidst terror and confusion, exceeding all 
that even earthquakes or hurricanes are known to pro- 
duce, men ‘‘shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds 
with great power and glory.” 

The second coming of Christ shall be utterly unlike 
the first. He came the first time in weakness, a tender 
infant, born of a poor woman in the manger at Bethle- 
hem, unnoticed, unhonored, and scarcely known. He 
shall come the second time in royal dignity, with the 
armies of heaven around Him, to be known, recognized, 
and feared by all the tribes of the earth. He came the 
first time to suffer—to bear our sins—to be reckoned a 
curse—to be despised, rejected, unjustly condemned, and 
slain, He shall come the second time to reign—to put 
down every enemy bengath His feet—to take the king- 


that a personal anti-christ, yet to be revealed at Jerusalem, may prove 
the final accomplishment of these words. I desire to avoid dogmatism 
on the subject. I only suggest it as a possible and probable thing. 


MARK, CHAP. XIII, 287 


doms of this world for His inheritance—to rule them 
with righteousness—to judge all men, and to live for 
evermore. 

How vast the difference ! How mighty the contrast ! 
How startling the comparison between the second advent 
and the first! How solemn the thoughts that the sub- 
ject ought to stir up in our minds! Here are comfortable 
thoughts for Christ’s friends. Their own King will soon 
be here. They shall reap according as they have sown. 
They shall receive a rich reward for all that they have 
endured for Christ’s sake. They shall exchange their 
cross for a crown. Here are confounding thoughts for 
Christ’s foes. That same Jesus of Nazareth, whom they 
have so long despised and rejected, shall at length have 
the pre-eminence. That very Christ, whose Gospel they 
have refused to believe, shall appear as their Judge, 
and helpless, hopeless, and speechless, they will have to 
stand before His bar. May we all lay these things to 
heart, and learn wisdom ! 

Let us observe, in the next place, that the first event 
after the Lord’s second coming, shall be the gathering of His 
elect, “‘He shall send His angels and gather together 
His elect from the four winds.” 

The safety of the Lord’s people shall. be provided for, 
when judgment falls upon the earth. He will do nothing 
till He has placed them beyond the reach of harm. The 
flood did not begin till Noah was safe in the ark. The 
fire did not fall on Sodom till Lot was safe within the 
walls of Zoar. The wrath of God on believers shall 
not be let loose till believers are hidden and secure. 

The true Christian may look forward to the advent of 


288 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Christ without fear. However terrible the things that 
shall come upon the earth, his Master will take care that 
no harm comes to him. He may well bear patiently the 
partings and separations of this present time. He shall 
have a joyful meeting, by and bye, with all his brethren 
in the faith, of every age, and country, and people, and 
tongue. Those who meet in that day, shall meet to 
part no more. The great gathering is yet to come. (2 
Thess. ii. 1.) 

Let us observe, in the next place, how important tt 1s to 
note the signs of our own times. Our Lord bids His dis- 
ciples “learn a parable of the fig tree.” Just as its 
budding leaves tell men that summer is near, so the fulfil- 
ment of events in the world around us, should teach us 
that the Lord’s coming “is nigh, even at the doors.” 

It becomes all true Christians to observe carefully 
the public events of their own day. It is not only a 
duty to do this, but a sin to neglect it. Our Lord 
reproved the Jews for “not discerning the signs of 
the times.’ (Matt. xvi. 3.) They did not see that 
the sceptre was passing away from Judah, and the 
weeks of Daniel running out. Let us beware of fall- 
ing into their error, Let us rather open our eyes, and 
look at the world around us. Let us mark the dry- 
ing up of the Turkish power, and the increase of mis- 
sionary work in the world. Let us mark the revival of 
Popery, and the rise of new and subtle forms of infidelity. 
Let us mark the rapid spread of lawlessness and contempt 
for authority. What are these things but the budding 
of the fig tree? They show us that this world is wearing 
‘out, and needs a new and better dynasty. It need its — 


MARK, CHAP. XIII. 289 


rightful king, even Jesus. May we watch, and keep our 
garments, and live ready to meet our Lord! (Rev. xvi. 
15.) 

Let us observe, lastly, in these verses, how carefully our 
Lord asserts the certainty of His predictions being fulfilled. 
He speaks as though he foresaw the incredulity and 
scepticism of these latter days. He warns us emphati- 
cally against it :—‘‘ Heaven and earth shall pass away, 
but my words shall not pass away.” 

_ We ought never to allow ourselves to suppose that 
any prophecy is improbable or unlikely to be fulfilled, 
merely because it is contrary to past experience. Let us 
not say, ‘‘ Where is the likelihood of Christ coming 
again ? Where is the likelihood of the world being 
burned up ?” We have nothing to do with “likely or 
unlikely” in such matters, The only question is, ‘‘ what 
is written in God’s word ?” The words of St. Peter 
should never be forgotten: ‘‘ There shall come in the 
last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, saying, 
Where is the promise of His coming ?” (2 Pet. iii. 8, 4.) 

We shall do well to ask ourselves what we should have 
thought if we had lived on earth two thousand years 
ago. Should we have thought it more probable that the 
Son of God would come on earth as a poor man, and die, 
or that He would come on earth as a King, and reign ? 
Should we not have said at once, that if He came at all, 
He would come to reign, and not to die P? Yet we know 
that He did come as ‘‘a man of sorrows,” and died on the 
cross. Then let us not doubt that He will come the 
second time in glory, and reign as a King for evermore. 

Let us leave the passage with a thorough conviction 


290 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


of the truth of every jot of its predictions. Let us be- 
lieve that every word of it shall prove at last to have 
been fully accomplished. Above all, let us strive to live 
under an abiding sense of its truth, like good servants 
ready to meet their master. Then, whatever be the ful- 
filment of it, or however soon, we shall be safe.* 


MARK XIII. 32—27. 


82 But of that day and that hour) and commanded the porter to watch. 
knoweth no man, no, not the angels! 85 Watch ye therefore: for ye know 
which are in heaven, neither the Son,|not when the master of the house 


but the Father. cometh, at even, or at midnight, or 
_ 83 Take ye heed, watch and pray:| at the cockcrowing, or in the morn- 
for ye know not when the time is. ing: 


34 For the Son of man is asaman| 36 Lest coming suddenly he find 
taking a far journey, who left his| you sleeping. ’ + 
house, and gave authority to his| 87 ‘And what I say unto you I say 
servants, and to every man his work, | unto all, Watch. 


THESE verses conclude St. Mark’s report of our Lord’s 
prophecy on the Mount of Olives. They ought to form 


* JT am aware that some interpreters of the passage now expound- 
ed, explain its language very differently from myself. Many regard 
the “sun, moon, and stars’ as emblems of kings and rulers—the 

“coming of the Son of Man,” as a general expression signifying any 
great exhibition of divine power—and the “sending forth of His an- 
gels,” as nothing more than the sending of ministers and messengers 
of the Gospel to gather together the people of God. 

I will only say that I can see no ground or warrant for such inter- 
pretations. They appear to me to be a dangerous tampering with 
the plain literal meaning of Scripture, and to give a great handle to 
the Arian, the Socinian, and the Jew, in the arguments that they 
respectively bring forward in support of their own peculiar views. 

I take this opportunity of expressing my decided opinion that the 
word “generation” in the verse, “this generation shall not pass 
away,” can only mean “this nation or people—the Jewish nation— 

* shall not pass away.” 

The view that it means “the generation of men which is alive 
now while I am speaking,” would make our Lord to say that which 


MARK, CHAP. XIII. 291 


& personal application of the whole discourse to our 
consciences, 

We learn from these verses, that the exact time of our 
Lord Jesus Christ's second advent is purposely withheld from 
His church. The eventiscertain. The precise day and 
hour are not revealed. ‘Of that day and hour knoweth 
no man, no, not the angels which are in heaven,”’* 


was not true. His words were in no sense completely fulfilled when 
the generation to which He spoke had passed away. 

. The view that it means “the same generation which is alive when 
these things begin, shall also see them accomplished,” appears to me 
untenable for one simple reason: It is not the natural meaning of 
the Greek words from which our translation is made. 

* There is undoubtedly some difficulty in the words of our Lord, 
“ Of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which 
are in heaven, neither the Son.” The question has often been raised, 
“How can the Lord Jesus be ignorant of any thing, since He is very 
God, and says himself, ‘I and my Father are one?’ How can the 
expression be reconciled with the saying, ‘In Him are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge?” (Col. ii. 3.) 

The answer to these questions is to be found in our deep ignorance 
of the great mystery of the union of two natures in one Person. 
That our Lord Jesus Christ was at the same time perfect God and 
perfect man we know. That these two distinct natures were both 
found together in His Person, we also know. But how, and in what 
way, and to what extent the divine nature did not always operate 
in Him so as to overshadow the human nature, I believe it to be im- 
possible for mortal man to explain—Enough for us to know that we 
sometimes see in our Lord’s words and actions, the “man Christ 
Jesus,” and sometimes the “God over all blessed for ever.” But 
though we see clearly, and admire, we cannot explain. We can only 
say, in the present instance, that our Lord spake as a man, and not as 
God. 
Bullinger, in an able note on the subject, gives an interesting quo- 
tation from Cyril, of which the following passage is a portion: 

“ Just as the Saviour was willing to endure hunger, and thirst, and 
other sufferings of this kind, so also, as man, He is ignorant of ‘that 
great day.’ For He sometimes speaks as God, and sometimes as 
man, in order that He may show Himself to be both very God and 


292 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is deep wisdom and mercy in this intentional 
silence. "We have reason to thank God that the thing 
has been hiddenfrom us. Uncertainty about the date of 
the Lord’s return is calculated to keep believers in an 
attitude of constant expectation, and to preserve them 
from despondency. What a dreary prospect the early 
church would have had before it, if it had known for cer- 
tain that Christ would not return to earth for at least 
fifteen hundred years! The hearts of men like Athan- 
asius, Chrysostom, and Agustine, might well have sunk 
within them, if they had been aware of the centuries of 
darkness through which the world would pass, before 
their Master came back to take the kingdom.—What a 
quickening motive, on the other hand, true Christians 
have perpetually had, for a close walk with God! They 
have never known, in any age, that their Master might 
not come suddenly to take account of his servants. This 
very uncertainty has supplied them with a reason for 
living always ready to meet Him. 

There is one caution connected with the subject, which 
very man. As God He said to His disciples, ‘Our friend Lazarus 
sleepeth,’ when no one had told Him. As man He asked the sis- 
ter of Lazarus, when He came to them at the end of His journey, 
‘Where have ye laid him?’ He who, when far off, knew that La- 
zarus was dead, how could He be ignorant, when present, of the 
place where the body of Lazarus was? It is utterly improbable that 
He should have known the one thing, and been ignorant of the 
other. But the truth is, that He knew both as God, while He was 
ignorant of both as man. Therefore, in the same way, He both knew 
not and yet knew ‘that day and that hour.” As man He knew not. 
As God He knew.” 

It is a sensible remark of Gualter, that pressing an excessively lite- 
ral interpretation of texts like this, is the sure way to revive old he- 


resies, and to bring into doubt, sometimes the divine, and sometimes 
the human nature of Christ. - 


* 


MARK, CHAP. XIII. 298 


must not be overlooked. We must not allow the uncer- 
tainty of the time of our Lord’s second advent to prevent 
our giving attention to the unfulfilled prophecies of Serip- 
ture. This is a great delusion, but one into which, 
unhappily, many Christians fall. There is a wide dis- 
tinction to be drawn between dogmatical and positive 
assertions about dates, and a humble, prayerful searching 
into the good things yet to come. Against dogmatism 
about times and seasons, our Lord’s words in this place 
are a standing caution. But as to the general profitable- 
ness of studying prophecy, we can have no plainer au- 
thority than the apostle Peter’s words: “Ye do well 
that ye take heed to prophecy ;” and the apostle John’s 
words in Revelation: ‘ Blessed is he that readeth.” (2 
Peter i. 19. Rev. i. 3.) 

We learn, in the second place, from these verses, what 
are the practical duties of all true believers in the prospect 
of the second coming of Jesus Christ. Our Lord mentions 


_ three things, to which His people should attend. He 


tells them plainly that He is coming again one day, in 
power and great glory. He tells them at the same time, 
that the precise hour and date of that coming are not 
known. What then are His people to do? In what 
position of mind are they to live? They are to watch. 
They are to pray. hey are to work. 

We are to watch. We are to live always on our 
guard. We are to keep our souls in a wakeful, lively 
state, prepared at any time to meet our Master. We are 
to beware of any thing like spiritual lethargy, dulness, 
deadness, and torpor. The company, the employment 
of time, the society which induces us to forget Christ and 


2994 ' EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


His second advent, should be marked, noted, and avoid- 
ed. ‘Let us not sleep as do others,” says the apostle, 
“but let us watch and be sober.” (1 Thess. v. 6.) 

We are to pray. We are to keep up habits of regular 
communion and intercourse with God. We are to allow 
no strangeness to come in between us and our Father in 
heaven, but to speak with Him daily ; that so we may 
be ready at any moment to see Him face to face. More- 
over, we are to make special prayer about the Lord’s 
coming, that we may be ‘‘ found in peace, without spot 
and blameless,” and that our hearts may at no time be 
“overcharged” with the cares of this life, and so the day 
come upon us unawares. (2 Peter i. 14. Luke xxi. 34.) 

Finally, we are to work. We are to realize that we 
are all servants of a great Master, who has given to 
every men his work, and expects that work to be done. 
We are to labor to glorify God, each in our particular 
sphere and relation. There is always something for every 
one todo. We are to strive each of us to shine as a 
light—to be the salt of our own times—to be faithful 
witnesses for our Master, and to honor Him by conscien- 
tiousness and consistency in our daily conversation. Our 
great desire must be to be found not idle and sleeping, 
but working and doing.* 

Such are the simple injunction# to which our Lord 
would have us attend. They ought to stir up in the 
hearts of all professing Christians great self-examination. 


* “Be doing something,” says Jerome, “that the devil may always 
find you engaged.” Itwas a common saying of Calvin, towards the 
end of his life, when his friends would have had him do less work, 
for his health’s sake, “ Would you have my Master find me idle ?” 


MARK, CHAP, XIV. 295 


Are we looking for our Saviour’s return ? Do we long 
for His appearing? Can we say with sincerity, Come, 
Lord Jesus? Do we live as if we expected Christ to 
come again ? These are questions which demand serious 
consideration. May we give them the attention which 
they deserve ! 

Does our Lord require us to neglect any of the duties 
of life, in the expectation of His return ? He requires 
nothing of the kind. He does not bid the farmer neglect 
his land, or the laborer his work, the merchant his 
business, or the lawyer his calling. All He asks is that 
baptized people should live up to the faith into which 
they were baptized—should live as penitent people— 
live as believing people—live as people who know that 
“‘ without holiness no man can see the Lord.” §So living, 
we are ready to meet our Master. Not living in this way, 
we are neither fit for death, judgment, nor eternity. To 
live in this way is to be truly happy, because it is to be 
truly prepared for any thing that may come upon the 
earth, Let us never be content with a lower standard 
of practical Christianity than this. The last words of 
the prophecy are peculiarly solemn : ‘‘ What I say unto 
you, I say unto all, Watch !” 


MARK XIV. 1—9. 


1 After two days was the ne of | house of Simon the leper, as he sat 
the Passover, and of unleavened | at meat, there came a woman having 
bread: and the Chief Priests and the | an alabaster box of ointment of spike- 
Scribes sought how they might take | nard very precious; and she brake 
him by craft, and put Aim to death. | the box, and poured ¢ on his head. 

2 But they said, Not on the feast| 4 And there were some that had 
day, lest there be an uproar of the | indignation within themselves, and 
people. — | said, Why was this waste of the oint- 

3 And being in Bethany, in the | ment made? 


296 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


5 For it might have been sold for ; not always. 
more than three hundred pence and| 8 She hath done what she could: 
have been given to the poor. And|she is come aforehand to anoint my 
they murmered against her. body to the burying. 

6 And Jesus said, Let her alone;| 9 Verily I say unto you, Whereso- 
why trouble ye her ? she hath wrought | ever this Gospel shall be preached 
2 good work on me. throughout the whole world, this also 

7 For ye have the poor with you | that she hath done shall be spoken of 
always, and whensoever ye will ye | for a memorial of her. 
may do them good: but me ye have 


Tus chapter begins that part of St. Mark’s Gospel, 
which describes our Lord’s sufferings and death. Hither- 
to we have chiefly seen our Saviour as our prophet and 
teacher. We have now to see Him as our High Priest. 
Hitherto we have had to consider His miracles and say- 
ings. We have now to consider His vicarious sacrifice 
on the cross. 

Let us first observe in these verses, how God can disap- 
point the designs of wicked men, and over-rule them to His 
own glory. 

It is plain from St. Mark’s words, and the parallel 
passage in St. Matthew, that our Lord’s enemies did not 
intend to make His death a public transaction. “‘ They 
sought to take Him by craft.” ‘They said, not on the 
feast day, lest there be an uproar of the people.” In 
short, it would appear that their original plan was to do 
nothing till the feast of the passover was over, and the 
passover-worshippers had returned to their own homes. 

The overruling providence of God completely defeated 
this politic design. The betrayal of our Lord took place 
at an earlier time than the chief priests had expected. 
The death of our Lord took place on the very day when 
Jerusalem was most full of people, and the passover feast 
was at its height. In every way the counsel of these 
wicked men was turned to foolishness. They thought 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 297 


they were going to put an end for ever to Christ’s 
spiritual kingdom ; and in reality they were helping to 
establish it. They thought to have made Him vile and 
contemptible by the crucifixion; and in reality they 
made Him glorious. They thought to have put Him to 
death privily and without observation ; and instead, 
they were compelled to crucify Him publicly, and before 
the whole nation of the Jews. They thought to have 
silenced His disciples, and stopped their teaching : and 
instead, they supplied them with a text and a subject 
for evermore. So easy is it for God to cause the wrath 
of man to praise Him. (Psalm Ixxvi. 10.) 

There is comfort in all this for true Christians. They 
live in a troubled world, and are often tossed to and fro 
by anxiety about public events. Let them rest them- 
selves in the thought that everything is ordered for good 
by an all-wise God. Let them not doubt that all things 
in the world around them, are working together for their 
Father’s glory. Let them call to mind the words of the 
second Psalm: “The kings of the earth set themselves, 
and the rulers take council together against the Lord.” 
And yet it goes on, “ He that sitteth in the heavens shall 
laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision.” It has 
been so in time past. It will be so in time to come. 

Let us observe, secondly, in these verses, how good 
works are sometimes undervalued and misundertsood. We 
are told of the good work of a certain woman, in pour- 
ing ointment on our Lord’s head, in a house at Bethany.* 
She did it, no doubt, asa mark of honor and respect, 

* The question has often been raised, whether there were one, two, 


or three women who anointed our Lord during His earthly ministry. 
13* 


298 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and in token of her own gratitude and love towards Him. 
Yet this act of her’s was blamed by some. Their cold 
hearts could not understand such costly liberality. They 
called it “waste.” “‘ They had indignation within them- 
selves.” They “murmured against her.” pos 
The spirit of these narrow-minded fault-finders is un- 
happily only too common. Their followers and successors 


Theophylact is of opinion that there were three. For this opinion 
much may be said. 

1. The woman spoken of in the seventh chapter of St. Luke ap-. 
pears first in order. The city in which this anointing took place does 
not appear to be Bethany. The woman is spoken of as having been 
“a sinner.” The house is described as that of a Pharisee. The anoint- 
ing was of our Lord’s “ feet,” and not of His “head.” There is strong 
internal evidence that the whole transaction took place at a compara- 
tively early period of our Lord’s ministry. All these points should 
be noticed. 

2.. The anointing described by St. John appears next in order. 
This, we are distinctly told, was “six days” before the passover. The 
person who anointed our Lord was Mary, the sister of Lazarus. The 
part of Him anointed was again His “feet,” and not His “head.” 
These points ought also to be noticed. 

8. The anointing described by St. Matthew and St. Mark comes 
third in order, This, we are told, was only “two days” before the 
feast of the passover. In this case we are not told the name of the 
woman who anointed our Lord. But we are told that the ointment 
was poured on His “head.” 

The question of course occurs to our minds: “ Isit likely and prob- 
able that this event would take place no less than three times?” In 
reply to that, it may be fairly said, that to anoint a person as a mark 
of honor and respect, was far more common in our Lord’s time than we 
in England suppose; and that anointing was a far more frequent 
practice than we in this climate can imagine. And it seems per- 
fectly possible that the same thing may have happened three times. 

The main difficulty, of course, is the close similarity of the language 
used at the anointing described by John, and at that described by 
Matthew and Mark. This can only be explained by supposing that 
our Lord twice said the same things. 


MARK, CHAP, XIV. 299 


are to be found in every part of Christ’s visible church. 
There is never wanting a generation of people who decry 
what they call “‘ extremes” in religion, and are incessantly 
recommending what they term ‘‘moderation” in the 
service of Christ. If a man devotes his time, money, 
and affections to the pursuit of worldly things, they do 
not blame him. If he gives himself up to the service of 
money, pleasure, or politics, they find no fault. But if 
the same man devotes himself, and all he has, to Christ, 
, they can scarcely find words to express their sense of his 
folly. ‘“‘ He is beside himself.” ‘He is out of his mind.” 
“He is a fanatic.” “He is an enthusiast.” “He is 
righteous over-much.” ‘‘Heis an extreme man.” In 
short, they regard it as ‘‘ waste.” 

Let charges like these not disturb us, if we hear them 
made against us because we strive to serve Christ. Let 
us bear them patiently, and remember that they are as 
old as Christianity itself. Let us pity those who make 
such charges against believers.. They show plainly that 
they have no sense of obligation to Christ. A cold heart 
makes a slow hand. Ifa man once understands the 
ainfulness of sin, and the mercy of Christ in dying for 
him, he will never think anything too good or too costly 
to give to Christ. He will rather feel, “‘ what shall I 
render to the Lord for all His benefits.” (Psalm cxvi. 
12.) He will fear wasting time, talents, money, affections 
on the things of this world. He will not be afraid 
of wasting them on his Saviour. He will fear going 
into extremes about business, money, politics, or pleasure ; 
but he will not be afraid of doing too much for Christ. 

Let us observe, in the last place, how highly our Lord 


300 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Jesus Christ esteems any service done to Himself. No- 
where, perhaps, in the Gospels, do we find such strong 
praises bestowed on any person, as this woman here 
receives. Three points, in particular, stand out promi- 
nently in our Lord’s words, to which many who now 
ridicule and blame others for their religion’s sake, would 
do well to take heed. 

For one thing, our Lord says, ‘‘ Why trouble ye her P” 
A heart-searching question that, and one which all who 
persecute others because of their religion would find it. 
hard to answer! What cause can they show? What 
reason can they assign for their conduct ? None! none 
at all. They trouble others out of envy, malice, igno- 
rance, and dislike of the true Gospel. 

For another thing, our Lord says, “She hath done a 
good work.” How great and marvellous is that praise, 
from the lips of the King of kings ! Money is often given 
to the church or bestowed on charitable institutions, 
from ostentation, or other false motives. But it is the 
person who loves and honors Jesus Himself, who really 
“does good works.” 

For another thing, our Lord says, “‘She hath done 
what she could.” No stronger word of commendation 
than that could possibly have been used. Thousands 
live and die without grace, and are lost eternally, who 
are always saying, “I try all I can. I do all I can.” 
And yet in saying so, they tell as great a lie as Ananias 
and Sapphira. Few, it may be feared, are to be found 
like this woman, and really deserve to have it said of 
them, that they ‘do what they can.” 

Let us leave the passage with practical self-applicaton. 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 301 


Let us, like this holy woman, whose conduct we have 
just heard described, devote ourselves, and all we have, 
to Christ’s glory. Our position in the world may be 
lowly, and our means of usefulness few. But let us, like 
her, “‘do what we can.” 
Finally, let us see in this passage a sweet foretaste 
of things yet to come in the day of judgment. Let us 
believe that the same Jesus who here pleaded the cause 
of His loving servant, when she-was blamed, will one 
day plead for all who have been His servants in this 
world. Let us work on, remembering that His eye is 
upon us, and that all we do is noted in His book.—Let 
us not heed what men say or think of us, because of our 
religion. The praise of Christ at the last day, will more 
than compensate for all we suffer in this world from un- 
kind tongues. 





MARK XIV. 10—16. 


10 And Judas Iscariot, one of the 
twelve, went unto the Chief Priests, 
to betray him unto them. 

11 And when they heard i, they 
were glad, and promised to give him 
money. And he sought how he might 
conveniently betray him. 

12 And the first day of unleavened 
bread, when they killed the Passover, 
his disciples said unto him, Where 
wilt thou that we go and prepare that 
thou mayest eat the Passover ? 

13 And he sendeth forth two of his 
disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye 
into the city, and there shall meet 


you a man bearing a pitcher of water 
follow him. 

14 And wheresoever he shall go in 
say ye to the goodman of the house, 
The Master saith, Where is the guest- 
chamber, where [ shall eat the Pass- 
over with my disciples ? 

15 And he will shew you a large 
upper room furnished and prepared : 
there make ready for us. 

16 And his disciples went forth, 
and came into the city, and found as 
he had said unto them: and they 
made ready the Passover. 


In these verses, St. Mark tells us how our Lord was 


delivered into the hands of His enemies. 


It came to 


pass through the treachery of one of His own twelve . 


302 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


disciples. The false apostle, Judas Iscariot, betrayed 
Him. 

We ought to mark, firstly, in this passage, to what 
lengths a man may go in.a false profession of religuon. 

It is impossible to conceive a more striking proof of 
this painful truth, than the history of Judas Iscariot. 
If ever there was a man who at one time looked like a 
true disciple of Christ, and bade fair to reach heaven, 
that man was Judas. He was chosen by the- Lord 
Jesus Himself to be an apostle. He was privileged to 
be a companion of the Messiah, and an eye-witness of 
His mighty works, throughout His earthly ministry. He 
was an associate of Peter, James and John. He was 
sent forth to preach the kingdom of God, and to work 
miracles in Christ’s name. He was regarded by all the 
eleven apostles as one of themselves. He was so like his 
fellow disciples, that they did not suspect him of being 
a traitor. And yet this very man turns out at last a. 
false-hearted child of the devil—departs entirely from 
the faith—assists our Lord’s deadliest enemies, and 
leaves the world with a worse reputation than any one 
since the days of Cain. Never was there such a fall, 
such an apostacy, such a miserable end to a fair begin- 
ning—such a total eclipse of a soul! 

And how can this amazing conduct of Judas be ac- 
counted for ? T’here is only one answer to that question. 
“The love of money” was the cause of this unhappy 
man’s ruin. That same grovelling covetousness, which 
enslaved the heart of Balaam, and brought on Gehazi 
a leprosy, was the destruction of Iscariot’s soul. No 
other explanation of his behavior will satisfy the plain 


MARK, CHAP. XIV, 808 


statements of Scripture. His act was an act of mean 
covetousness, without a redeeming feature about it. The 
Holy Ghost declares plainly “he was a thief.” (John xii. 
6.) And his case stands before the world as an eternal 
comment on the solemn words, ‘‘ the love of money is 
the root of all evil.” (1 Tim. vi. 10.) 

Let us learn from this melancholy history of Judas, 
to be ‘‘clothed with humility,” and to be content with 
nothing short of the grace of the Holy Ghost in our 
hearts. Knowledge, gifts, profession, privileges, church- 
member-ship, power of preaching, praying, and talking 
about religion, are all useless things, if our hearts are 
not converted. They are all no better than sounding 
brass, and a tinkling cymbal, if we have not put off the 
old man, and put on the new. They will not deliver us 
from hell.—Above all, let us remember our Lord’s cau- 
tion, to ‘‘ beware of covetousness.” (Luke xii. 15.) It 
is a sin that eats like a canker, and once admitted into 
our hearts, may lead us finally into every wickedness. 
Let us pray to be “content with such things as we 
have.” (Heb. xiii. 6.) The possession of money is not 
the one thing needful. Riches entail great peril on the 
souls of those who have them. The true Christian ought 
to be far more afraid of being rich than of being poor. 

We ought to mark, secondly, in this passage, the a- 
tentional connection between the time of the Jewish passover 
and the time of Christ's death. We cannot doubt for a 
moment that it was not by chance, but by God’s provi- 
dential appointment, that our Lord was erucified in the 
passover week, and on the very day that the passover 
lamb was slain, It was meant to draw the attention of 


804 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the Jewish nation to Him as the true Lamb of God. It 
was meant to bring to their minds the true object and 
purpose of His death. Every sacrifice, no doubt, was 
intended to point the Jew onward to the one great sac- 
rifice for sin which Christ offered. But none, certainly, 
was so striking a figure and type of our Lord’s sacrifice, 
as the slaying of the passover lamb. It was pre-emi- 
nently an ordinance which was a “schoolmaster unto 
Christ.” (Gal. iii. 24.) Never was there a type so full 
of meaning in the whole circle of Jewish ceremonies, as 
the passover was at its original institution. 

Did the passover remind the Jew of the marvellous 
deliverance of his forefathers out of the land of Egypt, 
when God slew the first-born ? No doubt it did. But 
it was also meant to be a sign to him of the far greater 
redemption and deliverance from the bondage of sin, 
which was to be brought in by our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Did the passover remind the Jew, that by the death. 
of an innocent lamb, the families of his forefathers were 
once exempted from the death of their first-born P No 
doubt it did. But it was also meant to teach him the 
far higher truth, that the death of Christ on the cross 
was to be the life of the world. 

Did the passover remind the Jew that the sprinkling 
of blood on the door-posts of his forefathers’ houses, 
preserved them from the sword of the destroying angel ? 
No doubt it did. But it was also meant to show him 
the far more important doctrine that Christ’s blood 
sprinkled on man’s conscience, cleanses it from all stain 
of guilt, and makes him safe from the wrath to come. 

Did the passover remind the Jew that none of his fore- 


MARK, CHAP, XIV, 305 


fathers were safe from the destroying angel, in the night 
when he slew the first-born, unless he actually ate of the 
slain lamb? No doubt it did. But it was meant to 
guide his mind to the far higher lesson, that all who 
would receive benefit from Christ’s atonement, must 
actually feed upon Him by faith, and receive Him into 
their hearts. 

Let us call these things to mind, and weigh them well. 
We shall then see a peculiar fitness and beauty in the 
time appointed by God for our Lord Jesus Christ’s death 
on the cross. It happened at the very season when the 
mind of all Israel was being directed to the deliverance 
from Egypt, and to the events of that wondrous night, 
when it took place. The lamb slain and eaten by every 
member of the family—the destroying angel—the safety 
within the blood-sprinkled door, would have been talked 
over and considered in every Jewish household, the very 
week that our blessed Lord was slain. It would be 
strange indeed if such a remarkable death as His, at 
such a time, did not set many minds thinking, and open 
many eyes. To what extent we shall never know till the 
last day. 

Let it be a rule with us, in the reading of our 
Bibles, to study the types and ordinances of the Mosaic 
law with prayerful attention. They are all full of Christ. 
The altar—the scape-goat—the daily burnt-offering— 
the day of atonement, are all so many finger-posts point- 
ing to the great sacrifice offered by our Lord on Calvary. 
Those who neglect to study the Jewish ordinances, as 
dark, dull, and uninteresting parts of the Bible, only 
show their own ignorance, and miss great advantages. 





306 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


Those who examine them with Christ as the key to their 
meaning, will.find them full of Gospel light and com- 


fortable truth.* 


MARK XIV. 17—25. 


17 And in the evening he cometh 
with the twelve. 

18 And as they sat and did eat, 
‘Jesus said, Verily Isay unto you, One 
of you which eateth with me shall 
betray me. 

19 And they began to be sorrowful, 
and to say unto him one by one, Js it 
1? and another said, Js it 1? 

20 And he answered and said unto 
them, J¢ is one of the twelve that 
dippeth with me in the dish. 

21 The Son of man indeed goeth, 
as it is written of him: but woe to 
that man by whom the Son of man is 


if he had never been born. 

22 And as they did eat, Jesus took 
bread, and blessed, and brake i, and 
gave to them, and said, Take, eat: 
this is my body. 

23 And he took the cup, and when 
he had given thanks, he gave % to 
them: and they all drank of it. 

24 And he said unto them, This is 
my blood of the new testament, which 
is shed for many. 

25 Verily I say unto you, I will 
drink no more of the fruit of the vine, 
until that day that I drink it new in 
the kingdom of God. 


betrayed! good were it for that man 

* Tt may be well to observe in this connection, that it admits of 
much question, whether the common view of the word “ passover” 
is the correct.one. At any rate, the following passage from Bishop 
Lowth, on Isaiah xxxi. 5, deserves careful consideration. He says: 

“The common notion of God’s passing over the houses of the Is- 
raelites is, that in going through the land of Egypt to smite the first- 
born, seeing the blood on the door of the houses of the Israelites, He 
passed over, or skipped those houses, and forbore to smite them. 
But that this is not the true notion of the thing, will be plain from 
considering the words of the sacred historian, where he describes 
very explicitly the action: ‘For Jehovah will pass through to smite 
the Egyptians; and when He seeth the blood on the lintels and on 
the two side posts, Jehovah will spring forward over or before the 
door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come into your houses to 
smite you.’ Hxod. xii. 23. Here are manifestly two distinct agents, 
with which the notion of passing over is not consistent; for that 
supposes but one agent. The two agents are, the destroying angel 
passing through to smite every house, and Jehovah the protector, 
keeping pace with him, who, seeing the door of the Israelites marked 
with blood, leaps forward, throws Himself with a sudden motion in 
the way, opposes the destroying angel, and protects and saves that 
house against him, nor suffers him to smite it.” The words of Isaiah 
xxxi, 5, ought to be studied attentively, in order to understand the 
fitness and propriety of this interpretation. 


MARK, CHAP, XIV. 307 


TsusE verses contain St. Mark’s account of the. insti- 
tution of the Lord’s Supper. The simplicity of the 
description deserves special observation. Well would it 
have been for the Church, if men had not departed trom 
the simple statements of Scripture about this blessed 
sacrament! It is a mournful fact that it has been 
corrupted by false explanations and superstitious addi- 
tions, until its real meaning, in many parts of Christen- 
dom, is utterly unknown. Let us however, at present, 
dismiss from our minds all matters of controversy, and 
study the words of St. Mark with a view to our own 
personal edification. 

Let us learn from the passage before us, that self- 
examination should precede the reception of the Lord’s 
Supper. We cannot doubt that this was one object of 
our Lord’s solemn warning, “One of you which eateth 
with me shall betray me.” He meant to stir up in the 
minds of his disciples, those very searchings of heart 
which are here so touchingly recorded: ‘ They began 
to be sorrowful, and to say unto Him one by one, Is it 
I? and another said, Is it 1?” He meant-to teach His 
whole Church throughout the world, that the time of 
drawing near to the Lord’s table should be a time for 
diligent self-inquiry. 

The benefit of the Lord’s Supper depends entirely on 
the spirit and frame of mind in which we receive it. The 
bread which we there eat, and the wine which we there 
drink, have no power to do good to our souls, as medi- 
cine does good to our bodies, without the co-operation of 
our hearts and wills. They will not convey any blessing 
to us, by virtue of the minister’s consecration, if we do 


308 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


not receive them rightly, worthily, and with faith. To 
assert, as some do, that the Lord’s supper must do good to 
all communicants, whatever be the state of mindin which 
they receive it, is a monstrous and unscriptural figment, 
and has given rise to gross and wicked superstition. 

The state of mind which we should look for in ourselves, 
before going to the Lord’s table, is well described in the 
Catechism of the Church of England. We ought to “ ex- 
amine ourselves whether we repent truly of our former 
sins—whether we stedfastly purpose to lead a new life— 
whether we have a lively faith in God’s mercy through 
Christ—and a thankful remembrance of His death— 
and whether we are in charity with all men.’ If our 
conscience can answer these questions satisfactorily, we 
may receive the Lord’s supper without fear. More than 
this God does not require of any communicant. Less 
than this ought never to content us. 

Let us take heed to ourselves in the matter of the Lord’s 
supper. It is easy to err about it on either side—On 
the one hand, we are not to be content with staying away 
from the Lord’s table under the vague plea of unfitness, 
As long as we so stay away, we are disobeying a plain 
command of Christ, and are living in sin. But, on the 
other hand, we are not to go to the Lord’s table as a 
mere form, and without thought. As long as we receive 
the sacrament in that state of mind, we derive no good 
from it, and are guilty of a great transgression. It is an 
awful thing to be unfit for the sacrament, for this is to be 
unfit to die. It is a no less awful thing to receive it 
unworthily, for this is most provoking to God. The only 
safe course is to be a decided servant of Christ, and to 


MARK, CHAP. XIV, 809 


live the life of faith in Him. Then we may draw near 
with boldness, and take the sacrament to our comfort. 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 
that the principal object of our Lord’s Supper, is to remind 
us of Christ's sacrifice for us on the cross. The bread is 
intended to bring to our recollection the “body” of 

Christ, which was wounded for our transgressions. The 
wine is intended to bring to our recollection the “ blood” 
of Christ, which was shed to cleanse us from all sin. 
The atonement and propitiation which our Lord effected 
by His death as our Surety and Substitute, stand out 
prominently in the whole ordinance. The false doctrine 
which some teach, that His death was nothing more than 
the death of a very holy man, who left us an example 
how to die, turns the Lord’s supper into an unmeaning 
ordinance, and cannot possibly be reconciled with our 
Lord’s words at its institution. 

A clear understanding of this point is of great im- 
portance, It will place us in the right position of mind, 
and teach us how we ought to feel in drawing near to the 
Lord’s table. It will produce in us true humility of 
spirit. The bread and wine, will remind ug how sinful 
sin must be, when nothing but Christ’s death could 
atone for it. It will produce in us hopefulness about our 
souls. The bread and wine will remind us that though 
our sins are great, a great price has been paid for our 
redemption. Not least, it will produce in us gratitude. 
The bread and wine will remind us how great is our 
debt to Christ, and how deeply bound we are to glorify 
Him in our lives. May these be the feelings that we 
experience, whenever we receive the Lord’s supper ! 


310 ‘ EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


’ Finally, we learn from these verses, the nature of the 
spiritual benefits which the Lord’s supper is intended to 
convey, and the persons who have a right to expect them. 
We may gather this lesson from the significant actions 
which are used in receiving this sacrament. Our Lord 
commands us to “eat” bread and to “ drink” wine. 
Now eating and drinking are the acts of a living person. 
The object of eating and drinking is to be strengthened 
and refreshed. The conclusion we are meant to draw, 
is manifestly this, that the Lord’s supper is appointed 
for “the strengthening and refreshing of our souls,” and 
that those who ought to partake of it are those who are 
lively, real Christians. All such will find this sacrament 
a means of grace. It will assist them to rest in Christ 
more simply, and to trust in Him more entirely. The 
visible symbols'of bread and wine will aid, quicken, and 
confirm their faith. I 

A right view of this point is of the utmost moment in 
' these latter days. We must always beware of thinking 
that there is any way of eating Christ’s body, and drink- 
ing Christ’s blood, but by faith—or that receiving the 
Lord’s supper will give any man a different interest in 
Christ’s sacrifice on the cross from that which faith gives. 
Faith is the one grand mean of communication between 
the soul and Christ. The Lord’s supper can aid, 
quicken, and confirm faith, but can never supersede it, 
or supply its absence. Let this never be forgotten. 
Error on this point is a most fatal delusion, and leads to 
many superstitions. 

Let it be a settled principle in our Christianity, that 
no unbeliever ought to go to the Lord’s table, and that 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. . 311 


the sacrament will not do our souls the slightest good, 
if we do not receive it with repentance and faith. The 
Lord’s supper is not a converting or justifying ordinance, 
and those who come to it unconverted and unjustified, 
will go away no better than they came, but rather worse. 
It is an ordinance for believers, and not for unbelievers, 
for the living and not for the dead. It is meant to sus- 
tain life, but not to impart it—to strengthen and increase 
grace, but not to give it—to help faith to grow, but not 
to sow or plant it. Let these things sink down into our 
hearts, and never be forgotten. 

Are we alive unto God? This is the great question. 
If we are, let us go to the Lord’s supper, and receive it 
thankfully, and never turn our backs on the Lord’s table. 
If we do not go, we commit a great sin. 

Are we yet dead in sin and worldliness ? If we are, 
we have no business at the communion. We are on 
the broad way that leadeth to destruction. We must 
repent. We must be born again. We must be joined 
to Christ by faith. Then, and not till then, we are fit 
to be communicants,* 


* There are two expressions in the passage now expounded, which 
deserve a special notice. One is, the “fruit of the vine.” The other 
is “the kingdom of God.” 

1. The words, “fruit of the vine,” applied by our Lord to the cup 
of wine which He had just been giving to His.-disciples, in the insti- 
tution of the Lord’s supper, appear entirely to overthrow the Romish 
doctrine of transubstantiation. The wine, it appears, did not réally 
and literally become Christ’s blood, as the Roman Catholics say. Our 
Lord himself speaks of it as the juice of grapes, “the fruit of the vine.” 
It is clear therefore, that when He said of that cup of wine before, 
“this is my blood,” He meant nothing more than this, “ this repre- 
sents—is an emblem of—my blood.” 

2 The words, “kingdom of God,” applied by our Lord toa time 


312 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK XIV. 26—81. re 
26 And when they had sung an| though all shall be offended, yet will 
hymn, they went out into the mount | not I. , : ? 
of Olives. 30 And Jesus saith unto him, Verily 
27 And Jesus saith unto them, All|I say unto thee, That this day, even 
ye shall be offended because of me|in this night, before the cock crow 
this night: for it is written, I will] twice, thou shalt deny me thrice. 
smite the shepherd, and the sheep| 31 But he spake the more vehem- 


shall be scattered. ently, If I should die with thee, I 
28 But after that I am risen, I will] will not deny thee in any wise. Like- 
go before you into Galilee. wise also said they all. 


29 But Peter said unto him, Al- 

WE see in these verses, how well our Lord foreknew the 
weakness and infirmity of His disciples. He tells them 
plainly what they were going todo. “All ye shall be 
offended because of me this night.” He tells Peter in 
particular of the astounding sin which he was about to 
commit: “ This night, before the cock crow, thou shalt 
deny me thrice.” 

Yet our Lord’s fore-knowledge did not prevent His 
choosing these twelve disciples to be His apostles. He 
allowed them to be His intimate friends and com- 
panions, knowing perfectly well what they would one 
day-do. He granted them the mighty privilege of being 
continually with Him, and hearing His voice, with a 
clear foresight of the melancholy weakness and want of 
faith which they would exhibit at the end of His minis- 
try. This is a remarkable fact and deserves to be had 
in continual remembrance. 


and state of things yet future, appear to show plainly that He did 
not consider God’s kingdom to have come, when he spoke. More- 
over, the words have not yet received a fulfilment, as it is not known, 
that our Lord administered the Lord’s supper to His disciples after 
His resurrection. The words therefore are meant to turn our minds 
towards the time of our Lord’s second advent. Then, and not till 
then, “the kingdom of God” will be fully set up. Then, and not till 
then, we shall sit down at the marriage supper of the Lamb, and 
drink the new wine in the kingdom. 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 3138 


‘Let us take comfort in the thought that the Lord 
Jesus does not cast off his believing people because of 
failures and imperfections. He knows what they are. 
He takes them, as the husband takes the wife, with all 
their blemishes and defects, and, once joined to Him by 
faith, will never put them away. He is a merciful and 
compassionate High-priest. It is His glory to pass over 
the transgressions of His people, and to cover their 
many sins. He knew what they were before conversion, 
—wicked, guilty, and defiled ; yet He loved them. He 
knows what they will be after conversion,—weak, erring, 
and frail; yet He loves them. He has undertaken to 
save them, notwithstanding all their shortcomings, and 
what He has undertaken He will perform. 

Let us learn to pass a charitable judgment on the 
conduct of professing believers. Let us not set them 
down. in a low place, and say they have no grace, be- 
cause we see in them much weakness and corruption. Let 
us remember that our Master in heaven bears with their 
infirmities, and let us try to bear with them too. The 
Church of Christ is littie better than a great hospital. 
We ourselves are all, more or less, weak, and all daily 
need the skilful treatment of the heavenly Physician. 
There will be no complete cures till the resurrection day. 

We see, in the second place, in these verses, how much 
comfort professing Christians may miss by carelessness and 
inattention. Our Lord spoke plainly of His resurrection : 
“* After that I am risen, I will go before you into Gali- 
lee.” Yet His words appear to have been thrown away, 
and spoken in vain. Not one of his disciples seems to 
have noticed them, or treasured them up in his heart. 


314 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


When He was betrayed, they forsook Him. When He 
was crucified, they were almost in despair. And when 
He rose again on the third day, they would not believe 
that it was true. They had heard of it frequently with 
the hearing of the ear, but it had never made any impres- 
sion on their hearts. 

What an exact picture we have here of human na- 
ture! How often we see the very same thing among 
professing Christians in the present day! How many 
truths we read yearly in the Bible, and yet remember 
them no more than if we had never read them at all! 
How many words of wisdom we hear in sermons heed- 
lessly and thoughtlessly, and live on as if we had never 
heard them! The days of darkness and affliction come 
upon us by and bye, and then we prove unarmed and 
unprepared. On sick-beds, and in mourning, we see a 
meaning in texts and passages which we at one time 
heard listlessly and unconcerned. Things flash across 
our minds at such seasons, and make us feel ashamed 
that we had not noticed them before. We then remem- 
ber to have read them, and heard them, and seen them, 
but they made no impression upon us. Like Hagar’s 
well in the wilderness, they were close at hand, but, 
like Hagar, we never saw them. (Gen. xxi. 19.) 

Let us pray for a quick understanding in hearing and 
reading God’s word. Let us search into every part of 
it, and not lose any precious truth in it for want of care. 
So doing, we shall lay up a good foundation against the 
time to come, and in sorrow and sickness be found armed. 

Let us mark how little reason ministers have to be 
surprised, if the words that they preach in sermons are 


MARK, CHAP, XIV. 315 


often unnoticed and unheeded. They only drink of the 
same cup with their Master, Even He said many things 
which were not noticed when first spoken, And yet we 
know that “never man spake like this man.” “The 
disciple is not greater than his Master, nor the servant 
than his Lord.” We have need of patience. Truths 
that seem neglected at first, often bear fruit after many 
days. 

We see in the last place, in these verses, how much 
wnorant self-confidence may sometimes be found in the hearts 
of professing Christians. The apostle Peter could not 
think it possible that he could ever deny his Lord. ‘If 
I should die with thee,” he says, “I will not deny thee 
in any wise.” And he did not stand alone in his confi- 
dence. The other disciples were of the same opinion. 
“* Likewise also said they all.” 

Yet what did all this confident boasting come to ? 
Twelve hours did not pass away before all the disciples 
forsook our Lord and fled. Their loud professions were 
all forgotten. The present danger swept all their prom- 
ises of fidelity clean away. So little do we know how we 
shall act in any particular position until we are placed in 
it ! So much do present circumstances alter our feelings ! 

Let us learn to pray for humility. “ Pride goeth before 
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.” (Prov. 
xvi. 19.) There is far more wickedness in all our hearts 
than we know. We never can tell how far we might 
fall, if once placed in temptation. There is no degree 
of sin into which the greatest saint may not run, if he 
is not held up by the grace of God, and if he does not 
watch and pray. The seeds of every wickedness lie 


316 - EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


hidden in our hearts. They only need the convenient 
season to spring forth into a mischievous vitality. 
“Tet him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest 
he fall.” “He that trusteth his own heart is a fool.” 
(1 Cor. x. 12. Prov. xxviii. 26.) Let our daily prayer 
be, “ Hold thou me up and I shall be safe.” 


MARK XIV. 32—42. 


82 And they came to a place which 
was named Gethsemane; and he 
saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, 
while I shall pray. 

83 And he taketh with him Peter 
and James and John, and began to be 
sore amazed, and to be very heavy ; 

34 And saith unto them, My soul 
is exceeding sorrowful unto death: 
tarry ye here, and watch. 

85 And he went forward a little 
and fell on the ground, and prayed 
that, if it were possible, the hour 
might pass from him. 

86 And he said, Abba, Father, all 
things are possible unto thee; take 
away this cup from me : nevertheless 
not what I will, but what thou wilt. 

87 And he cometh, and findeth 





them sleeping, and saith unto Peter, 
Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not 
thou watch one hour? 

88 Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter 
into temptation. The spirit truly és 
ready, but. the flesh 7s weak. 

39 And again he went away, and 
prayed, and spake the same words. 

40 And when he returned, he found 
them-asleep again (for their eyes were 
heavy), neither wist they what to an- 
swer hin. 

41 And he cometh the third time, 
and saith unto them, Sleep on now, 
and take your rest: it is enough, the 
houris come ; behold, the Son of manis 
betrayed into the hands of sinners. 

42 Rise up, let us go; lo, he that 


| betrayeth me is at hand. 


Tue history of our Lord’s agony in the garden of Geth- 
semane isa deep and mysterious passage of Scripture. 
It contains things which the wisest divines cannot fully 
explain. Yet it has upon its surface plain truths of most 
momentous importance. 

Let us mark, in the first place, how keenly our Lord 
felt the burden of a world’s sin, It is written that He 
“began to be sore amazed,-and to be very heavy; and 
saith unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto 
death,’—and that “he fell on the ground, and prayed, 
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass fyom him.” 


MARK, CHAP. XIV, 317 


There is only one reasonable explanation of these ex- 
_pressions. It was no mere fear of the physical suffering 
of death, which drew them from our Lord’s lips. It 
was a sense of the enormous load of human guilt, which 
began at that time to press upon Him in a peculiar way. 
It was a sense of the unutterable weight of our sins and 
transgressions which were then specially laid upon Him. 
He was being “‘ made a curse for us.” He was bearing our 
griefs and carrying our sorrows according to the covenant 
He came on earth to fulfil. He was being “ made sin 
for us who Himself knew no sin.” His holy nature felt 
acutely the hideous burden laid upon Him. These were 
the reasons of His extraordinary SOTTOW. 

We ought to see in our Lord’s agony in Gethsemane 
the exceeding sinfulness of sin. It is a subject on which 
the thoughts of professing Christians are far below what 
they should be. The careless, light way in which such 
sins as swearing, Sabbath-breaking, lying, and the like, 
are often spoken of, is a painful evidence of the low con- 
dition of men’s moral feelings. Let the recollection of 
Gethsemane have a sanctifying effect upon us. What- 
ever others do, let us never ‘‘ make a mock at sin.” 

Let us mark, in the second place, what an example our 
Lord gives us of the importance of prayer in tume of trouble. 
In the hour of His distress we find Him employing this 
great remedy. ‘Twice we are told that when His soul 
was exceeding sorrowful, “‘ He prayed.” 

We shall never find a better receipt than this for the 
patient bearing of affliction. The first person to whom 
we should turn in our trouble is God. The first complaint 
we should make should be in the form of a prayer. The 
reply may not be given immediately. The relief we 


318 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


want may not be granted at once. The thing that tries 
us may never be removed and taken away. But the 
mere act of pouring out our hearts, and unbosoming our- 
selves at a throne of grace will do us good. The advice 
of St. James is wise and weighty: ‘Is any afflicted ? 
Let him pray.” (James v. 13.) 

Let us mark, in the third place, what a striking exam- 
ple our Lord gives us of submission of will to the will of God. 
Deeply as His human nature felt the pressure of a world’s 
guilt, He still prays that, ‘‘ if it were possible,” the hour 
might pass from Him. “Take away this cup from me: 
nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt.”* 


* Men are so apt to run into error on the subject of the divine and 
human natures in Christ, that the following quotation may be worth 
reading. 

“There are two distinct wills in Christ. But although they be truly 
distinct and different one from the other, yet they are not contrary 
one to the other, but they are subordinate each to other; the human 
will of Christ being always subject to His divine will, and most ready 
to be ordered and ruled by it. Therefore here we see that He doth 
submit His will, as He was man, to the divine will of God the Father, 
which divine will of the Father was also Christ’s own will. This truth 
we are to hold and maintain against those old heretics, which were 
called Monothelites, because they held there was but one kind of will 
in Christ, namely His divine will. This heresy sprung up in the Hast- 
ern church about 600 years after Christ; and it did very much mo- 
Jest and trouble the church for many years. It was a branch of the 
gross heresy of Eutyches which sprung up 200 years before. This 
Eutyches confounded the two natures in Christ, holding that as there 
was but one Person after the personal union, so there was but one 
nature in Christ, viz. the divine nature, the human nature being swal- 
lowed up. To maintain this the better, his followers maintained that 
Christ had but one kind of will. This heresy was condemned by the 
sixth general council at Constantinople, as well as by other ancient 
councils, And the fathers of the church in those times, did confute 
it by these very words of our Saviour which we have now in hand.” 
—Fetter on Mark. 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 319 


We can imagine no higher degree of perfection than 
that which is here set before us. To take patiently 
whatever God sends— to like nothing but what God 
likes —to wish nothing but what God approves — to 
prefer pain, if it please God to send it, to ease, if God 
does not think fit to bestow it—to lie passive under 
God’s hand, and know no will but His —this is the 
highest standard at which we can aim, and of this our 
Lord’s conduct in Gethsemane is a perfect pattern. 

Let us strive and labor to have “the mind that 
was in Christ” in this matter. Let us daily pray and 
endeavor to be enabled to mortify our self-will. It is 
for our happiness to do so. Nothing brings us so much 
misery on earth as having our own way. It is the best 
proof of real grace to do so. Knowledge, and gifts, and 
convictions, and feelings, and wishes, are all very un- 
certain evidences. They are often to be found in uncon- 
verted persons. But a continually increasing disposition 
to submit our own wills to the will of God, is a far more 
healthy symptom. It is a sign that we are really “ grow- 
ing in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.” 

’ Let us mark, lastly, in these verses, how much infirmity 
may be found even in the best Christians. We have a painful 
illustration of this truth in the conduct of Peter, James, 
and John. They slept when they ought to have watched 
and prayed. Though invited by our Lord to watch with 
Him, they slept. Though warned a short time before 
that danger was at hand, and their faith likely to fail, 
they slept. Though fresh from the Lord’s table, with all 
its touching solemnities, they slept. Never was there a 
more striking proof that the best of men are but men, 


820 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


and that, so long as saints are in the body, they are 
compassed with infirmity. 

These things are written for our learning. Let us 
take heed that they are not written in vain. Let us ever 
be on our guard against the slothful, indolent, lazy spirit 
in religion, which is natural to us all, and especially in 
the matter of our private prayers. When we feel that 
spirit creeping over us, let us remember Peter, James, 
and John in the garden, and take care. 

The solemn counsel which our Lord addresses to His 
disciples should often ring in our ears: ‘‘ Watch and 
pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly is 
ready, but the flesh is weak.” It should be the Chris- 
tian’s daily motto from the time of his conversion to the 
hour of his death. 

Are we true Christians ? and would we keep our souls 
awake ? Let us not forget that we have within usa double 
nature—a ready “spirit” and weak “ flesh”—a carnal. 
nature inclined to evil, and a spiritual nature inclined 
to good, These two are contrary one to the other. 
(Gal. v.17.) Sin and the devil will always find helpers 
in our hearts. If we do not crucify and rule over the 
flesh, it will often rule over us and bring us to shame. 

Are we true Christians, and would we keep our souls 
awake P Then let us never forget to “watch and pray.” 
We must watch like soldiers—we are upon enemy’s 
ground. We must always be on our guard. Wemust fight 
a daily fight, and war a daily warfare. The Christian’s 
rest is yet to come. We must pray without ceasing, 
regularly, habitually, carefully, and at stated times. We 
must pray as well as watch, and watch as well as pray. 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 321 


Watching without praying is self-confidence and sclf- 
conceit. Praying without watching is enthusiasm and 
fanaticism. The man who knows his own weakness, and 
knowing it both watches and prays, is the man that will 
be held up and not allowed to fall. 





MARK XIV. 48—52. 


43 And immediately, while he yet of the High Priest, and cut off his 
spake, cometh Judas, one of the ear. 
twelve, and with him a great multi-| 48 And Jesus answered and said 
tude with swords and staves, from the untothem, Are ye come out, as against 
Chief Priests and the Scribes and the a thief, with swords and with staves 
elders. to take me ? 

44 And he that betrayed him had| 49 I was daily with you in the 
given them a token, saying, Whom- temple teaching, and ye took me not: 
soever I shall kiss, that same is he; | but the Scriptures must be fulfilled. 
take him, and lead him away safely. | 50 And they all forsook him, and 

45 And as soon as he was come, he fied. 

oeth straightway to him, and saith,| 51 And there followed him a cer- 

aster, master; and kissed him. | tain young man, having a linen cloth 

46 And they laid their hands on) cast about his naked body; and the 
him, and took him. | young men laid hold on him: 

47 And one of them that stood by) 52 And he left the linen cloth, and 
drew a sword, and smote a servant) fled from them naked. 


Lert us notice in these verses, how little our Lord’s enemies 
understood the nature of His kingdom. We read that 
Judas came to take Him “ with a great multitude, with 
swords and staves.” It was evidently expected that our 
Lord would be vigorously defended by His disciples, and 
that He would not be taken prisoner without fighting. 
The chief priests and scribes clung obstinately to the 
idea, that our Lord’s kingdom was a worldly kingdom, 
and therefore supposed that it would be upheld by worldly 
means. They had yet to learn the solemn lesson contained 
in our Lord’s words to Pilate, ‘‘ My kingdom is not of this 
world :—now is my kingdom not from hence.” (John 
xviii. 36.) 


822 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We shall do well to remember this in all our endea- 
vors to extend the kingdom of true religion. It is not 
to be propagated by violence, or by an arm of flesh. 
“‘ The weapons of our warfare are not carnal.” ‘ Not by 
might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of 
hosts.” (2 Cor. x. 4. Zech. iv. 6.) The cause of truth 
does not need force to maintain it. False religions, like 
Mohammedanism, have often been spread by the sword. 
False Christianity, like that of the Roman Church, has 
often been enforced on men by bloody persecutions. But 
the real Gospel of Christ requires no such aids as these. 
It stands by the power of the Holy Ghost. It grows by 
the hidden influence of the Holy Ghost on men’s hearts 
and consciences. There is no clearer sign of a bad cause 
in religion than a readiness to appeal to the sword. 

Let us notice, secondly, in these verses, how all things 
in our Lord’s passion happened according to God’s word. 
His own address to those who took Him, exhibits this in- 
a striking manner: “the Scripture must be fulfilled.” 

‘There was no accident or chance in any part of the close 
of our Lord’s earthly ministry. The steps in which He 
walked from Gethsemane to Calvary were all marked out 
hundreds of years before. The twenty-second Psalm, and 
the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, were literally fulfilled. 
The wrath of His enemies—His rejection by His own 
people—His being dealt with as a malefactor—His 
being condemned by the assembly of the wicked—all had 
been foreknown, and all foretold. All that took place 
was only the working out of God’s great design to pro- 
vide an atonement for a world’s sin. The armed men 
whom Judas brought to lay hands on Jesus, were, like © 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 323 


Nebuchadnezzar and Sennacherib, unconscious instru- 
ments in carrying God’s purposes into effect. 

Let us rest our souls on the thought, that all around 
us is ordered and overruled by God’s almighty wisdom. 
The course of this world may often be contrary to our 
wishes. The position of the Church may often be very 
unlike what we desire. The wickedness of worldly men, 
and the inconsistencies of believers, may often afflict our 
souls. But there is a hand above us, moving the vast 
machine of this universe, aud making all things work 
together for His glory. The Scriptures are being yearly 
fulfilled. Not one jot or tittle in them shall ever fail to 
be accomplished. The kings of the earth may take 
counsel together, and the rulers of the nations may set 
themselves against Christ (Psal. ii. 2), but the resurrec- 
tion morning shall prove that, even at the darkest time, 
all things were being done according to the will of God. 

Let us notice, lastly, in these verses, how much the 

faith of true believers may give way. We are told that 
when Judas and his company laid hands on our Lord, 
and He quietly submitted to be taken prisoner, the 
eleven disciples ‘all forsook Him and fled.” Perhaps 
up to that moment they were buoyed up by the hope 
that our Lord would work a miracle, and set Himself 
free. But when they saw no miracle worked, their 
courage failed them entirely. Their former protestations 
were all forgotten. Their promises to die with their 
Master, rather than deny Him, were all cast to the winds. 
The fear of present danger got the better of faith. The 
sense of immediate peril drove every other feeling out of 
' their minds, They “all forsook Him and fled.” 


324 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is something deeply instructive in this incident. 
It deserves the attentive study of all professing Chris- 
tians.. Happy is he who marks the conduct of our 
Lord’s disciples, and gathers from it wisdom ! 

Let us learn from the flight of these eleven disciples 
not to be over-confident in our ownstrength. The fear 
of man does indeed bring a snare. We never know 
what we may do, if we are tempted, or to what extent 
our faith may give way. Let us be clothed with hu- 
mility. 

Let us learn to be charitable in our judgment of other 
Christians. Let us not expect too much from them, or 
set them down as having no grace at all, if we see them 
overtaken in a fault. Let us not forget that even our 
Lord’s chosen apostles forsook Him in His time of need. 
Yet they rose again by repentance, and became pillars of 
the Church of Christ. 

Finally, let us leave the passage with a deep sense of . 
our Lord’s ability to sympathize with His believing people. 
If there is one trial greater than another, it’is the trial 
of being disappointed in those we love. It is a bitter 
cup, which all true Christians have frequently to drink. 
Ministers fail them. Relations fail them. Friends fail 
them. One cistern after another proves to be broken, 
and to hold no water. But let them take comfort in the 
thought, that there is one unfailing Friend, even Jesus, 
who can be touched with the feeling of their infirmities, 
and has tasted of all their sorrows. Jesus knows what 
it is to see friends and disciples failing Him in the hour 
of need. Yet He bore it patiently, and loved them not- 
withstanding all, He is neyer weary of forgiving. Let 


MARK, CHAP, XIV. 325 


us strive to do likewise. Jesus, at any rate, will never 
fail us. It is written, ‘‘ His compassions fail not.” (Lam. 
iii, 22.* 

* The question has often been asked, “Who was the ‘certain 
young man,’ mentioned at the end of this passage, on whom the young 
men laid hold, and who fled away naked?” St. Mark is the only 
evangelist who relates this circumstance: and he has given us no clue 
to further knowledge as to who it was, or why the event is mentioned, 

No satisfactory answer\to these questions has yet been given. The 
utmost that can be said of any of the explanations attempted, is, that 
they are conjectures and speculations. 

“Some,” says Petter in his commentary on Mark, “have thought 
that it was one of the twelve disciples, viz., James the son of Alpheus, 
the Lord’s brother, or kinsman of our Saviour (whose appearance 
was perhaps like our Lord’s).” This is the view of Hpiphanius and 
Jerome. Others have thought that it was John, the beloved disciple. 
This is the view of Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Gregory. But it could 
be neither of them, nor any other of the twelve, because it is said 
immediately before, that they “all fled” upon the taking of our Sa- 
viour, whereas this young man followed our Saviour at this time. It 
is more likely that it was some good young man, who dwelt near 
the garden of Gethsemane, who hearing the noise and stir that was 
made about the taking and binding of our Saviour, did arise suddenly 
out of his bed to see what was the matter, and perceiving that they 
had cruelly taken and bound our Saviour, and were leading Him 
away, did follow after Him to see what would be done with Him, 
whereby it appears that he was a well-wisher to our Saviour.” 

Theophylact and Euthymius think it probable that it was some 
young man who followed our Lord from the house where He ate 
the passover with His disciples. Some think that it was the Evan- 
gelist Marl himself. 

Some have thought that St. Mark’s purpose in relating the event, 
is to show the cruelty, rage, and ferocity of those who took our 
Lord. They were ready to lay hands on any one who was any 
where near Him, and to make prisoners indiscriminately of all who 
even appeared to be connected with him. 

Some have thought that the whole transaction exhibits the utter de- 
gertion of our Lord. “This young man,” says Clarius, “ would rather 
escape naked than be taken as one of the followers of Christ.” 

Some have thought that itis related to show the real peril in 


326 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK XIV. 58—65. 


53 And they fed Jesus away to the 
High Priest: and with him were as- 
sembled all the Chief Priests and the 
elders and the Scribes. 

54 And Peter followed him afar off, 
even unto the palace of the High 
Priest: and he sat with the servants, 
and warmed himself at the fire. 

55 And the Chief Priests and all 
the council sought for witness against 
Jesus to put him to death ; and found 
none. 

56 For many bare false witness 
against him, but their witness agreed 
not together. 

57 And there arose certain, and bare 
false witness against him, saying, 

58 We heard him say, I will destroy 
this temple that is made with hands, 
and within three days I will build an- 
other made without hands. 

59 But neither so did their witness 
agree together, 

60 And the High Priest stood up 





in the midst, and asked Jesus, say- 
ing, Answerest thou nothing ? what és 
it which these witness against thee ? 

61 But he held his peace, and 
answered nothing. Again the High 
Priest asked him, and said unto him, 
Art thou the Christ, the Son of the 
Blessed? 

62 And Jesus said, lam: and ye 
shall see the Son of man sitting on 
the right hand of power, and coming 
in the clouds of heaven. 

63 Then the ie Priest rent his 
clothes, and saith, What need we any 
further witnesses ? 

64 Ye have heard the blasphemy : 
what think ye? And they all con- 
demned him to be guilty of death. 

65 And some began to spit on him, 
and to cover his face, and to buffet 
him, and to say unto him, Prophesy : 
and the servants did strike him with 
the palms of their hands. 


Soniomoy tells us in the book of Ecclesiastes, that one evil 
he has seen under the sun, is when “ folly is set in great. 
dignity, and the rich sit in low place.” (Hccles. x. 6.) 

We can imagine no more complete illustration of his. 
words than the state of things we have recorded in the 


which the disciples were, and to make it plain that they saved their 
lives only by their flight. 

One eminent divine regards the whole event as strongly figura- 
tive. He sees in it an antitype of what took place on the day of 
atonement, and at the cleansing of a leper. He considers the young 
man escaping to represent the goat let go free, and the bird let loose; 
while our Lord represents the goat offered up, and the bird slain. 
See Lev. xiv. 7, and xvi. 22. 

I offer no opinion on any of the above explanations, excepting that 
T look on the last as eminently fanciful and unsatisfactory. Bullin- 
ger remarks sensibly, “ It does not interest us much to know who this 
young man was, and it would not bring any very great fruit to us, 
if we did know. If it had been useful and wholesome for us to know 
the Spirit of God wonld not have been silent, seeing that He is often 
marvellously diligent in relating very minute things. 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 327 


passage before us. We see the Son of God, “in whom 
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,” 
arraigned as a malefactor before “the chief priests, 
and elders, and scribes,” We see the heads of the 
Jewish nation combining together to kill their own 
Messiah, and judging Him who will one day come in 
glory to judge them and all mankind. These things 
sound marvellous, but they are true. 

Let us observe in these verses, how foolishly Christians 
sometimes thrust themselves into temptation. We are told 
that when our Lord was led away prisoner, ‘‘ Peter fol- 
lowed Him afar off, even into the palace of the high 
priest : and he sat with the servants, and warmed him- 
self at the fire.”* There was no wisdom in this act. Hav- 
ing once forsaken his Master and fled, he ought to have 
remembered his own weakness, and not to have ventured 
into danger again. It was an act of rashness and pre- 
sumption. It brought on him fresh trials of faith, for 
which he was utterly unprepared. It threw him into 
bad company, where he was not likely to get good, but 
harm. It paved the way for his last and greatest 
transgression—his thrice-repeated denial of his Master. 

But it isan experimental truth that ought never to be 
overlooked, that when a believer has once begun to back- 


* Tn the expression “ warmed himself at the fire,” it is worthy of 
remark, that the Greek word which we translate “ fire,” is not the 
same as that translated “fire of coals,” in John xviii. 18. It would 
rather bear the meaning of “ light,” or a fire so blazing as to give light. 

The remark is not without interest, as it explains how easily Peter 
was recognized and discovered by those who sat around him as one 
of Christ’s disciples. The bright light of the fire shining upon him 
made concealment impossible. 


328 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


slide and leave his first faith, he seldom stops short at 
his first mistake. He seldom makes only one stumble. 
He seldom commits only one fault. A blindness seems 
to come over his understanding. He appears to cast 
over-board his common sense and discretion. Like a 
stone rolling down-hill, the further he goes on in sin- 
ning, the faster and more decided is his course. Like 
David, he may begin with idleness, and end with com- 
mitting every possible crime. Like Peter, he may be- 
gin with cowardice—go on to foolish trifling with temp- 
tation, and then end with denying Christ. 

If we know any thing of true saving religion, let us 
ever beware of the beginnings of backsliding. It is like 
the letting out of water, first a drop and then a torrent. 
Once out of the way of holiness, there is no saying t¢ 
what we may come. Once giving way to petty incon- 
Sistencies, we may find ourselves one day committing 
every sort of wickedness. Let us keep far from the 
brink of evil. Let us not play with fire. Let us never - 
fear being too particular, too strict, and too precise. No 
petition in the Lord’s prayer is more important than the 
last but one, ‘‘ Lead us not into temptation.”- 

Let us observe, in the second place, in these verses, 
how much our Lord Jesus Christ had to endure from lying 
lips, when tried before the chief priests. We are told that 
' “many bare false witness against Him ; but their wit- 
ness agreed not together.” 

We can easily conceive that this was not the least 
heavy part of our blessed Saviour’s passion. To be seized 
unjustly as a malefactor, and put on trial as a criminal 
when innocent, is a severe affliction. But to hear men 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 829 


inventing false charges against us and coining slanders— 
to listen to all the malignant virulence of unscrupulous 
tongues let loose against our character, and know that it 
is all untrue—this is a cross indeed! ‘“‘ The words of a 
talebearer,” says Solomon, ‘are as wounds.” (Prov. 
xvii. 8.) ‘ Deliver my soul,” says David, ‘from lying lips 
and a deceitful tongue.” (Psalm exx. 2.) All this was a 
part of the cup which Jesus drank for our sakes. Great 
indeed was the price at which our souls were redeemed ! 

Let it never surprise true Christians if they are 
slandered and misrepresented in this world. They must 
not expect to fare better than their Lord. Let them 
rather look forward to it as a matter of course, and see 
in it a part of the cross which all must bear after con- 
version. Lies and false reports are among Satan’s 
choicest weapons. When he cannot deter men from serv- 
ing Christ, he labors to harass them and make Christ’s 
service uncomfortable. Let us bear it patiently, and 
not count it a strange thing. The words of the Lord 
Jesus should often come to our minds: ‘‘ Woe unto you, 
when all men shall speak well of you.” ‘ Blessed are 
ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and 
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.” 
(Luke vi. 26. Matt. v. 11.) 

Let us observe, lastly, in these verses, what distinet tes- 
timony our Lord bore to His own Messiahship, and second 
advent in glory. The high priest asks Him the solemn 
question, “ Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed ?” 
He receives at once the emphatic reply, “I am: and ye 
shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of 
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven.” 


330 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


These words of our Lord ought always to be had in 
remembrance. The Jews could never say after these 
words, that they were not clearly told that Jesus of 
Nazareth was the Christ of God. Before the great 
councils of their priests and elders, He declared, “I am 
the Christ.” The Jews could never say after these words, 
that He was so lowly and poor a person, that He was not 
worthy to be believed. He warned them plainly that 
His glory and greatness was all yet to come. They were 
only deferred and postponed till His second advent. 
They would yet see Him in royal power and majesty, 
“sitting on the right hand of power,” coming in the 
clouds of heaven, a Judge, a Conqueror, and a King. If 
Israel was unbelieving, it was not because Israel was not 
told what to believe. 

Let us leave the passage with a deep sense of the 
reality and certainty of our Lord Jesus Christ’s second 
coming. Once more at the very end of His ministry, 
and in the face of His deadly enemies, we find Him 
asserting the mighty truth that He will come again to 
judge the world. Let it be one of the leading truths in 
our own personal Christianity. Let us live in the daily 
recollection that our Saviour is one day coming back to 
this world. Let the Christ in whom we believe, be not 
only the Christ who died for us and rose again—the 
Christ who lives for us and intercedes—but the Christ 
who will one day return in glory, to gather together and 
reward His people, and to punish fearfully all His 
enemies. 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 


331 


MARK XIV. 66—72. 


66 And as Peter was beneath in the 
palace, there cometh one of the maids 
of the High Priest: 

67 And when she saw Peter warm- 
ing himself, she looked upon him, and 
said, And thou also wast with Jesus 


70 And he denied itagain. Anda 
little after, they that stood by said 
again to Peter, Surely thou art one 
of them; for thou art a Galilean, and 
thy speech agreeth thereto. 

71 And he began to curse and to 


of Nazareth. 

68 But he denied, saying, I know 
not, neither understand I what thou 
sayest. And he went out into the 
porch; and the cock crew. 

69 And a maid saw him again, and 
began to say to them that stood by, 
This is one of them. 


swear, saying, I know not this man of 
whom ye speak. 

72 And the second time the cock 
crew. And Peter called to mind the 
word that Jesus said unto him, Before 
the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny 
me thrice. And when he thought 
thereon, he wept. 


A SHIPWRECK is a melancholy sight, even when no lives 
are lost. It is sad to think of the destruction of property, 
and disappointment of hopes which generally attend it. 
It is painful to see the suffering and hardship, which the 
ship’s crew often have-to undergo in their struggle to 
escape from drowning. Yet no shipwreck is half so 
melancholy a sight as the backsliding and fall of a true 
Christian. Though raised again by God’s mercy, and 
finally saved from hell, he loses much by his fall. Such 
a sight we have brought before our minds in the verses 
we have now read. We are there told that most pain- 
ful and instructive story, how Peter denied his Lord. 
Let us learn, in the first place, from these verses, how 
far and how shamefully a great saint may fall. We 
know that Simon Peter was an eminent apostle of Jesus 
Christ. He was one who had received special commen- 
dation from our Lord’s lips, after a noble confession 
of His Messiahship: “Blessed art thou, Simon Bar- 
jona :” “I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom 
of heaven.” He was one who had enjoyed special priv- 
ileges, and had special mercies shown to him. Yet here 
we see this same Simon Peter so entirely overcome by 


332 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


fear that he actually denies his Lord. He declares that 
he knows not Him whom he had accompanied and lived 
with for three years! He declares that he knows not 
Him who had healed his own wife’s mother, taken him 
up into the mount of transfiguration, and saved him from 
drowning in the sea of Galilee! And he not only denies 
his Master once, but does it three times! And he not 
only denies Him simply, but does it ‘ cursing and swear- 
ing!” And above all, he does all this in the face of the 
’ plainest warnings, and in spite of his own loud protesta- 
tion that he would do nothing of the kind, but rather die! 

These things are written to show the Church of Christ 
what human nature is, even in the best of men. They 
are intended to teach us that, even after conversion and 
renewal of the Holy Ghost, believers are compassed with 
infirmity and liable to fall. They are meant to impress 
upon us the immense importance of daily watchfulness, 
prayerfulness, and humility so long as we are in the 
body. ‘Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed 
lest he fall.” 

Let us carefuily remember that Simon Peter’s case 
does not stand alone. The word of God contains many 
. other examples of the infirmity of true believers, which 
we shall do well to observe. The histories of Noah, 
Abraham, David, Hezekiah, will supply us with mourn- 
ful proof, that ‘‘ the infection of sin remains even in the 
regenerate,” and that no man is so strong as to be be- 
yond the danger of falling. Let us not forget this. Let 
us walk humbly with our God. ‘ Happy is the man that 
feareth alway.” (Prov. xxviii. 14.) 

Let us learn, in the second place, from these verses, 


MARK, CHAP. XIV. 333 


how small a temptation may cause a saint to have a great 
fall. The beginning of Peter’s trial was nothing more 
than the simple remark of “a maid of the High Priest.” 
“Thou also wert with Jesus of Nazareth.” There is 
nothing to show that these words were spoken with any 
hostile purpose. For anything we can see, they might 
fairly mean that this maid remembered that Peter used 
to be a companion of our Lord. But this simple remark 
was enough to overthrow the faith of an eminent apostle, 
and to make him begin to deny his Master. The chiefest 
and foremost of our Lord’s chosen disciples is cast down, 
not by the threats of armed men, but by the saying of 
one weak woman ! 

There is something deeply instructive in this fact. It 
ought to teach us that no temptation is too small and 
trifling to overcome us, except we watch and pray to be 
held up. If God be for us we may remove mountains 
and get the victory over a host of foes. “Ican do all 
things,” says Paul, “through Christ that strengtheneth 
me.” (Phil. iv. 22.) If God withdraw His grace, and 
leave us to ourselves, we are like a city without gates 
and walls, a prey to the first enemy, however weak and 
contemptible. 

Let us beware of making light of temptations because 
they seem little and insignificant. There is nothing 
little that concerns our souls, A little leaven leaveneth 
the whole lump. A little spark may kindle a great fire. 
A little leak may sink a great ship. A little provocation 
may bring out from our hearts great corruption, and end 
in bringing our souls into great trouble. 

Finally, let us learn from these verses that backsliding 


3834 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


brings saints into great sorrow. The conclusion of the 
passage is very affecting. ‘Peter called to mind the 
words that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow 
thou shalt deny me thrice”? Who can pretend to 
describe the feelings that must have flashed across the 
apostle’s mind ? Who can conceive the shame, and con- 
fusion, and self-reproach, and bitter remorse which must 
have overwhelmed his soul ? ‘To have fallen so foully ! 
To have fallen so repeatedly! To have fallen in the 
face of such plain warnings! All these must have been 
cutting thoughts. The iron must indeed have entered 
into his soul. There is deep and solemn meaning in the 
one single expression used about him—“ when he thought 
thereon he wept.” 

The experience of Peter is only the experience of all 
God’s servants who have yielded to temptation. Lot, and 
Samson, and David, and Jehoshaphat in Bible history— 
Cranmer and Jewell in the records of our own English — 
Church—have all left evidence, like Peter, that ‘ the 
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways.” 
(Prov. xiv. 14.) Like Peter, they erred grievously. Like 
Peter, they repented truly. But, like Peter, they found 
that they reaped a bitter harvest in this world. Like 
Peter, they were freely pardoned and forgiven. But, like 
Peter, they shed many tears. 

Let us leave the passage with the settled conviction 
that sin is sure to lead to sorrow, and that the way of 
most holiness is always the way of most happiness. The 
Lord Jesus has mercifully provided that it shall never 
profit His servants to walk carelessly and to give way 
to temptation. - If we will turn our backs on Him we 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 


shall be sure to smart for it. 
will make us feel the folly of our own ways. 


335 


Though He forgives us, He 
Those that 


follow the Lord most fully, shall always follow Him most 


comfortably. 


“Their sorrows shall be multiplied who 


hasten after other gods.” (Psalm xvi. 4.) 





MARK XY. 1—15. 


1 And straightway in the morning 
the Chief Priests held a consultation 
with the elders and Scribes and the 
whole council, and bound Jesus, and 
carried im away, and delivered him 
to Pilate. - 

2 And Pilate asked him, Art thou 
the king of the Jews? And he answer- 
ing said unto him, Thou sayest 7. 

38 And the Chief Priests accused 
him of many things: but he answered 
nothing. 

4 And Pilate asked him again, 
saying, Answerest thou nothing? be- 
hold how many things they witness 
against thee. 

5 But Jesus yet answered nothing ; 
so that Pilate marvelled. 

6 Now at that feast he released 
unto them one prisoner, whomsoever 
they desired. 

7 And there was one named Barab- 
bas, which lay bound with them that 
had made insurrection with him, who 
had committed murder in the insur- 
rection. 





8 And the multitude crying aloud 
began to desire him to do as he had 
ever done unto them. 

9 But Pilate answered them, say- 
ing, Will ye that I release unto you 
the King of the Jews ? 

10 For he knew that the Chief 
Priests had delivered him for envy. 

11 But the Chief Priests moved the 

eople, that he should rather release 

arabbas unto them. 

12 And Pilate answered and said 
again unto them, What will ye then 
that I shall do unto him whom ye call 
the King of the Jews ? 

18 And they cried out again, Cru- 
eify him. 

14 Then Pilate said. unto them 
Why, what evil hath he done? And 
they cried out the more exceedingly, 
Crucify him. 

15 And go Pilate, willing to content 
the people, released Barabbas unto 
them, and delivered Jesus, when he 
had scourged him, to be crucified. 


Turse verses begin the chapter in which St. Mark de- 
scribes the slaying of “the Lamb of God, which taketh 
_away the sin of the world.” It is a part of the Gospel 
history which should always be read with peculiar reve- 
rence. We should call to mind, that Christ was cut off, 
not for Himself, but for us. (Dan. ix. 26.) We should 
remember that His death is the life of our souls, and 
that unless His Liood had been shed, we must have 
‘perished miserably in our sins. 


336 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us mark in these verses, what a striking proof the 
Jewish rulers gave to their own nation that the times of 
Messiah had come. 

The chapter opens with the fact, that the chief priests 
bound Jesus and “delivered Him to Pilate,” the Roman 
Governor. Why did they do so? Because*they had no 
longer the power of putting any one to death, and were 
under the dominion of the Romans. By this one act 
and deed they declared that the prophecy of Jacob was 
fulfilled. ‘The sceptre had departed from Judah, and 
the lawgiver from between his feet,” and Shiloh the 
Messiah, whom God had promised to send, must have 
come. (Gen. xlix.10.) Yet there is nothing whatever 
to show that they remembered this prophecy. Their 
eyes were blinded. They either could not, or would not, 
see what they were doing. 

Let us never forget that wicked men are often fulfilling 
God’s predictions to their own ruin, and yet know it not. 
In the very height of their madness, folly, and unbelief, 
they are often unconsciously supplying fresh evidence 
that the Bible is true. The unhappy scoffers who make 
a jest of all serious religion, and can scarcely talk of 
Christianity without ridicule and scorn, would do well to 
remember that their conduct was long ago foreseen and 
foretold, “There shall come in the last days scoffers, 
walking after their own lusts.” (2 Peter iii.) 

Let us mark, secondly, in these verses, the meekness and 
lowliness of our Lord Jesus Christ. When He stood be- 
fore Pilate’s bar, and was “‘accused of many things,” He 
answered nothing. Though the charges against Him were 
false, and He knew no sin, He was content to endure the 
contradiction of sinners against Himself, not answering 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 337 


again. (Heb. xii. 3.) Though he was innocent of any trans- 
gression, He submitted to bear groundless accusations 
made against Him without a murmur. Great is the 
contrast between the second Adam and the first! Our 
first father Adam was guilty, and yet tried to excuse bim- 
self, The second Adam was guiltless, and yet made no 
defence at all. ‘As a sheep before her shearers is dumb, 
so openeth he not his mouth.” (Isa. liii. 7.) 

Let us learn a practical lesson from our Saviour’s 
example. Let us learn:to suffer patiently, and not to 
vomplain, whatever God may think fit to lay upan us, 
Let us take heed to our ways, that we offend not in our 
tongues, in the hour of temptation. (Psal. xxxix. 1.) 
Let us beware of giving way to irritation and ill temper, 
however provoking and undeserved our trials may seem 
to be. Nothing in the Christian character glorifies 
God so much as patient suffermg. ‘‘If when ye do 
well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is ac- 
ceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called, 
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example 
that ye should follow His steps.” (1 Pet. ii. 20, 21.) 

Let us mark, thirdly, in these verses, the wavering and 
undecided conduct of Pilate. 

It is clear from the passage before us that Pilate was 
convinced of our Lord’s innocence. “ He knew that the 
chief priests had delivered him for envy.” We see him 
feebly struggling for a time to obtain our Lord’s acquit- 
tal, and to satisfy his own conscience. At last he yields 
to the importunity of the Jews, and “ willing to content 
the people,” delivers Jesus to be crucified—to the eter- 
nal disgrace and.ruin of his own soul. 

: 15 


338 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


A man in high place without religious principles, is 

one of the most pitiable sights in the world. He is like 
a large ship tossed to and fro on the sea without com- 
pass or rudder. His very greatness surrounds him with 
temptations and snares. It gives him power for good or 
evil, which, if he knows not how to use it aright, is sure 
to bring him into difficulties, and to make him unhappy. 
Let us pray much for great men. They need great grace 
to keep them from the devil. High places are slippery 
places. No wonder that St. Paul recommends interces- 
sion “ for kings and for all that are in authority.” (1 Tim. 
ii. 1.) Let us not envy great men. They have many and 
peculiar temptations. How hardly shall a rich man en- 
ter the kingdom of God. ‘“‘Seekest thou great things 
for thyself ? seek them not.” (Jerem. xl. 5.) 
' Let us mark, fourthly, in these verses, the exceeding 
guilt of the Jews in the matter of the death of Christ. At 
the eleventh hour the chief priests had an opportunity 
of repenting if they would have takenit. They had the 
choice given them whether Jesus or Barabbas should be 
let go free. Coolly and deliberately they persevered in 
their bloody work. They chose to have a murderer let 
go free. ‘They chose to have the Prince of Life put to 
death. The power of putting our Lord to death was no 
longer theirs. The responsilility of His death they pub- 
licly took upon themselves. ‘“‘ What will ye that I shall 
do unto him ?” was Pilate’s question. ‘Crucify him, 
crucify him,” was the awful answer. The agents in our 
Lord’s death were undoubtedly Gentiles. But the guilt 
of our Lord’s death must always rest chiefly upon the 
J ews. 

We marvel at the wickedness of the Jews at this part 


- MARK, CHAP. XV. 839 


of our Lord’s history—and no wonder. To reject Christ 
and choose Barabbas was indeed an astounding act! It 
seems as if blindness, madness, and folly could go no 
further. But let us take heed that we do not unwittingly 
follow their example. Let us beware that we are not 
found at last to have chosen Barabbas and rejected 
Christ. The service of sin and the service of God are 
continually before us. The friendship of the world and 
the friendship of Christ are continually pressed upon our 
notice. Are we making the right choice? Are we 
cleaving to the right Friend ? These are solemn ques- 
tions. Happy is he who can give them a satisfactory 
answer. 

Let us mark, finally, in these verses, what a striking 
type the release of Barabbas affords of the Gospel plan of 
salvation. The guilty is set free and the innocent is put 
to death. The great sinner is delivered, and the sin- 
less one remains bound. Barabbas ‘is spared, and Christ 
is crucified. 

We have in this striking fact a vivid emblem of the 
manner in which God pardons and justifies the ungodly. 
He does it, because Christ hath suffered in their stead, 
the just for the unjust. They deserve punishment, but 
a mighty Substitute has suffered for them, They deserve 
eternal death, but a glorious Surety has died for them. 
' Weare all by nature in the position of Barabbas. We 
are guilty, wicked, and worthy of condemnation. But . 
“¢ when we were without hope,” Christ the innocent died 
for the ungodly. And now God for Christ’s sake can be 
just, and yet “the justifier of him which believeth in 
Jesus.” 


340 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us bless God that we have sucha glorious salvation 
set before us. Our plea must ever be, not that we are 
deserving of acquittal, but that Christ has died for us. 
Let us take heed, that having so great a salvation we 
really make use of it for our own souls. May we never 
rest till we can say by faith, “Christ is mine. I deserve 
hell. But Christ has died for me, and believing in Him 


I have a hope of heaven.” 


MARK XY. 16—32. 


16 And the soldiers led him away 
into the hall, called Preetorium ; and 
they call together the whole band. 

17 And they clothed him with pur- 
ple, and platted a crown of thorns. 
and put it about his head, 

18 And began to salute him, Hail, 
King of the Jews! 

19 And they smote him on the head 
with a reed, and did spit upon him, 
a bowing their knees worshipped 

am. 

20 And when they had mocked him, 
they took off the purple from him, 
and put his own clothes on him, and 
led him out to crucify him. 

_ 21 And they compel one Simon a 
Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out 
of the country, the Father of Alexan- 
der and Rufus, to bear his cross. 

22 And they bring him unto the 
place Golgotha, which is, being inter- 
preted, the place of a skull. 

23 And they gaye him to drink wine 
mingled with myrrh : but he received 
vt NOt. 

24 And when they had crucified 
him, they parted his garments, cast- 


| ing lots upon them, what every man 
should take. 

25 And it was the third hour, and 
they crucified him. 

26 And the superscription of his 
accusation was written over, THE 
KING OF THE JEWS. ; 1 

27 And with him they crucify two 
| thieves ; the one on his right hand, 
and the other on his left. 

28 And the Scripture was fulfilled 
which saith, And he was numbere 
with the trangressors. 

29 And they that passed by railed 
on him, wagging their heads, and 
saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the 
temple, and buildest 2 in three 
days, 

30 Save thyself, and come down 
from the cross. $ 

81 Likewise also the Chief Priests 
mocking said among themselves with 
the Scribes, He saved others; himself 
he cannot save. : 

82 Let Christ the King of Israel 
descend now from the cross, that we 
may see and believe. And they that 
were crucified with him reviled him. 








THE passage we have now read, is one of those which 
show us the infinite love of Christ toward sinners. The 
sufferings described in it would fill our minds with mingled 
horror and compassion, if they had been inflicted on one 
who was only a man like ourselves. But when we reflect 


MARK, OHAP. XV. 341 


that the sufferer was the eternal Son of God, we are lost 
in wonder and amazement. And when we reflect further 
that these sufferings were voluntarily endured to deliver 
sinful men and women like ourselves from hell, we may 
see something of St. Paul’s meaning when he says, 
“The love of Christ passeth knowledge.” ‘‘ God com- 
mendeth His love toward us in that while we were yet 
sinners, Christ died for us.” (Ephes. iii. 19 ; Rom. v. 8.) 

We shall find it useful to examine separately the 
several parts of our Lord’s passion. Let us follow Him 
step by step from the moment of His condemnation by 
Pilate to His last hour upon the cross. There is a deep 
meaning in every jot and tittle of His sorrows. All were 
striking emblems of spiritual truths. And let us not 
forget as we dwell on the wondrous story, that we and 
our sins were the cause of all these sufferings. “ Christ 
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that He might 
bring us to God.” (1 Peter iii. 18.) It is the death of 
our own Surety and Substitute that we are reading. 

First of all we see Jesus delivered into the hands of the 
Roman soldiers, as a criminal condemned to death. He 
before whom the whole world will one day stand and be 
judged, allowed Himself to be sentenced unjustly, and 
given over into the hands of wicked men. 

And why was this? It was that we, the poor sinful 
children of men, believing on Him, might be delivered 
from the pit of destruction, and the torment of the 
prison of hell. It was that we might be set free from 
every charge in the day of judgment, and be presented 
faultless before God the Father with exceeding joy. 

Secondly, we see Jesus insulted and made a laugh- 


342 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


ing-stock by the Roman soldiers. They “clothed Him 
with purple” in derision, and put “a crown of thorns” 
on His head, in mockety of his kingdom. ‘‘ They smote 
Him on the head with a reed, and did spit upon Him,” 
as one utterly contemptible, and no better than “ the 
filth of the world.” (1 Cor. iv. 13.) 

And why was this? It was that we, vile as we are, 
might have glory, honor, and eternal life through faith 
in Christ’s atonement. It was done that we might be 
received into God’s kingdom with triumph at the last day, 
and receive the crown of glory that fadeth not away. 

Thirdly, we see Jesus stripped of His garments and 
crucified naked before His enemies. The soldiers who 
led Him away “ parted His garments, casting lots upon 
them.” 

And why was this? It was that we, who have no 
righteousness of our own, might be clothed in the per- 
fect righteousness that Christ has wrought out for us, 
and not stand naked before God at the last day. It was 
done, that we, who are all defiled with sin, might have 
a wedding-garment, wherein we may sit down by the 
side of angels, and not be ashamed. 

Fourthly, we see Jesus suffering the most ignominious 
and humiliating of all deaths, even the death of the cross. 
It was the punishment reserved for the worst of male- 
factors. The man on whom it was inflicted was counted 
_ accursed. It is written, “‘Cursed is every one that ~ 
hangeth on a tree.” (Gal. iii. 13.) 

And why was this? It was that we, who are born 
in sin and children of wrath, might be counted blessed 
for Christ’s sake. It was done to remove the curse which 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 343 


we all deserve because of sin, by laying it on Christ. 
“Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, 
being made a curse for us.” (Gal. iii. 13.) 

Fifthly, we see Jesus reckoned a transgressor and a 
sinner. “ With him they crucify two thieves.” He 
who had done no sin, and in whom there was no guile, 
“‘ was numbered with the transgressors.” 

And why was this? It was that we, who are mise- 
rable trangressors, both by nature and practice, may be 
reckoned innocent for Christ’s sake. It was done that 
we, who are worthy of nothing but condemnation, may 
be counted worthy to escape God’s judgment, and be 
pronounced not guilty before the assembled world. 

Lastly, we see Jesus mocked when dying, as one who 
was an impostor, and unable to save Himself. 

And why was this ? It was that we, in our last hours, 
through faith in Christ may have strong consolation. It 
all came*to pass that we may enjoy a strong assurance— 
may know whom we have believed, and may go down 
the valley of the shadow of death fearing no evil. 

Let us leave the passage with a deep-sense of the 
enormous debt which all believers owe to Christ. All 
that they have, and are, and hope for, may be traced up 
to the doing and dying of the Son of God. Through His 
condemnation, they have acquittal—through His suf- 
ferings, peace—through His shame, glory—through 
His death, life. Their sins were imputed to Him. His 
righteousness is imputed to them. No wonder that St. 
Paul says, “ Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable 
gift.” (2 Cor. ix, 15.) 

Finally, let us leave the passage with the deepest 


344 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


sense of Christ’s unutterable love to our souls. Let us 
remember what we are, corrupt, evil, and miserable sin- 
ners. Let us remember who the Lord Jesus is, the eter- 
nal Son of God, the maker of all things. And then let 
us remember that for our sakes Jesus voluntarily en- 
dured the most painful, horrible, and disgraceful death. 
Surely the thought of this love should constrain us daily 
to live not unto ourselves, but unto Christ. It should 
make us ready and willing to present our bodies a liv- 
ing sacrifice to Him who lived and died for us. (2 Cor. 
v. 4. Rom xii. 1.) Let the cross of Christ be often be- 
fore our minds. Rightly understood, no object in all 
Christianity is so likely to have a sanctifying as well 
as a comforting effect on our souls. 


MARK XV. 33—38. 
88 And when the sixth hour was| 386 And one ran and filled a spunge 


come, there was darkness over the 
whole land until the ninth: hour. 

34 And at the ninth hour Jesus 
cried with a loud voice, saying, Eloi, 
Eloi, lama sabacthani? which is, be- 
ing interpreted, My God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me ? 

35 And some of them that stood by, 
when they heard 7é, said, Behold, he 





full of vinegar, and put i on a reed,. 
and gave him to drink, saying, Let 
alone; let us see whether Elias will 
come to take him down. 

37 And Jesus cried with a loud 
voice, and gave up the ghost. 

88 And the veil of the temple was 
rent in twain from the top to the 


bottom, 
ealleth Elias. / 


WE have in these verses the death of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. All deaths are solemn events. Nothing in the 
whole history of a man is so important as his end. But 
never was there a death of such solemn moment as that 
which is now before us, In the instant that our Lord drew 
His last breath, the work of atonement for a world’s sin 
was accomplished. The ransom for sinners was at length 
paid. The kingdom of heaven was thrown fully open to 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 345 


all believers.—All the solid hope that mortal men enjoy 
about their souls, may be traced to the giving up the 
ghost on the cross. 

_ Let us observe, in these verses, the visible signs and 
wonders which accompanied our Lord’s death. St. Mark 
mentions two in particular, which demand our attention. 
One is the darkening of the sun for the space of three 
hours. The other is the rending of the veil which divided 
the holy of holies from the holy place in the temple. 
Both were miraculous events. Both had, no doubt, a 
deep meaning about them. Both were calculated to 
arrest the attention of the whole multitude assembled at 
Jerusalem, The darkness would strike even thoughtless 
Gentiles, like Pilate and the Roman soldiers, The rent 
veil would strike even Annas and Caiaphas and their 
unbelieving companions. There were probably few houses 
in Jerusalem that evening in which men would not say, 
“‘ we have heard and seen strange things to-day.” 

What did the miraculous darkness teach ? It taught 
the exceeding wickedness of the Jewish nation. They 
were actually crucifying their own Messiah, and slaying 
their own King. The sun himself hid his face at the 
sight —It taught the exceeding sinfulness of sin in the 
eyes of God. The Son of God himself must needs be 
left without the cheering light of day, when He became 
sin for us and carried our transgressions,“ 

* Tt is almost unnecessary to remark, that the darkness which 
covered the heaven on the day of the crucifixion, could not possibly 
have been occasioned by an eclipse of the sun, because the passover 
was always held at full moon. It is evident that the darkness was 
miraculous, and caused by some special interference with the course 


of nature. 
15* 


346 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


What did the miraculous rending of the veil mean ? 
It taught the abolition and termination of the whole 
Jewish law of ceremonies. It taught that the way into 
the holiest of all was now thrown open to all mankind 
by Christ’s death. (Heb. ix. 8.) It taught that Gentiles 
as well as Jews might now draw nigh to God with bold- 
ness, through Jesus the one High Priest, and that all 
barriers between man and God were for ever cast down. 

May we never forget the practical lesson of the rent 
veil! To attempt to revive the Jewish ceremonial in the 
Church of Christ, by returning to altars, sacrifices, and 
a priesthood, is nothing better than closing up again the 
rent veil, and lighting a candle at noon-day. 

May we never forget the practical lesson of the mi- 
raculous darkness! It should lead our minds on to that 
blackness of darkness which is reserved for all obstinate 
unbelievers. (Jude 13.) The darkness endured by our 
blessed Surety on the cross was only for three hours. The 
chains of darkness which shall bind all who reject His 
atonement and die in sin, shall be for evermore. 

Let us observe, secondly, in these verses, how truly 
and really our Lord Jesus Christ was made a curse for us, 
and bore our sins. We see it strikingly brought out in 
those marvellous words which He used at the ninth 
hour, “ My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ?” 

It would be useless to pretend to fathom all the depth 
of meaning which these words contain. They imply an 
amount of mental suffering, such as we are unable to 
conceive. The agony of some of God’s holiest servants 
has been occasionally very great, under an impression 
of God’s favor being withdrawn from them. What then 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 347 


may we suppose was the agony of the holy Son of God—- 
when all the sin of all the world was laid upon His head 
—when He felt Himself reckoned guilty, though without 
sin—when He felt His Father’s countenance turned away 
from Him ? The agony of that season must have been 
something past understanding. It isa high thing. We 
cannot attain to a comprehension of it. We may believe 
it, but we cannot explain and find it out to perfection. 

One thing, however, is very plain, and that is the im- 
possibility of explaining these words at all, except we 
receive the doctrine of Christ’s atonement and substitu- 
‘tion for sinners. To suppose, as some dare to do, that 
Jesus was nothing more than a man, or that His death 
was only a great example of self-sacrifice, makes this 
dying ery of His utterly unintelligible. It makes Him 
appear less patient and calm in a dying hour than many 
a martyr, or even than some heathen philosophers. One 
explanation alone is satisfactory. That explanation is 
the mighty scriptural doctrine of Christ’s vicarious sacri- 
fice and substitution for us on the cross. He uttered 
His dying cry, under the heavy pressure of a world’s 
sin laid upon Him, and imputed to Him. 

Let us observe, lastly, in these verses, that it 1s possible 
to be forsaken of God for a time, and yet to be loved by 
Him. We need not doubt this, when we read our 
Lord’s dying words on the cross. We hear Him saying 
to His Father, ‘‘ Why hast thou forsaken me ?” and yet 
addressing Him as “my God.” We know too, that our 
Lord was only forsaken for a season, and that even when 
forsaken He was the beloved Son in whom, both in His 
suffering and doing, the Father was “ well pleased,” 


348 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


There is deep experimental instruction in this, which 
deserves the notice of all true Christians. No doubt 
there is a sense in which our Lord’s feeling of being 
‘‘ forsaken” was peculiar to Himself, since He was suf- 
fering for our sins and not for His own. But still after 
making this allowance, there remains the great fact that 
Jesus was for a time ‘forsaken of the Father,” and yet 
for all that was the Father’s ‘‘ Beloved Son.” As it was 
with the Great Head of the Church, so it may be in 
a modified sense with His members. They too, though 
chosen and beloved of the Father, may sometimes feel 
God’s face turned away from them. They too, some- 
times from illness of body, sometimes from peculiar 
affliction, sometimes from carelessness of walk, some- 
times from God’s sovereign will to draw them nearer to 
Himself, may be constrained to cry, ‘‘My God, my 
God, why hast thou forsaken me ?” 

It becomes believers who feel ‘ forsaken,” to learn from 
our Lord’s experience not to give way to despair. No- 
doubt they ought not to be content with their position. 
They ought to search their own hearts, and see whether 
there is not some secret thing there which causes their 
consolations to be small. (Job xv. 11.) But let them not 
write bitter things against themselves, and hastily con- 
clude that they are cast off for ever, or are self-deceivers, 
and have no grace at all. Let them still wait on the 
Lord, and say with Job, ‘‘ Though he slay me, yet will I 
trust in him.” (Job xiii. 15.) Let them remember the 
words of Isaiah and David, ‘‘ Who is among you that 
feareth the Lord—that walketh in darkness, and hath 
no light ? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 


stay upon his God.” 


349 


“Why art thou cast down, O my 
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me! 


Hope 


thou in God, for I shall yet praise him.” (Isaiah 1, 10, 


Psalm xlii. 11. 





MARK XY. 39—47. 


89 And when the centurion, which 
stood over against him, saw that he 
so cried out, and gave up the ghost, 
he said, Truly this man was the Son 
of God. 

40 There were also women looking 
on afar off: among whom was Mary 


orable counsellor, which also waited 
for the kingdom of God, came, and 
went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved 
the body of Jesus. 

44 And Pilate marvelled if he were 
already dead: and calling unto him 
the centurion, he asked him whether 


Magdalene, and Mary the mother of 
James the less and of J. oses, and Sa- 
lome ; 

41 (Who also, when he was in 
Galilee, followed him and ministered 
unto him;) and many other women 
piney came up with him unto Jeru- 
salem. 


he had been any while dead. 

45 And when he knew # of the 
centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. 

46 And he bought fine linen, and 
took him down, and wrapped him in 
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre 
which was hewn out of a rock, and 
rolled a stone unto the door of the 


42 And now when the even was|sepulchre. 
come, because it was the preparation,| 47 And Mary Magdalene and Mary 
that is, the day before the sabbath, | the mother of Joses beheld where he 
43 J oseph of Arimathea, an hon- was laid. 


Tue death of our Lord Jesus Christ is the most impor- 
tant fact in Christianity. On it depend the hopes of 
all saved sinners both for time and eternity. We need 
not therefore to be surprised to find the reality of His 
death carefully placed beyond dispute. Three kinds of 
witnesses to the fact are brought before us in the verses 
we have now read. The Roman centurion, who stood 
near the cross,—the women who followed our Lord from 
Galilee to Jerusalem,—the disciples, who buried Him, 
were all witnesses that Jesus really died. Their united 
evidence is above suspicion. They could not be deceived. 
What they saw was no swoon, or trance, or temporary 
insensibility. They saw that same Jesus, who was cru- 


350 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


cified, lay down His life, and become obedient even unto 
death. Let this be established in our minds. Our Sa- 
viour really and truly died. 

Let us notice, for one thing in this passage, what 
_ honorable mention is here made of women. We are 
specially told that, when our Lord gave up the ghost, 
“there were women looking on afar off.” The names of 
some of them are recorded. We are also told that they 
were the same who had followed our Lord in Galilee and 
ministered unto Him, and that there were ‘‘ many other 
women which came up with him to Jerusalem.” 

We should hardly have expected to have read such 
things. We might well have supposed that, when all 
the disciples but one had forsaken our Lord and fled, the 
weaker and more timid sex would not have dared to 
show themselves His friends. It only shows us what 
grace can do. God sometimes chooses the weak things 
of the world to confound the things that are mighty. 
The last are sometimes first, and the first last. The 
faith of women sometimes stands upright, when the faith 
of men fails and gives way. 

But it is interesting to remark throughout the New 
Testament how often we find the grace of God glorified 
in women, and how much benefit God has been pleased 
to confer through them on the Church, and on the world. 
In the Old Testament, we see sin and death brought in 
by the woman’s transgression. In the New, we see 
Jesus born of a woman, and life and immortality brought 
to light by that miraculous birth. In the Old Testa- 
ment, we often see woman proving a hindrance and a 
snare to man. The women before the flood, the histo- 


MARK, CHAP. XV. 351 


ries of Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, Delilah, Bath-sheba, 
Jezebel, are all painful examples. In the New Testa- 
ment, we generally see women mentioned as a help and 
assistance to the cause of true religion. Elizabeth, 
Mary, Martha, Dorcas, Lydia, and the women named by 
St. Paul to the Romans, are all cases in point. The 
contrast is striking, and we need not doubt intentional. 
It is one of the many proofs, that grace is more abun- 
dant under the Gospel than under the law, It seems 
meant to teach us that women have an important place 
in the Church of Christ, one that ought to be assigned 
to them, and one that they ought to fill. There is a 
great work that women can do for God’s glory, without 
being public teachers. Happy is that congregation in 
which women know this, and act upon it ! 

Let us notice, for another thing, in this passage, that 
Jesus has friends of whom little is known. We cannot 
conceive a more remarkable proof of this than the per- 
son who is here mentioned for the first time, Joseph of 
Arimathea. We know nothing of this man’s former 
history. We know not how he had learned to love 
Christ} and to desire to do Him honor. We know nothing 
of his subsequent history after our Lord left the world. 
All we know is the touching collection of facts before 
us. Weare told that he “ waited for the kingdom of 
God, and that at a time when our Lord’s disciples had 
all forsaken Him, He “ went in boldly unto Pilate, and 
craved the body of Jesus,” and buried it honorably in 
his own tomb. Others had honored and confessed our 
Lord when they saw Him working miracles, but Joseph 
honored Him and confessed himself a disciple, when he 


352 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


saw Him a cold, blood-sprinkled corpse. Others had 
shown love to Jesus while He was speaking and living, 
but Joseph showed love when He was silent and dead. 

Let us take comfort in the thought that there are true 
Christians on earth, of whom we know nothing, and in 
_ places where we should not expect to find them. No 
doubt the faithful are always few. But we must not 
hastily conclude that there is no grace in a family or in 
a parish, because our eyes may not seeit. We know in 
part and see only in part, outside the circle in which 
our own lot is cast. The Lord has many “ hidden ones” 
in the Church, who, unless brought forward by special 
circumstances will never be known till the last day. 
The words of God to Elijah should not be forgotten, 
“Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel.” (1 
Kings xix. 18.) 

_ Let us notice, lastly in this passage, what honor our 
Lord Jesus Christ has placed on the grave, by allowing 
Himself to be laid in tt. We read that he was “laid in 
a sepulchre hewn out of a rock,” and a “stone rolled 
unto the door.” 

This is a fact that in a dying world we should always 
remember. It isappointed unto men once to die. We 
are all going to one place, and we naturally shrink from 
it. The coffin and the funeral, the worm and corrup- 
tion, are all painful subjects. They chill us, sadden us, 
and fill our minds with heaviness. I¢ is not in flesh and 
blood to regard them without solemn feelings. One 
thing, however, ought to comfort believers, and that is” 
the thought, that the grave is “‘the place where the 
Lord once lay.” As surely as He rose again victorious 


MARK, CHAP. XVI, 353 


from the tomb, so surely shall all who believe in Him 
rise gloriously in the day of His appearing. Remember- 
ing this, they may look down with calmness into the 
‘* house appointed for all living.” They may recollect that 
Jesus himself was once there on their behalf, and has 
robbed death of his sting. They may say to themselves, 
“ the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the 
law: but thanks be to God who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ.” (1 Cor. xv. 56, 57.) 
The great matter that concerns us all, is to make sure 
that we are spiritually buried with Christ, while we are 
yet alive. We must be joined to Him by faith, and con- 
formed to His image, With Him we must die to sin, 
and be buried by baptism into Hi€ death. (Rom. vi. 4.) 
With Him we must rise again and be quickened by His 
Spirit. Except we know these things, Christ’s death and 


burial will profit us nothing at all. 





MARK XVI. 1—8. 


1 And when the sabbath was past, 
Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mo- 
ther of James, and Salome, had bought 
sweet spices, that they might come 
and anoint him. t 

2 And very early in the morning 
the first day of the week, they came 
unto the sepulehre at the rising of 
the sun. 

3 And they suid among themselves, 
Who shall roll us away the stone from 
the door of the sepulchre? 

4 And when they looked, they saw 
that the stone was rolled away: for 
t was very great. 

5 And entering into the sepulchre, 
they saw a young man sitting on the 





right side, clothed in a long white 
garment; and they were affrighted. 

6 And he saith unto them, Be not 
afirighted: Ye seek Jesus of Naza- 
reth, which was crucified: he is risen ; 
he is not here: behold the place where 
they laid him. 

7 But go your way, tell his disei- 
ples and Peter that he goeth before 
you into Galilee: there shall ye sce 
him, as he said unto you. 

8 And they went out quickly, and 
fled from the sepulechre; for they 
trembled and were amazed: neither 
said they any thing to any man ; for 
they were afraid. 


Ler us observe, in this passage, the power of strong love 


354 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


to Christ, We have a forcible illustration of this in the 
conduct of Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, which 
St. Mark here records. He tells us that they had 
“bought sweet spices” to anoint our Lord, and that 
“‘ very early in the morning, the first day of the week, 
they came unto the sepulchre, at the rising of the sun.” 

We may well believe that it required no small courage 
to do this. To visit the grave in the dim twilight of an 
eastern day-break, would try most women, under any 
circumstances. But to visit the grave of one who had 
been put to death as a common malefactor, and to rise 
early to show honor to one whom their nation had 
despised, this was a mighty boldness indeed. Yet these 
are the kind of acts ‘which show the difference between 
weak faith and strong faith—between weak feeling and 
strong feeling towards Christ. These holy women had 
tasted of our Lord’s pardoning mercies. Their hearts 
were full of gratitude to Him for light, and hope, and 
comfort, and peace. They were willing to risk all conse- 
quences in testifying their affection to their Saviour. So 
true are the words of Canticles: ‘Love is strong as 
death—many waters cannot quench love, neither can the 
floods drown it.” (Cant. viii. 6, 7.) 

Why is it that we see so little of this strong love to 
Jesus among Christians of the present day ? How is it 
that we so seldom meet with saints who will face any 
danger, and go through fire and water for Christ’s sake ? 
There is only one answer. It is the weak faith, and the 
low sense of obligation to Christ, which so widely pre- 
vail. A low and feeble sense of sin will always produce 
a low and feeble sense of the value of salvation, A slight 


MARK, CHAP, XVI. 355 


sense of our debt to God will always be attended by a 
slight sense of what we owe for our redemption. It is the 
man who feels much forgiven who loves much. “ To whom 
little is forgiven, the same loveth little.” (Luke vii. 47.) 

Let us observe, secondly, in this passage, how the 
difficulties which Christians fear, will sometimes disappear 
as they approach them. These holy women, as they 
walked to our Lord’s grave, were full of fears about the 
stone at the door. “‘ They said among themselves, Who 
shall roll us away the stone from the door of the 
sepulchre ?” But their fears were needless. Their 
expected trouble was found not to exist. ‘‘ When they 
looked, they saw that the stone was rolled away.” 

What a striking emblem we have in this simple narra- 
tive, of the experience of many Christians! How often 
believers are oppressed and cast down by anticipation 
of evils, and yet, in the time of need, find the thing they 
feared removed, and the ‘‘stone rolled away.” A large 
proportion of a saint’s anxieties arise from things which 
never really happen. We look forward to all the possi- 
bilities of the journey towards heaven. We conjure up 
in our imagination all kind of crosses and obstacles. 
We carry mentally to-morrow’s troubles, as well as 
to-day’s. And often, very often, we find at the end, 
that our doubts and alarms were groundless, and that 
the thing we dreaded most has never come to pass at all. 
Let us pray for more practical faith. Let us believe 
that in the path of duty, we shall never be entirely for- 
saken. Let us go forward boldly, and we shall often find 
that the lion in the way is chained, and the seeming 
hedge of thorns is only a shadow. 


356 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS, 


Let us observe, thirdly, in this passage, that the friends 
of Christ have no cause to be afraid of angels. We are 
told, that when Mary Magdalene and her companion 
saw an angel sitting in the sepulchre, ‘they were 
affrighted.” But they were at once reassured by his 
words : ‘“ Be not afirighted : ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, 
which was crucified.” 

The lesson at first sight, may seem of little import- 
ance. We see no visions of angels in the present day. 
We do not expect to see them. But the lesson is one 
which we may find useful at some future time. The day 
is drawing near when the Lord Jesus shall come again to 
jadge the world, with all the angels round Him. The 
angels in that day shall gather together His elect from 
the four winds. The angels shall gather the tares into 
bundles to burn them. The angels shall gather the 
wheat of God into His barn. Those whom the angels 
take they shall carry to glory, honor, and immortality. 
Those whom they leave behind shall be left to shame | 
and everlasting contempt. 

Let us strive so to live, that when we die we may be 
carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom. Let us en- 
deavor to be known of angels as those who seek Jesus, 
and love Him in this world, and so are heirs of salva- 
tion. Let us give diligence to make our repentance sure, 
and so to cause joy in the presence of the angels of God. 
Then, whether we wake or sleep, when the archangel’s 
. voice is heard, we shall have no cause to be afraid. We 
shall rise from our grave, and see in the angels our 
friends and fellow-servants, in whose company we shall 
spend a blessed eternity. 


’ MARK, CHAP. XVI. 357 


Let us observe, lastly, in this passage, the exceeding 
kindness of God towards his backsliding servants. The 
message which the angel conveys is a striking illustration 
of this truth. Mary Magdalene and the other Mary 
were bid to tell the disciples that “Jesus goeth before 
them into Galilee,” and that “there they shall see him.” 
But the message is not directed generally to the eleven 
apostles. This alone, after their late desertion of their 
master, would have been a most gracious action: Yet 
Simon Peter who had denied his Lord three times, is 
specially mentioned by name. Peter, who had sinned 
particularly, is singled out and noticed particularly: 
There were to be no exceptions in the deed of grace. 
All were to be pardoned. All were to be restored to 
favor—and Simon Peter as well as the rest. 

We may well say when we read words like these, 
“this is not the manner of man.” On no point perhaps 
are our views of religion so narrow, low, and contracted, 
as on the point of God’s exceeding willingness to pardon 
penitent sinners. We think of Him as such an one as 
ourselves. We forget that “he delighteth in mercy.” 
(Micah vii. 18.) 

Let us leave the passage with a determination to open 
the door of mercy very wide to sinners, in all our speak- 
ing and teaching about religion. Not least, let us leave 
it with a resolution never to be unforgiving towards our 
fellow men. If Christ is so ready to forgive us, we ought 
to be very ready to forgive others. 


358 


EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


MARK XVI. 9—14. 


9 Now when Jesus was risen early 
the first day of the week, he appeared 
first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom 
he had cast seven devils. 

10 And she went and told them 
that had been with him, as they 
mourned and wept. 

11 And they, when they had heard 
that he was alive, and had been seen 
of her, believed not. 


form unto two of them, as they walk- 
ed, and went into the country. 

13 And they went and told 7 unto 
the residue; neither believed they 
them. 

14 Afterward he appeared unto the 
eleven as they sat at meat, and up- 
braided them with their unbelief and 
hardness of heart, because they be- 
lieved not them whith had seen him 
after he was risen. 


12 After that he appeared in another 


Let us mark, in these verses, what abundant proof we 
have that our Lord Jesus Christ really rose again from the 
dead. In this one passage St. Mark records no less than 
three distinct occasions on which He was seen after His 
resurrection. First, he tells us, our Lord appeared to 
one witness, Mary Magdalene—then to two witnesses, 
two disciples walking into the country—and lastly to 
eleven witnesses, the eleven apostles all assembled to- 
gether. Let us remember, in addition to this, that other 
appearances of our Lord are described by other writers 
in the New Testament, beside those mentioned by St. 
Mark. And then let us not hesitate to believe, that of 
all the facts of our Lord’s history, there is none more 
thoroughly established than the fact, that He rose from 
the dead. 

There is great mercy in this. The resurrection of 
Christ is one of the foundation-stones of Christianity, 
It was the seal of the great work that He came on earth 
to do. It was the crowning proof that the. ransom He 
paid for sinners was accepted, the atonement for sin ac- 
complished, the head of him who had the power of death 
bruised, and the victory won. It is well to remark 
how often the resurrection of Christ is referred to by 


MARK, CHAP. XVI. 359 


the apostles, ‘ He was delivered for our offences,” says . 
Paul, “and was raised again for our justification.” (Rom. 
iv. 25.) “He hath begotten us again to a lively hope,” 
says Peter, “‘ by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead.” (1 Peter i. 3.) 

We ought to thank God that the fact of the resur- 
rection is so clearly established. The Jew, the Gentile, 
the priests, the Roman guard, the women who went 
to the tomb, the disciples who were so backward to 
believe, are all witnesses whose testimony cannot be 
gainsaid. Christ has not only died for us, but has also 
risen again. ‘To deny it shows far greater credulity than 
to believe it. To deny it a man must put credit in 
monstrous and ridiculous improbabilities. 'T’o believe it 
a man has only to appeal to simple undeniable facts. 

Let us mark, secondly, in these verses, our Lord Jesus 
Christ's singular kindness to Mary Magdalene. We are 
told that ‘‘ when he was risen early the first day of the 
week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom 
he had cast seven devils.” To her before all others of 
Adam’s children, was granted the privilege of being first 
to behold a risen Saviour. Mary, the mother of our 
Lord, was yet alive. John, the beloved disciple, was yet 
upon earth. Yet both were passed over on this occasion 
in favor of Mary Magdalene. A woman who at one 
time had probably been chief of sinners, a woman who 
at one time had been possessed by seven devils, was the 
first to whom Jesus showed Himself alive, when He rose 
victorious from the tomb. The fact is remarkable, and 
full of instruction.* 


* There is nothing in the New Testament to justify the common 


360 . EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We need not doubt, for one thing, that, by appearing 
“first to Mary Magdalene,” our Lord meant to show us 
how much He values love and faithfulness. Last at the 
cross and first at the grave, last to confess her Master 
while living, and first to honor Him when dead, this © 
warm-hearted disciple was allowed to be the first to see 
Him, when the victory was won. It was intended to be 
a perpetual memorial to the Church, that those who 
honor Christ, He will honor, and that those who do 
much for Him upon earth, shall find Him even upon 
earth doing much for them. May we never forget this. 
May we ever remember that for those who forsake all for 
Christ’s sake, there “is an hundred-fold now in this 
present time.” 

We need not doubt, for another thing, that our Lord’s 
appearing “first to Mary Magdalene” wasintended to com- 
fort all who have become penitent believers, after having 
run into great excesses of sin. It was meant to show us. 
that, however far we may have fallen, we are raised to 
entire peace with God, if we repent and believe the Gospel. 
Though before far off, we are made nigh. Though before 
enemies, we are made dearchildren. Old things are passed 
away, and all things are become new. (1 Cor. v. 17.) 


notion that Mary Magdalene had been a sinner against the seventh 
commandment more than other commandments. There is no scrip- 
tural warrant for calling hospitals and asylums intended for fallen 
women, “Magdalene Hospitals.” No better authority can be discoy- 
ered for the common idea on the subject than tradition. 

_ At the same time it is only fair to say, that there seems strong prob- 
ability for supposing that the sins of Mary Magdalene had been very 
great. There was probably some grave cause for her being possessed 
by seven devils, though the nature of it has not been revealed to us. 


MARK, CHAP. XVI. ; 361 


The blood of Christ makes us completely clean in God’s 
sight. We may have begun like Augustine, and John 
Newton, and been ringleaders in every kind of iniquity. 
But once brought to Christ, we need not doubt that all 
is forgiven. We may draw nigh with boldness, and 
have access with confidence. Our sins and iniquities, 
like those of Mary Magdalene, are remembered no more. 

Let us mark, lastly, in these verses, how much weak- 
ness there is sometimes in the faith of the best Christians. 
Three times in this very passage we find 8t. Mark describ- 
ing the unbelief of the eleven apostles. Once, when Mary 
Magdalene told them that our Lord had risen, “ they 
believed not.”—Again, when our Lord had appeared to 
two of them, as they walked, we read of the residue, 
“neither believed they them.”—Finally, when our Lord 
Himself appeared to them as they sat at meat, we are told 
that “‘he upbraided them for their unbelief and hardness 
of heart.” Never perhaps was there so striking an ex- 
ample of man’s unwillingness to believe that which runs 
counter to his early prejudices. Never. was there so 
remarkable a proof of man’s forgetfulnéss of plain teach- 
ing. These eleven men had been told repeatedly by our 
Lord that He would rise again. And yet, when the time 
came, all was forgotten, and they were found unbelieving. 

Let us however see in the doubts of these good men 
the over-ruling hand of an all-wise God. If they were 
convinced at last, who were so unbelieving at first, how 
strong isthe proof supplied us that Christ rose indeed. 
It is the glory of God to bring good out of evil, The 
very doubts of the eleven apostles are the confirmation 
of our faith in these latter days. 

16 


862 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


Let us learn from the unbelief of the apostles, a useful 
practical lesson for ourselves. Let us cease to feel sur- 
prise when we feel doubts arising in our own heart. 
Let us cease to expect perfection of faith in other 
believers. We are yet in the body. We are men of 
like passions with the apostles. We must count it no 
strange thing, if our experience is sometimes like their’s, 
and if our faith, like their’s, sometimes gives way. Let 
us resist unbelief manfully. Let us watch, and pray, 
and strive to be delivered from its power. But let us 
not conclude that we have no grace, because we are 
sometimes harassed with doubts, nor suppose that we 
have no part or lot with the apostles, because at seasons 
we feel unbelieving. 

Let us not fail to ask ourselves, as we leave this pas- 
sage, whether we have risen with Christ, and been made 
partakers spiritually of His resurrection. This, after all, 
is the one thing needful. ‘To know the facts of Chris-_ 
tianity with the head, and to be able to argue for them 
with the tongue, will not save our souls. We must yield 
ourselves to God as those alive from the dead. (Rom. vi. 
13.) We must be raised from the death of sin, and 
walk in newness of life. This and this only is saving 
Christianity. 


MARK XVI. 15—18. 


15 And he said unto them, Go ye) cast out devils; they shall speak with 
into all the world, and preach the|new tongues; 
Gospel to every creature. 18 They shall take up serpents ; and 
16 He that believeth and is baptized |if they drink any deadly thing, it 
shall be saved; but he that believeth | shall not hurt them ; they shall lay 
not shall be damned. hands on the sick, and they shall 
17 And these signs shall follow them | recover. 
that believe; In my name shall they 


MARK, CHAP. XVI. 363 


WE ought to notice, firstly, in these verses, the parting 
commission which our Lord gives to His apostles. He is 
addressing them for the last time. He marks out their 
work till He comes again, in words of wide and deep 
significance, ‘‘ Go ye into all the world, and preach the 
gospel to every creature.” 

The Lord Jesus would have us know that all the 
world needs the Gospel. In every quarter of the globe 
man is the same, sinful, corrupt, and alienated from God. 
Civilized or uncivilized, in China, or in Africa, he is by 
nature everywhere the same, without knowledge, without 
holiness, without faith, and without love. Wherever 
we see a child of Adam, whatever be his color, we see 
one whose heart is wicked, and who needs the blood of 
Christ, the renewing of the Holy Ghost, and reconcilia- 
tion with God. 

The Lord Jesus would have us know that the salvation 
of the Gospel is to be offered freely to all mankind. The 
glad tidings that ‘‘ God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son,” and that “ Christ has died for the 
ungodly,” is to be proclaimed freely “‘ to every creature.” 
We are not justified in making any exception in the 
proclamation. We have no warrant for limiting the offer 
to the elect. We come short of the fulness of Christ’s 
words, and take away from the breadth of His sayings, if 
we shrink from telling any one, “God is full of love 
to you, Christ is willing to save you.” “‘ Whosoever 
will, let him take the water of life freely.” (Rev. xx. 17.) 

Let us see in these words of Christ, the strongest 
argument in favor of missionary work, both at home 
and abroad. Remembering these words, let us be un- 


364 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


wearied in trying to do good to the souls of all mankind. 
If we cannot go to the heathen in China and Hindostan, 
let us seek to enlighten the darkness which we shall 
easily find within reach of our own door. Let us labor 
on, unmoved by the sneers and taunts of those who dis- 
approve missionary operations, and hold them up to 
scorn. We may well pity such people. They only 
show their ignorance, both of Scripture and of Christ’s 
will, They understand neither what they say, nor 
whereof they affirm. 

We ought to notice, secondly, in these verses, the 
‘terms which our Lord tells us should be offered to all who 
hear the Gospel. ‘He that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved ; but he that believeth not shall be 
damned.” Every word in that sentence is of deep import- 
ance. Hvery expression in it deserves to be carefully 
weighed. 

We are taught here the importance of baptism. It is. 
an ordinance generally necessary to salvation, where it 
can be had. Not “he that believeth” simply, but 
“he that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.” 
Thousands no doubt receive not the slightest benefit from 
their baptism. ‘Thousands are washed in sacramental 
water, who are never washed in the blood of Christ. But 
it does not follow therefore that baptism is to be despised 
and neglected. It is an ordinance appointed by Christ 
Himself, and when used reverently, ‘intelligently, and 
prayerfully, is doubtless accompanied by aspecial blessing, 
he baptismal water itself conveys no grace. We must 
look far beyond the mere outward element to Him who 
commanded it to be used. But the public confession 
of Christ, which is implied in the use of that water, isa 


MARK, CHAP. XVI. 365 


sacramental act, which our Master Himsclf has com- 
manded ; and when the ordinance is rightly used, we 
may confidently believe that He seals it by His blessing. 

Weare taught here, furthermore, the absolute necessity 
of faith in Christ to salvation. This is the one thing 
needful, ‘‘ He that believeth not” is the man that shall 
be lost for evermore. He may have been baptized, and 
made a member of the visible church. He may be a 
regular communicant at the Lord’s Table. He may 
even believe intellectually all the leading articles of the 
creed. But all shall profit him nothing if he lacks saving 
faith in Christ. Have we this faith ? This is the great 
question that concerns us all. Except we feel our sins, 
and feeling them flee to Christ by faith, and lay hold on 
Him, we shall find at length we had better never have 
been born. 

We are taught here, furthermore, the certainty of 
God’s judgments on those who die unbelieving. ‘‘ He 
that believeth not shall be damned.” How awful the 
words sound ! How fearful the thought that they came 
from the lips of Him who said, ‘‘ My words shall not pass 
away.” Let no man deceive us with vain words. There 
is an eternal hell for all who will persist in their wicked- 
ness, and depart out of this world without faith in Christ. 
The greater the mercy offered to us in the Gospel, the 
greater will be the guilt of those who obstinately refuse 
to believe. “Oh! that men were wise. Oh! that they 
would consider their latter end.” Deut. xxxii. 29.) He 
that died upon the cross, has given us plain warning that 
there is a hell, and that unbelievers shall be damned. 
Let us take heed that His warning is not given to us in 
vain ! ; 


- 366 : EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


We ought to notice, lastly, in these verses, the gracious 
promises of special help which our Lord holds out in His 
parting words to His apostles. He knew well the enormous 
difficulties of the work which He had just commissioned 
them to do. He knew the mighty battle they would 
have to fight with heathenism, the world, and the devil. 
He therefore cheers them by telling them that miracles 
shall help forward their work. ‘ Signs shall follow them 
that believe. In my name they shall cast out devils ; 
they shall speak with new tongues ; they shall take up 
serpents; and if they shall drink any deadly thing it 
shall not hurt them ; they shall lay hands on the sick, 
and they shall recover.” The fulfilment of most of these . 
promises is to be found in the Acts of the Apostles. 

The age of miracles no doubt is long passed. They 
were never meant to continue beyond the first establish- 
ment of the Church. It is only when plants are first 
planted, that they need daily watering and support. 
The whole analogy of God’s dealings with His church, 
forbids us to expect that miracles would always continue. 
In fact, miracles would cease to be miracles, if they hap- 
pened regularly without cessation or intermission. It is 
well to remember this. The remembrance may save us 
much perplexity. 

But though the age of physical miracles is past, we 
may take comfort in the thought that the church of 
Christ shall never want Christ’s special aid in its seasons 
of special need. The great Head in heaven will never 
forsake His believing members. His eye is continually 
upon them. He will always time His help wisely, and 
come to their succor in the day that He is wanted. 


MARK, CHAP, XVI. 367 


When the enemy shall come in like a flood, tine Spirit 
of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him.” (Isai 
lex: 19.) 

Finally, let us never forget, that Christ’s believing 
Church in the world is of itself a standing miracle. The 
conversion and perseverance in grace of every member of 
that Church, is a sign and wonder, as great as the raising 
of Lazarus from the dead. The renewal of every saint 
is as great a marvel as the casting out of a devil, or the 
healing of a sick man, or thespeaking with a new tongue. 
Let us thank God for this and take courage, The age of 
spiritual miracles is not yet past. Happy are they who 
have learned this by experience, and can say, “I was 
dead, but am alive again : I was blind, but I see.” 


MARK XVI. 19—20. 


19 So then after the Lord had spo-| 20 And they went forth, and preach- 
ken unto them, he was received ) ed every ef oat the ee a 
into heaven, and sat on theright hand | with them, and confirming wo 
of God. with signs following. Amen. 
Tse words form the conclusion of St. Mark’s Gospel. 
Short as the passage is, it is a singularly suitable con- 
clusion to the history of our Lord Jesus Christ’s earthly 
ministry. It tells us where our Lord went, when He 
left this world, and ascended up on high. It tells us 
what His disciples experienced after their Master left 
them, and what all true Christians may expect until 
He appears again. 

Let us mark, in these verses, the place to which our 
Lord went when He had finished His work on earth, and 


368 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


the place where He ts at this present time. We are told 
that “ He was received up into heaven, and sat on the 
right hand of God.” He returned to that glory which - 
He had with the Father before He came into the world. 

He received, as our victorious Mediator and Redeemer, 

the highest position of dignity and power in heaven 

which our minds can conceive. There He sits, not idle, 

but carrying on the same blessed work for which He 

died on the cross. There He lives, ever making inter- 

cession for all who come unto God by Him, and so able 

to save them to the uttermost. (Heb. vii. 25.) 

There is strong consolation here for all true Chris- 
tians. They live in an evil world. They are often care- 
ful and troubled about many things, and are sorely cast 
down by their own weakness and infirmities—They live 
in adying world. They feel their bodies gradually fail- 
ing and giving way. They have before them the awful 
prospect of soon launching forth into a world unknown.— 
What then shall comfort them ? They must lean back | 
on the thought of their Saviour in heaven, never slum- 
bering, and never sleeping, and always ready to help. 
They must remember that though they sleep, Jesus 
wakes—though they faint, Jesus is never weary—though 
they are wedk, Jesus is Almighty—and though they die, 
Jesus lives for evermore. Blessed indeed is this thought ! 
Our Saviour, though unseen, is an actually living person. 
We travel on toward a dwelling where our best Friend 
is gone before, to prepare a place for us. (John, xiv. 2.) 
The Forerunner has entered in and made all things ready, 
No wonder that St. Paul exclaims, “ Who is He that 
condemneth ? It is Christ that died ; yea, rather that ia 


MARK, CHAP. XVI. 369 


risen again—who is even at the right hand of God—who 
also maketh intercession for us.” (Rom. viii. 34.) 

Let us mark, for another thing, in these verses, the 
blessing which our Lord Jesus Christ bestows on all who 
work faithfully for Him. We are told that, when the 
disciples went forth and preached, the Lord ‘“ worked 
with them,” and “confirmed the word with signs fol- 
lowing.” 

We know well from the Acts of the Apostles, and from 
the pages of church history, the manner in which these 
words have been proved true. We know that bonds and 
afflictions, persecution and opposition, were the first 
fruits that were reaped by the laborers in Christ’s harvest. 
But we know also that, in spite of every effort of Satan, 
the word of truth was not preached in vain. Believers 
from time to time were gathered out of the world. 
Churches of saints were founded in city after city, and 
country after country. The little seed of Christianity 
grew gradually into a great tree. Christ Himself wrought 
with His own workmen, and, in spite of every obstacle, 
His work went on. The good seed was never entirely 
thrown away. Sooner or later there were “ signs follow- 
ing.” 

Let us not doubt that these things were written for 
our encouragement, on whom the latter endsof the world 
are come. Let us believe that no one shall ever work 
faithfully for Christ, and find at last that His work has 
been altogether without profit. Let us labor on patiently, 
each in our own position. Let us preach, and teach, 
and speak, and write, and warn, and testify, and rest 
assured that our labor is not in vain. We may die our- 

16* 


370 EXPOSITORY THOUGHTS. 


selves, and see no result from our work. But the last 
day will assuredly prove that the Lord Jesus always 
works with those who work for Him, and that there 
were ‘‘ signs following,” though it was not given to the 
workmen to see them. Let us then be “stedfast, im- 
movable, always abounding in the work of the Lord.” 
We may go on our way heavily, and sow with many 
tears ; but if we sow Christ’s precious seed, we shall 
‘come again with joy and bring our sheaves with us.” 
(1 Cor. xv. 58; Psal. cxxvi. 6.) 

And now let us close the pages of St. Mark’s Gospel 
with self-inquiry and self-examination. Let it not con- 
tent us to have seen with our eyes, and heard with our 
cars, the things here written for our learning about Jesus 
Christ. Let us ask ourselves whether we know any 
thing of Christ ‘dwelling in our hearts by faith ?” 
Does the Spirit ‘‘ witness with our spirit” that Christ is 
our’s and we are His? Can we really say that we are 
“living the life of faith in the son of God,” and that we 
have found by experience that Christ is “ precious” to 
our own souls? These are solemn questions. They 
demand serious consideration. May we never rest till 
we can give them satisfactory answers! ‘ He that hath 
the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Bon of God 
hath not life”” (1 John v. 12). 


THE END. 


EOLOGY LIBRARY 
A=MONT, CALIF, 


wil 4% 
: TRIS 
oe i . 


ty aCe 
ee a 


car Feud. 























| a C. Uhmgte 1816-1900. 't 1 1 3 2 2 @ 


Bees 
VI 
Kb 
THEOLOGY LIBRARY 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 





BR PRINTED IN U.S.A. 223-262-002 


(Meee De 





ereerey 


FRapene 
Pave a 


rei 

FAs E 

Pi ae 
Moga S 


EY 


See 
Rs 
. 
Ss 
iy 
aah 


eRe eR 





