THE 


'ROPHET 


LIBRARY 


Hgrltfo  OLollrge 


TORONTO 


Shelf  No.. 


.BS580.SM- 


Register  No... 


19 


^Presented  to 
\X/ucliffe    (allege,  •!• 

VV J  v^x 

Qoronto, 


u 


J3u 


SAMUEL  the   PROPHET 


\  \ 


SAM UE THE  PROPHET 


BY 


F.    B.    MEYER,    B.A 


AUTHOR  OF 

PAUL:  A  Servant  of  Jesus  Christ 
THE  PROPHET  OF  HOPE 
SAVED  AND  KEPT 
etc.,  etc 


LONDON:    MORGAN   AND  SCOTT 
OFFICE  OF  Clje  (Eljristtan 

12,    PATERNOSTER   BUILDINGS,   E.C 
And  may  be  Ordered  of  any  Bookseller 


By    F.    B.    MEYER,    B.A. 


EACH  VOLUME  IN  CLOTH  BOARDS,  2s.  6d. 


THE   "BIOGRAPHICAL"  SERIES. 

ABRAHAM  :  Or,  The  Obedience  of  Faith. 
ISRAEL:  A  Prince  with  God. 
JOSEPH  :   Beloved— Hated— Exalted. 
MOSES  :   The  Servant  of  God. 
JOSHUA :  And  the  Land  of  Promise. 
DAVID:    Shepherd,  Psalmist,  King. 
ELIJAH  :  And  the  Secret  of  his  Power. 
JEREMIAH  :   Priest  and  Prophet. 
JOHN  THE  BAPTIST. 
PAUL  I  A  Servant  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  above  Ten  Volumes  in  Handsome  Oak  Case,  22s.  net. 
In  Polished  Walnut  Case,  24s.  6d.  net. 


A  complete  Illustrated  List  of  Works  by 

F.  B.  MEYER,  B.A., 
will  l>e  sent  post  free  on  application. 


LONDON  :  MORGAN  &  SCOTT,  12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.G. 

And  may  be  Ordered  of  any  Bookseller, 


f 


kWO  sentences  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  prove  the 
significance  and  importance  of  Samuel's  career  : — 

He  gave  them  judges  until  Samuel  the  Prophet." — ACTS  xiii.  20. 

,/  "All  the  prophets  from  Samuel  and  them  that  followed  after." 

ACTS  iii.  24. 

"  Until  Samuel ;  from  Samuel — these  suggestive  prepo 
sitions  indicate  that  this  great  life  was  a  hinge,  a  bridge, 
a  connecting-link,  a  meeting-place  between  two  epochs — 
"  a  place  where  two  seas  met." 

The  study  of  Samuel  the  Prophet  is  specially  helpful 
to  those  who  are  called  to  live  amid  Time's  "loud  stun 
ning  tide."  He  was  no  recluse,  dwelling  apart  in  dreamy 
mysticism.  Both  as  statesman  and  politician  in  the  best 
sense,  he  was  called  upon  to  play  a  great  part  in  his 
people's  history.  He  was  a  king-maker  and  a  king- 
breaker.  What  Bernard  of  Clairvaux  was  to  the  Middle 
Ages,  that,  but  without  his  faults,  Samuel  was  in  early 
Hebrew  history. 

His  life  does  not  seem  to  have  been  often  told :  I 
trust,  therefore,  that  this  book  may  fulfil  a  distinct  need ; 
but  I  would  like  to  express  my  special  obligation  to 
Dean  Stanley's  "  Jewish  Church,"  and  Rev.  W.  J.  Deane's 
"  Samuel  and  Saul."  Many  other  writers  have  supplied 
me  with  the  local  colouring,  with  which  I  have  en 
deavoured  to  make  an  accurate  presentation  of  Samuel 
the  Prophet,  and  necessarily  of  Saul  the  King. 


/3. 


Contents. 


PAGE 

I.  AN  AGE  OF  TRANSITION       7 

II.  A  WOMAN'S  ANGUISH  OF  HEART 14 

III.  THE  YOUNG  LEVITE 21 

IV.  THE  VISION  OF  GOD 27 

V.  MISFORTUNE  ON  MISFORTUNE         33 

VI.  THE  WORK  OF  RECONSTRUCTION 44 

VII.  THE  VICTORY  OF  FAITH       48 

VIII.  THE  STONE  OF  HELP 53 

IX.  A  GREAT  DISAPPOINTMENT 60 

X.  THE  VOICE  OF  CIRCUMSTANCES     71 

XI.  As  OCCASION  SERVES 77 

XII.  INNER  AND  OUTER  CONFLICTS       84 

XIII.  FORSAKEN?    NEVER! 93 

XIV.  NOT  CEASING  IN  PRAYER     101 

XV.  THE  CAUSE  OF  SAUL'S  DOWNFALL          109 

XVI.  "Two  PUTTING  TEN  THOUSAND  TO  FLIGHT" 116 

XVII.  FAILURE  UNDER  THE  SUPREME  TEST     123 

XVIII.  A  REMARKABLE  COLLOQUY 130 

XIX.  "AN  EVIL  SPIRIT  FROM  THE  LORD"       138 

XX.  "  SlN   BRINGETH    FORTH    DEATH" 147 

XXI.  THE  SIN  OF  JEALOUSY          155 

XXII.  "CRUEL   AS   THE   GRAVE" l6l 

XXIII.  A  GREAT  SUNSET        170 

XXIV.  ENDOR  AND  GILBOA 178 

XXV.  AN  EPILOGUE    .                                                                 .  188 


SAMUEL  THE  PROPHET. 


I. 
of  transition. 

(i  SAMUEL  i.) 

"  The  old  order  changeth,  yielding  place  to  new, 
And  God  fulfils  Himself  in  many  ways, 
Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world." 

TEXNYSOX. 

" S~^\ N  whom  the  ends  of  the  ages  are  come" — i.e.,  the 
\ J  end  of  one  age  and  the  beginning  of  another. 
Such  is  our  position  to-day.  In  every  direction 
the  old  order  is  giving  place  to  the  new.  It  was  thus  in  the 
days  of  the  Primitive  Church,  when  the  typical  institu 
tions  of  the  Levitical  system  were  being  replaced  by  "  the 
heavenly  things  themselves."  And  it  was  also  thus  at  the 
time  when  our  narrative  begins.  The  story  of  Samuel  is  a 
divine  interlude  between  the  days  of  the  Judges  and  those 
of  David  the  King. 

Hitherto  the  High  Priesthood  had  been  the  supreme 
authority  recognised  in  the  Hebrew  Commonwealth.  To 
Moses,  its  founder,  there  could  be  of  course  no  successor ; 
but  Aaron  was  the  first  of  an  unbroken  line  of  priests.  No 
other  office  stood  for  the  whole  of  Israel.  The  Mosaic  era, 
however,  was  not  destined  to  culminate  in  the  rule  of  the 


8  ^.n  3Ve  of  transition. 


Priest,  who  has  seldom  combined  the  sacerdotal  functions 
with  the  special  qualifications  that  constitute  a  great  leader 
and  ruler.  Too  often  the  reign  of  the  Churchman  has 
been  warped  by  bigotry,  tyranny,  and  the  repression  of  the 
nobler  aspirations  of  mankind.  The  Priest  was  to  make 
way  for  the  King. 

A  suggestion  that  a  fresh  development  of  the  Hebrew 
polity  was  near  occurs  in  the  closing  verses  of  the  Book  of 
Ruth,  with  which  this  book  is  connected  by  the  conjunction 
now.  The  genealogy,  which  is  the  evident  climax  of  that 
sweet  pastoral  story,  has  no  connection  with  Aaron  or 
his  line.  It  expressly  deals  with  the  tribe  of  Judah, 
of  which  nothing  was  spoken  concerning  the  priesthood. 
Evidently  the  Divine  purpose  was  moving  forward  —  but 
whither  ?  At  the  time  its  goal  was  not  apparent  ;  but  as  we 
look  back  on  all  the  circumstances  from  the  vantage-ground 
of  accomplished  fact,  we  can  see  that  it  was  slowly  moving 
towards  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  under  David  ; 
and  veiled  from  all  eyes  there  was  the  yet  profounder 
movement  towards  the  revelation  of  "  that  Proper  Man,"  as 
Luther  calls  Him,  in  whose  nature,  fitly  known  as  Wonder 
ful,  the  priestly,  the  prophetic,  and  the  royal,  blend  in  per 
fect  symmetry  and  beauty. 

I.  THE  URGENT  NEED  FOR  A  STRONG  MAN.  —  Every  age 
takes  up  and  urges  the  cry  —  Give  us  men  ;  but  if  ever  a 
strong  man  was  needed,  it  was  in  the  days  of  which  the 
Book  of  Judges  affords  some  startling  glimpses. 

Canaan  had  been  conquered,  but  the  ancient  inhabitants 
were  far  from  being  subdued  ;  they  remained  much  as  the 
Saxons  under  the  early  Norman  kings.  In  the  South,  the 
Philistines  held  their  five  cities.  The  mountain  fortress, 
which  was  afterwards  known  as  Mount  Zion,  garrisoned 
by  Jebusites,  was  proudly  defiant  so  far  forward  as  the 
days  of  David.  Nearly  all  the  sea-coast,  and  all  the 


flljc  gisctplhte   of  &rinl.  9 

strongholds  in  the  rich  plain  of  Esdraelon,  were  in  the 
hands  of  the  Canaanites.  The  little  kingdom  of  Gezer 
remained  independent  till  it  was  conquered  by  the  King 
of  Egypt,  and  given  as  a  dowry  to  Solomon's  Queen.  On 
the  northern  frontier  were  the  remains  of  those  mighty 
nations  which  Joshua  had  overthrown  in  the  great  battle  of 
the  Waters  of  Merom,  but  which  probably  only  gave  a 
nominal  allegiance  to  the  Israelite  suzerainty.  "  So  the 
Lord  left  those  nations,  without  driving  them  out  hastily, 
...  to  prove  Israel  by  them,  even  as  many  as  had  not 
known  the  wars  of  Canaan,  ...  to  teach  them  war,  at  the 
least  such  as  beforetime  knew  nothing  thereof."  Had  it  not 
been  for  the  presence  of  these  warlike  tribes,  we  should 
never  have  heard  of  Gideon,  of  Barak,  of  Jephthah,  of 
Samson,  or  of  David.  Without  this  discipline,  Israel  might 
have  become  an  effeminate  and  molluscous  race,  lacking 
backbone  and  muscle.  They  would  have  dwelt  in  security, 
after  the  manner  of  the  Zidonians,  quiet  and  secure  in  a 
large  land,  a  place  where  there  was  no  want  of  anything 
that  is  in  the  earth  (Judges  ii.  23-iii.  1-3,  R.v. ;  xviii.  7,  10). 

How  often  in  our  earthly  discipline  we  come  into  expe 
riences  which  are  the  counterpart  of  these.  There  are  wars 
where  we  looked  for  peace ;  fret  and  chafe  where  we 
expected  freedom  from  annoyance ;  pouring  from  vessel 
to  vessel  where  we  hoped  to  be  allowed  to  settle  on  our  lees. 
Are  not  these  clearly  permitted  to  try  us,  that  we  may  learn 
war ;  that  we  may  know  ourselves  and  know  God  ;  that  we 
and  our  children  may  grow  up  into  a  nobler  and  healthier 
style  of  character  than  had  otherwise  been  possible. 

In  Israel  this  incessant  exposure  to  attack  was  aggravated 
by  the  absence  of  a  strong  central  government.  The 
priesthood  had  evidently  fallen  into  the  hands  of  weaklings 
from  the  days  of  Phinehas.  Of  this  there  is  striking  con 
firmation  in  the  fact  that  Eli  sprang,  not  from  the  house  of 
Eleazar,  the  eldest  son  of  Aaron,  in  which  the  succession 
B 


10  jVn  JUjc  of  Cransttion. 

ought  to  have  been  continued,  but  from  the  family  of  the 
younger  son,  Ithamar.  There  is  a  strong  probability  that 
the  representatives  of  the  elder  branch  had  proved  them 
selves  so  unable  to  cope  with  the  disorders  of  the  time  that 
they  had  been  set  aside  in  favour  of  any  one  who  evinced 
faculty  enough  to  take  the  field  and  marshal  the  forces  of 
Israel.  Perhaps  Eli,  in  his  young  life,  had  done  some 
stirring  deed  of  prowess  which  raised  him  to  the  supreme 
position  his  fellow-countrymen  could  give ;  though,  when 
we  are  introduced  to  him,  he  is  pitiful  in  his  senile  de 
crepitude  and  weakness  (i  Chron.  vi.  4-15  ;  xxiv.  4). 

From  time  to  time  prophets  had  been  raised  up  as  a 
temporary  expedient.  "  He  gave  them  judges  until  Samuel 
the  prophet."  "And  when  the  Lord  raised  them  up  judges, 
then  the  Lord  was  with  the  judge,  and  saved  them  out  of  the 
hand  of  their  enemies  all  the  days  of  the  judge;  for  it  repented 
the  Lord  because  of  their  groaning  by  reason  of  them 
that  oppressed  them  and  vexed  them  "  (Acts  xiii.  20,  R.v.  ; 
Judges  ii.  18,  R.V.).  The  reign  of  a  judge  was,  however,  a 
very  transient  gleam  of  light  in  that  dark  and  stormy  age.  At 
the  furthest,  his  power  was  only  recognised  within  his  own 
and  the  adjacent  tribes.  Samson,  for  instance,  was  little 
else  than  the  hero  of  the  south  country,  whilst  Jephthah 
was  pre-eminently  the  captain  of  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes. 
In  many  cases  the  office  ceased  with  the  special  crisis  that 
called  it  into  being.  Only  in  the  case  of  two  or  three,  such 
as  Deborah  and  Gideon,  did  conspicuous  service  lead  to  a 
lifelong  primacy. 

Thus  the  nation  was  in  danger  of  desolation  by  internal 
anarchy  and  external  attack.  With  no  principle  of  cohesion, 
no  rallying-point,  no  acknowledged  leader,  what  was  there  to 
resist  the  pressure  of  the  Canaanites  from  within,  and  of  the 
hostile  nations  from  without,  its  borders  ?  "  In  those  days 
there  was  no  king  in  Israel,  but  every  man  did  that  which 
was  right  in  his  own  eyes";  "The  children  of  Israel  did 


31  Hcto  (Drier  of  Crjmrjs. 


evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  ";  "The  children  of  Israel  cried 
unto  the  Lord."  These  three  sentences,  repeated  frequently 
and  emphatically,  are  the  keynotes  of  the  whole  book. 
The  religious  ties,  moreover,  were  very  weak.  We  find,  for 
instance,  the  name  of  Baal,  a  Phoenician  deity,  occurring 
three  times  in  the  names  of  members  of  the  family  of  Saul 
(i  Chron.  viii.  30,  33,  34).  The  stories  of  Micah,  of  Ruth, 
and  of  the  extermination  of  the  Danites,  supply  graphic 
pictures  of  the  disunion,  independence,  and  wildness  of 
the  time  ;  of  wild  licence,  and  of  exposure  to  attack. 

It  was  necessary,  therefore,  to  introduce  a  new  order  of 
things.  To  assert  and  achieve  the  national  unity  ;  to  make 
the  best  aspects  of  the  rule  of  the  judges  permanent  in  the 
office  of  kingship  ;  to  resuscitate  and  maintain  the  allegiance 
of  Israel  to  the  God  of  their  fathers  ;  to  carry  over  the  whole 
nation  from  the  time  of  the  last  judge  to  that  of  the  first 
king  —  was  a  task  that  demanded  a  pre-eminently  strong  man  ; 
and  the  want  was  superbly  supplied,  as  we  shall  see,  by  the 
prophet  Samuel,  who  conducted  his  people  from  one  age  to 
another,  without  a  revolution,  and  almost  without  the  ex 
citement,  which  naturally  accompanies  so  great  a  change. 

II.  How  THE  NEED  WAS  MET.  —  God's  greatest  gifts  to 
man  come  through  travail.  Whether  we  look  into  the 
spiritual  or  the  temporal  sphere,  can  we  discover  anything, 
any  great  reform,  any  beneficent  discovery,  any  soul- 
awakening  revival,  which  did  not  come  through  the  toils  and 
tears,  the  vigils  and  blood-shedding  of  men  and  women, 
whose  sufferings  were  the  pangs  of  its  birth  ?  That  which 
costs  nothing  is  of  small  avail  to  the  salvation  and  help  of 
mankind.  The  souls  that  are  set  on  saving  themselves  will 
never  be  the  saviours  of  the  race.  If  the  temple  is  raised, 
David  must  bear  sore  afflictions  ;  if  the  Gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God  is  to  be  disentangled  from  Jewish  tradition,  Paul's 
life  must  be  one  long  agony  ;  if  the  Reformation  is  to  be 


12  JVtt  JUje  0f  transition. 


rendered  possible  for  Europe,  men  like  John  Huss  and 
Jerome  must  be  burnt  at  the  stake  ;  if  great  scientific  dis 
coveries  are  to  be  established,  men  like  Galileo,  Gal  van  i, 
Faraday,  and  Edison  must  spend  sleepless  nights  and  labo 
rious  days  through  long  years  ;  if  great  religious  truths  are  to 
be  enunciated,  as  the  priceless  heirloom  of  pilgrim  souls, 
men  like  Baxter,  Bunyan,  or  Charles  Simeon  must  be  willing 
to  undergo  ostracism,  misrepresentation,  and  contempt. 
Before  Samuel  could  be  given  to  his  people,  Hannah  must 
be  a  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit. 

Some  few  miles  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem,  on  the  confines 
of  the  territories  of  Ephraim  and  Benjamin,  was  situated 
the  town  of  Ramathaim-Zophim.  It  was  also  known  as 
Ramah,  and  has  passed  into  New  Testament  history  as 
Arimathea,  the  town  from  which  he  came  who  begged  of 
Pilate  the  body  of  the  Lord.  Ramathaim  means  the  two 
Ramahs,  as  there  were  probably  an  upper  and  a  lower  city, 
to  which  reference  is  made  in  the  after-story  (  i  Sam.  ix.  13). 
Zophim  recalls  the  name  of  an  ancestor  of  Elkanah,  named 
Zuph,  who  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  considerable 
importance,  and  to  have  given  his  name  to  the  whole  district 
(i  Chron.  vi.  35  ;  i  Sam.  ix.  5).  In  this  mountain  city  a 
child  was  to  be  born  who  was  to  give  it  interest  and  im 
portance,  not  only  during  his  lifetime,  when  it  became  the 
focus  of  the  national  life,  but  for  centuries  of  years. 

Towards  the  close  of  Samson's  career  in  Southern  Judah, 
a  family  resided  at  Ramah  consisting  of  Elkanah,  a  Levite, 
and  his  two  wives,  Hannah  (Grace)  and  Peninnah  (Pearl  or 
Margaret).  He  had  formerly  lived  in  Ephraim,  and  was 
therefore  considered  to  belong  to  that  tribe  (Joshua  xxi.  20). 
That  he  had  two  wives  was  not  a  violation  of  the  Levitical 
law,  which  did  not  forbid  polygamy,  but  carefully  regulated 
the  marriage-law,  penetrating  the  home-life  with  such  ideals 
as  would  gradually  bring  men  and  women  back  to  the 
original  institution  of  Paradise  (Mark  x.  4-9). 


^airiour  of  the  Country.  13 

It  is  supposed  that  Elkanah  brought  a  second  wife  into 
his  home  because  of  Hannah's  childlessness;  but,  what 
ever  had  been  the  cause,  the  step  had  been  fraught  with 
misery.  The  house  at  Ramah  was  filled  with  bickering  and 
strife,  which  was  augmented  as  child  after  child  fell  to  the 
lot  of  Peninnah,  whilst  Hannah  was  still  childless.  Apart 
from  all  else,  her  desolate  condition  was  an  almost  in 
tolerable  affliction  (Gen.  xxx.  i) ;  but  that  it  should  be 
made  the  subject  of  biting  sarcasm  and  bitter  taunts  was 
the  occasion  of  the  most  poignant  grief.  The  pain  was  not 
confined  to  Ramah,  but  seems  to  have  reached  its  climax 
when,  according  to  the  Hebrew  custom,  the  household  went 
up  to  offer  unto  the  Lord  the  yearly  sacrifice,  and  Hannah 
was  compelled  to  witness  the  many  portions  which  fell  to 
the  lot  of  her  rival,  for  all  her  sons  and  daughters,  at  the 
sacrificial  feast,  when,  after  offering  to  Jehovah  the  victims 
they  had  brought,  they  retired  to  feast  on  the  remainder. 
Then  it  was  that  the  needy  sat  upon  the  dunghill,  and  the 
poor  in  the  dust ;  then  it  was  that  her  soul  was  pierced  as 
by  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  drew  near  unto  the  grave ; 
then  it  was  that  the  hunger  of  her  soul  could  not  be  appeased 
even  by  the  consciousness  of  Elkanah's  fond  affection  (i.  5,  8; 
ii.  5-8).  But  out  of  this  soul-travail  the  joy  of  her  life  and 
the  saviour  of  her  country  were  to  be  born. 


II. 
31  Woman's  JUtgmslj  0f 

(i  SAMUEL  i.  15.) 

"  Unanswered  yet  ?     Faith  cannot  be  unanswered, 

Her  feet  were  firmly  planted  on  the  Rock  ; 
Amid  the  wildest  storms  she  stands  undaunted, 

Nor  quails  before  the  loudest  thundershock. 
She  knows  Omnipotence  has  heard  her  prayer, 
And  cries  '  It  shall  be  done  '  sometime,  somewhere." 

BROWNING. 

WE  may  infer  that  Hannah's  barrenness,  and  the 
provocation  of  her  rival,  were  not  the  only 
reasons  for  Hannah's  sorrow.  As  her  noble 
song  proves,  she  was  saturated  with  the  most  splendid 
traditions  and  hopes  of  her  people  ;  her  soul  was  thrilling 
with  the  conceptions  that  inspired  the  songs  of  Moses. 
Stricken  with  an  agony  of  grief  for  the  anarchy  and  con 
fusion  around  her,  she  longed  with  passionate  desire  to 
enshrine  her  noblest  self  in  a  son,  who  should  resuscitate 
the  ebbing  prosperity  of  the  nation,  and  set  it  on  an  enduring 
foundation.  Frail  woman  that  she  was,  she  might  not  even 
hope  to  emulate  a  Jael  or  a  Deborah,  but  she  might  save 
her  people  if  she  could  only  breathe  her  ardent  nature  into 
a  child.  What  if  she  were  to  be  deprived  of  his  presence 
and  support  from  his  earliest  years,  would  she  not  be  com 
pensated  a  thousandfold  if  only  the  Lord  would  accept  him 
as  his  own,  and  use  him  to  be  the  channel  through  which 
his  redemptive  schemes  might  be  achieved  ?  Levites  ordi 
narily  were  consecrated  to  the  Lord's  service  between  the 
ages  of  thirty  and  fifty,  but  her  son,  if  only  she  might  have 
one,  should  be  given  to  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  his  life, 
and  no  razor  should  ever  come  upon  his  flowing  locks. 
On  one  occasion,  while  the  feast  was  proceeding  at 


3V  flraycr  att&  its  Issue.  15 

Shiloh,  it  seemed  as  though  Hannah  could  restrain  herself 
no  longer,  and  after  her  people  had  eaten  and  drunk — she 
fasting,  save  from  tears — she  rose  up  and  returned  to  the 
outer  court  of  the  Tabernacle.  Most  of  its  ancient  glory 
had  departed.  Probably  only  a  few  curtains  were  draped 
around  the  Ark  and  the  other  sacred  furniture,  which  had 
escaped  the  wreck  of  the  previous  two  or  three  hundred 
years  ;  and  this  simple  structure  was,  if  we  may  credit  rab 
binical  tradition,  surrounded  by  a  low  stone  wall,  at  the 
gate  of  which  was  a  seat  or  throne  for  the  High  Priest. 
"And  she  was  in  bitterness  of  soul,  and  prayed  unto  the 
Lord,  and  wept  sore."  Others  went  with  burnt-offerings, 
but  she  with  the  broken  heart,  which  God  will  not  despise. 
She  did  not  chide  God,  but  she  held  out  her  cup  of  trial, 
that  it  might  become  a  cup  of  salvation. 

We  are  told  that  "  she  prayed,"  and  it  becomes  us  to 
study  her  prayer  and  its  issue. 

//  was  heart-prayer.  It  is  the  custom  of  Orientals  to 
pray  audibly,  but  as  she  stood  beside  Eli's  seat  (ver.  26)  she 
spake  in  her  heart ;  her  lips  moved,  but  her  voice  was  not 
heard.  This  indicates  that  she  had  made  many  advances 
in  the  Divine  life,  and  had  come  to  know  the  secret  of 
heart-fellowship  with  God.  Hers  were  not  vain  repetitions, 
but  such  an  interchange  of  spirit  with  spirit,  of  need  with 
supply,  of  hunger  with  satisfaction,  of  the  human  with  the 
Divine,  as  requires  no  speech,  for  speech  could  not  convey 
those  "  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered." 

//  was  based  on  a  new  name  for  God.  She  appealed  to 
Jehovah  under  a  new  title,  "  Jehovah  of  Hosts,"  as  though 
it  were  nothing  to  Him  to  summon  into  existence  an  infant 
spirit,  whom  she  might  call  child.  She  asked  Him  to  look 
down  from  the  myriads  of  holy  spirits  who  circled  round 
his  throne,  to  her  dire  affliction  and  anguish.  She  vowed 
in  words  which  Elkanah  by  his  silence  or  consent  after 
wards  ratified  (Num.  xxx.  6-15),  that  she  did  not  want 


1 6  JL  ^toman's  JUujuisrj  of 

this  inestimable  boon  for  herself  merely,  but  for  the  glory 
of  God  ;  and  that  her  son  should  be  a  Nazarite  from  his 
birth,  abstaining  from  intoxicating  drink,  his  locks  unshorn, 
his  body  undefiled  by  contact  with  the  dead. 

//  was  definite  prayer.  "  Give  unto  thine  handmaid  a 
man-child."  "  For  this  child  I  prayed."  So  many  of  our 
prayers  miscarry  because  they  are  aimed  at  no  special  goal. 
We  launch  them  aimlessly  in  the  air,  and  wonder  that  they 
achieve  nothing.  How  many  of  God's  professing  children 
would  be  nonplussed  if,  on  leaving  God's  audience  chamber 
on  any  morning,  they  were  questioned  as  to  what  pre 
cious  gift  they  had  gone  thither  to  obtain  ?  We  are  too 
often  contented  with  asking  generally  that  God  would  bless 
those  with  whom  we  are  connected,  without  entering  specifi 
cally  into  the  case  of  any.  Experienced  saints  who  are 
versed  in  the  art  of  intercessory  prayer  tell  us  of  the  mar 
vellous  results  which  have  accrued,  when  they  have  set 
themselves  to  pray  definitely  for  the  salvation  of  individuals, 
or  for  some  good  and  perfect  gift  on  their  behalf. 

There  is  a  notable  instance  of  this  in  the  life  of  Bishop 
Hannington,  of  Uganda.  It  is  recorded  in  the  diary  of  a 
fellow-clergyman,  who  had  known  him  at  the  University, 
that  on  a  certain  day  he  was  led  to  pray  definitely  for  his 
friend ;  and  almost  simultaneously  Hannington  notes  that 
he  was  conscious  of  unusual  drawings  towards  God. 

//  was  prayer  without  reserve.  "  I  have  poured  out  my 
soul  before  the  Lord."  Ah,  how  good  it  would  be  if  we 
could  more  often  follow  Hannah's  example.  We  pour  out 
our  secrets  to  confidential  friends,  and  often  have  reason 
bitterly  to  repent ;  or,  if  we  commit  our  cause  to  God,  we 
tell  Him  our  side  of  the  case,  seeking  to  hide  from  Him 
the  other.  Often  the  matter  would  be  ended,  if  we  dared 
to  pour  out  all  our  soul,  not  defending  ourselves,  not 
apologizing,  not  glossing  over  what  demanded  clear  and 
unequivocal  confession.  When  the  heart  is  breaking,  when 


17 

its  frail  machinery  seems  unable  to  sustain  the  weight  of  its 
anxiety,  when  its  cords  are  strained  to  the  point  of  snapping, 
then,  as  you  remember  these  things,  pour  out  your  soul  in 
you  (Psa.  xlii.  4). 

It  was  persevering  prayer.  "  It  came  to  pass,  as  she 
continued  praying  before  the  Lord."  Not  that  either  she  or 
we  can  claim  to  be  heard  for  our  much  speaking,  but  when 
the  Lord  lays  some  burden  on  us  we  cannot  do  other  than 
wait  before  Him. 

It  was  prayer  that  received  its  coveted  boon.  Eli  was 
seated  in  his  place  at  the  entrance  to  the  sanctuary.  His 
notice  was  attracted  by  Hannah,  though  she  was  in 
different  to  all  around.  At  first  his  attention  was  probably 
arrested  by  the  signs  of  her  excessive  sorrow,  and  he  ex 
pected  that  she  would  pour  out  her  prayers  in  an  audible 
voice,  as  so  many  other  burdened  souls  were  wont  to  do. 
But  since  her  lips  moved,  while  her  voice  was  not  heard, 
the  high  priest  thought  she  had  been  drunken,  and  rather 
rudely  and  coarsely  broke  in  on  her  with  the  rebuke,  "How 
long  wilt  thou  be  drunken  ?  Put  away  thy  wine  from  thee." 
Therein  another  proof  was  given  of  the  inability  of  the 
priesthood  to  understand  and  sympathise  with  the  best 
spirit  and  temper  of  the  time.  Eli  judged  after  the  sight 
of  his  eyes,  and  clearly  the  mind  of  God  had  not  been 
revealed  to  Him.  He  had  degenerated  into  the  mere 
official,  from  whom  the  Divine  purposes  were  concealed. 

Hannah  answered  the  unjust  reproach  with  great  meek 
ness.  "No,"  she  said,  "it  is  not  as  you  think.  I  have 
drunk  neither  wine  nor  strong  drink,  but  have  poured  out 
my  spirit  unto  the  Lord."  She  had  already  suffered  so 
much  that  this  last  misapprehension  could  not  seriously  add 
to  her  burden.  She  was  content  to  cast  it,  with  all  the  rest, 
on  God  ;  and  she  realized,  even  before  Eli  replied,  that  the 
merciful  Burden-bearer  had  heard  and  answered  her  prayer. 
She  had  entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  prayer,  which  not 
c 


1 8  3V  tSEoman'a  JVnguisIj  of  Heart. 

only  asks,  but  takes.  She  anticipated  those  wonderful 
words,  which,  more  than  any  others,  disclose  the  secret  of 
prevailing  supplication,  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye  pray  and 
ask  for,  believe  that  ye  have  received  them,  and  ye  shall  have 
them"  (Mark  xi.  24,  R.V.).  Before  ever  the  words  of  Eli, 
"  Go  in  peace,  and  the  God  of  Israel  grant  thy  petition  that 
thou  hast  asked  of  Him,"  had  fallen  like  a  summer  shower 
on  a  parched  land,  she  knew  that  she  had  prevailed,  and 
the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  filled 
and  kept  her  mind  and  heart.  And  she  said,  "  Let  thy 
servant  find  grace  in  thy  sight.  So  the  woman  went  her 
way,  and  did  eat,  and  her  countenance  was  no  more  sad." 
Too  often  we  return  from  prayer  with  sad  faces  and 
burdened  hearts.  We  have  not  cast  our  burden  on  the 
Lord,  or  if  we  have  done  so,  we  have  taken  it  back  again. 
There  has  been  no  interchange,  and  no  exchange.  We 
have  failed  to  abandon  our  weights,  anxieties,  and  sins  ; 
have  failed  to  leave  them  in  the  hands  of  our  Almighty 
Friend,  that  we  might  receive  instead  beauty  for  ashes,  the 
oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garment  of  praise  for  the 
spirit  of  heaviness. 

Could  we  but  kneel,  and  cast  our  load, 
E'en  while  we  pray,  upon  our  God, 
Then  rise  with  lightened  chcur. 

The  next  day  was  fixed  for  their  return  home.  "  And 
they  rose  up  in  the  morning  early,  and  worshipped  before 
the  Lord,  and  returned,  and  came  to  their  house  in  Ramah." 
But  what  an  altered  woman  she  was  !  How  differently  she 
had  borne  herself  in  that  last  brief  visit  to  the  holy  shrine  ! 
And  with  what  a  glad  face  she  entered  the  home  which  had 
been  associated  with  such  sorrow.  Peninnah  must  have 
wondered  what  had  happened  to  make  so  great  a  change ; 
but  Elkanah  was  the  confidant  of  her  secret,  and  his  faith 
was  made  stronger  by  her  unquestioning  trust  (ver.  23). 

The  workings  of  sorrow.     In  this  prayer  we  can  trace 


19 

the  harvest  sown  in  years  of  suffering.  Only  one  who  had 
greatly  suffered  could  have  poured  out  such  a  prayer.  The 
notes  of  resignation,  of  chastened  submission  to  the  will  of 
God,  of  appeal  as  from  the  dust,  of  the  abandonment  of  all 
hope  save  in  God,  of  the  simple  desire  for  his  kingdom  and 
righteousness,  are  touched  with  infinite  delicacy  and  tender 
ness  by  this  sorrowful  woman's  hand.  Sorrow  gives  an 
indefinable  beauty  to  the  soul.  The  blue  of  heaven  does 
not  seem  so  beautiful  in  rainless  Egypt  as  in  countries 
where  the  atmosphere  is  saturated  with  moisture.  "  What 
do  you  think  of  her  singing?  "  asked  the  trainer  of  a  soprano 
vocalist.  "She  sings  superbly,"  was  his  friend's  reply,  "  but 
if  I  had  to  do  with  her,  I  would  break  her  heart."  It  may 
be  that  the  long  sharp  pain,  which  has  been  your  lot  for 
these  many  years,  the  heart-hunger,  the  disappointed  hopes, 
the  silent  waiting,  the  holding  your  peace,  even  from  good, 
have  been  necessary,  to  teach  you  how  to  pray,  to  lead  you 
into  the  secret  of  a  childlike  faith,  and  to  fit  you  to  be  the 
parent  of  some  priceless  gift  to  the  world. 

It  fell  out  to  Hannah  according  to  her  faith.  Blessed 
was  she  that  had  believed,  for  there  was  a  performance  unto 
her  of  the  promises  which  God  had  made  to  her  secret  soul. 
"  The  Lord  remembered  her,  and  .  .  .  when  the  time  had 
come  about,  that  she  bare  a  son,  and  she  called  his  name 
Samuel,  saying,  Because  I  have  asked  him  of  the  Lord." 

The  good  Elkanah  had  a  new  joy  in  his  heart  as  he  went 
up  to  offer  unto  the  Lord  his  yearly  sacrifice ;  and  it  would 
seem  that  he  added  to  it  some  special  expression  of  a  vow 
that  he  had  made — "  the  yearly  sacrifice,  and  his  vow." 
But  Hannah  abode  at  Ramah  until  the  child  was  weaned, 
which  would  probably  be  on  his  completion  of  his  third 
year,  when  Levite  children  were  permitted  to  be  enrolled 
and  to  enter  the  house  of  the  Lord  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  16). 

At  last  the  time  arrived  when  the  child  should  be  openly 
presented  to  the  Lord.  The  parents  set  out  on  their  solemn 


20  ^  Roman's  SViujuisfc  of  Heart. 


journey  with  their  child.  The  mother's  heart  was  now  as 
full  of  praise  as  it  had  formerly  been  of  sorrow.  Her  heart 
rejoiced  in  the  Lord;  her  spirit  was  exalted  in  her  God. 
The  beggar  was  lifted  from  the  dunghill  to  inherit  the 
throne  of  glory.  She  had  learnt  that  there  was  no  Rock 
like  her  God,  and  she  rejoiced  in  his  salvation.  Her  song, 
on  which  the  mother  of  our  Lord  modelled  the  Magnificat, 
is  the  outburst  of  a  soul  whose  cup  was  simply  overflowing 
with  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord. 

Presently  the  memorable  journey  from  Ramah  was 
finished.  The  sanctuary  was  again  in  sight,  where  she  had 
suffered  so  poignantly  and  prayed  so  fervently.  How  it  all 
rushed  on  her  memory  !  "I  am  the  woman  that  stood  by 
thee  here,"  she  said  to  Eli  ;  "for  this  child  I  prayed,  and 
the  Lord  hath  given  me  my  petition." 

Notice  those  words,  "  I  stood  by  thee  here."  How  closely 
we  associate  certain  experiences  with  certain  spots.  Here 
we  suffered  ;  here  we  resolved  to  live  a  new  life  ;  here  we 
heard  God  speak.  It  was  thus  with  Hannah.  And  was  it 
not  befitting  that  she  should  rejoice  where  she  had  sorrow  ; 
that  the  harvest  of  joy  should  wave  over  the  furrows,  where 
her  tears  had  fallen  so  lavishly  ;  that  the  blue  skies  should 
overarch  the  very  spot  where  the  dark  clouds  had  loured  ? 

Take  heart,  thou  man  or  woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit  ! 
Only  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  for  no  wrong 
or  sinful  cause  !  Suffer  for  his  Church,  for  a  lost  world,  for 
dying  men  !  Travail  in  birth  for  souls  !  Exercise  thyself 
as  thou  wilt  for  the  coming  of  his  kingdom  !  Bear  the 
weight  of  some  other  soul,  dear  to  thee  as  life  !  And  if 
thou  dost  abide  thy  Lord's  time,  He  will  bring  thee  again 
to  tread  in  garments  of  joy,  where  thou  hast  stood  in  the 
drapery  of  woe.  Thou  shalt  come  again  from  the  land  of 
the  enemy.  They  that  go  forth  and  weep,  bearing  precious 
seed,  shall  doubtless,  doubtless,  DOUBTLESS  come  again  with 
rejoicing,  bringing  their  sheaves  with  them. 


III. 


(r  SAMUEL  ii.  and  iii.  ). 

'  '  Be  still  !  sad  soul  !  lift  thou  no  passionate  cry, 

But  spread  the  desert  of  thy  being  bare 
To  the  full  searching  of  the  All-seeing  eye  : 

Wait  !  —  and  through  dark  misgiving,  blank  despair, 
God  will  come  down  in  pity,  and  fill  the  dry 
Dead  place  with  light,  and  life,  and  vernal  air." 

J.  C.  SHAIRP. 

DEAN    STANLEY    tells    us    that,    in    his    gentler 
moments,  Luther   used  to  dwell  on   these   early 
chapters  of  the  Books  of  Samuel  with  the  tender 
ness  which  formed  the  occasional  counterpoise  to  the  ruder 
passions    and    enterprises   of    his    stormy   life.      Indeed, 
students  of  the  Scriptures  in  every  age  have  been  arrested 
by  the  figure  of  this  little  child  girded  with  his  linen  ephod, 
or  in  the  little  robe  which  his  mother  brought  him  from  year 
to  year,  when  she  came  up  with  her  husband  to  offer  the 
yearly  sacrifice. 

With  what  passionate  and  almost  irrepressible  desire  the 
mother  must  have  anticipated  that  annual  visit,  all  too 
transient  to  satisfy  her  natural  longings.  It  must  have 
been  hard  to  leave  him  at  so  tender  an  age  as  three  : 
but  Hannah  was  solaced  for  her  deprivation.  There  was 
the  precious  memory  of  those  early  years,  when  he  had  filled 
the  house  with  his  childish  prattle,  and  she  had  been  able  to 
sow  in  the  receptive  soil  of  his  tender  heart  the  seeds  of 
manhood's  harvest.  Other  children,  also,  were  born  to  her; 
and,  as  three  sons  and  two  daughters  grew  up  at  her  knees, 
surely  the  thought  of  their  little  brother,  in  his  sacred 
office  a  continual  inspiration,  must  have  been  a  subject  of 


Ijounij 

lively  and  perennial  interest !  Jehovah  had  vindicated  the 
woman's  wrongs,  as  He  will  assuredly  vindicate  all  those 
who,  when  they  are  reviled  revile  not  again,  when  they 
suffer  threaten  not,  but  commit  themselves  and  their 
complaint  to  Him  who  judgeth  righteously.  Peaceful, 
reverent,  and  loving  thoughts  rilled  the  mother's  heart  as 
she  wrought  at  the  little  robe,  which  in  shape  was  of  the 
pattern  which,  probably,  Mary  made  for  her  Son,  "woven 
from  the  top  throughout  and  without  seam,"  which  the 
soldiers  would  not  tear. 

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  A  MOTHER. — Mothers  still  make  gar 
ments  for  their  children — not  on  the  loom  or  with  their  busy 
needles  merely,  but  by  their  holy  and  ennobling  characters 
displayed  from  day  to  day  before  young  and  quickly- 
observant  eyes,  by  their  words  and  conversation,  and  by  the 
habits  of  their  daily  devotion.  What  the  children  see  they 
imitate,  and  unconsciously  array  themselves  in  the  gentle 
ness  or  rudeness,  the  reverence  for  religion  or  indifference, 
the  refinement  or  coarseness  of  manner,  which  are  daily  pre 
sented  to  their  gaze.  As  fish  take  on  the  mottled  colour 
of  the  ground  on  which  they  lie,  and  as  the  plovers  change 
their  plumage  to  match  the  winter  or  the  spring,  so  children 
wear  the  robes  which  their  mother's  character  and  behaviour, 
temper  and  tones,  weave  for  them. 

"And  the  child  did  minister  unto  the  Lord  before  Eli 
the  priest "  ;  slept  his  innocent  sleep  unconscious  of  the 
sins  around  him,  attracted  the  growing  attachment  of  the 
old  man  by  his  reverent  affection  and  endearing  ways,  and 
gave  many  evidences  that  he  was  being  prepared  to  become 
a  link  between  God  and  his  people,  a  mediator  between  the 
old  and  the  new — between  the  turbulent  days  of  Samson 
and  the  splendid  peace  of  the  reign  of  Solomon. 

THE  SACRILEGE  AND  SINS  OF  ELI'S  SONS.  "  Now  the 
sons  of  Eli  were  sons  of  Belial  (worthlessness) ;  they  knew 


and  j$ht.  23 

not  the  Lord,  nor  the  due  of  the  priests  from  the  people  " 
(ii.  12,  R.V.,  marg.}.  The  law  of  Moses  authorized  the 
priest  to  take  as  his  portion,  and  instead  of  fees  in  coin,  the 
whole  of  the  sin-offerings,  and  the  breast  and  right  shoulder 
of  the  peace-offerings,  the  fat  only  of  the  latter  being  burned 
on  the  altar,  whilst  the  remainder  of  the  animal  was  handed 
back  to  the  offerer,  to  be  consumed  by  himself,  his  sons, 
and  his  daughters,  his  men-servants  and  his  maid-servants, 
and  the  Levite  that  was  within  his  gates  (Deut.  xii.  12). 
It  was  befitting,  as  the  Apostle  states  it,  that  they  which 
ministered  about  sacred  things  should  eat  of  the  things  of 
the  Temple,  and  that  they  which  waited  upon  the  altar 
should  have  their  portion  with  the  altar  (i  Cor.  ix.  13). 

The  first  act  of  every  peace-offering  was  the  sprinkling  of 
blood  upon  the  altar  round  about :  the  second  was  the  burn 
ing  of  the  internal  fat.  It  was  never  eaten,  but  always  con 
sumed  by  fire.  The  flame  fed  on  it,  as  the  food  of  God, 
who,  so  to  speak,  ate  with  the  accepted  worshipper  (Lev. 
iii.  1 6,  17).  After  this  solemn  rite  was  performed,  the 
priest's  portion  was  waved  and  presented  to  God,  and  the 
group  of  worshippers  made  way  for  others,  carrying  away 
with  them  their  portion  for  the  joyful  sacrificial  feast. 

Here  Eli's  sons  stepped  in  with  their  rapacious  greed- 
Not  satisfied  with  their  legally  allotted  portion,  they  sent 
their  servant  after  the  retiring  group,  with  a  flesh-hook  of 
three  teeth  in  his  hand,  and  while  the  meat  was  boiling  for 
the  sacred  meal,  he  thrust  his  trident  into  the  cauldron,  and 
claimed  as  the  priest's  perquisite  whatever  was  brought  up. 
"  So  they  did  in  Shiloh  unto  all  the  Israelites  that  came 
thither." 

But  even  this  did  not  long  satisfy  them.  They  went  on 
to  insist  that  after  the  breast  and  shoulder  had  been  handed 
them,  but  before  the  remainder  had  been  put  to  boil,  they 
should  be  supplied  with  raw  meat  from  the  offerer's  por 
tion  ;  nor  would  they  burn  the  fat,  which  was  the  essential 


24 

part  of  the  whole  sacrifice,  and  one  for  which  the  worship 
pers  must  needs  wait,  until  their  demands  were  satisfied. 
This  final  touch  seems  to  have  aroused  the  long-suffering 
people  to  exasperation.  "  At  least,"  they  said,  "  wait  till 
the  Lord's  portion  has  been  presented  before  you  proceed 
to  your  lawless  depredations.  Burn  the  fat,  and  afterwards 
take  as  much  as  you  will."  "  Nay,"  was  the  ruthless 
answer  of  the  priest,  "  but  you  shall  give  it  me  now,  or 
I  will  take  what  I  choose  by  force."  "  And  the  sin  of  the 
young  men  was  very  great  before  the  Lord,  for  men 
abhorred  the  offering  of  the  Lord." 

It  becomes  us  to  inquire  with  much  anxiety  and  heart- 
searching  whether  we,  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  are  doing 
or  abetting  things  which  cause  men  to  abhor  that  holy  Name 
by  which  we  are  called.  We  may  begin  with  our  own 
characters  and  habits,  and  thence  proceed  to  our  doctrinal 
statements  and  ecclesiastical  arrangements.  Rightly  or 
wrongly,  I  have  heard  of  men  forswearing  the  Christian 
religion,  to  which  they  were  once  attached,  because  pro 
fessing  Christians  were  so  dilatory  in  paying  their  debts,  so 
evasive  in  their  excuses,  so  profuse  in  promises  that  were 
never  kept,  so  difficult  to  please,  so  thoughtless  and  careless 
in  their  demands  on  work-people  and  servants,  so  touchy 
and  fretful,  so  liable  to  do  things  in  business  which  high- 
minded  men  of  the  world  would  not  permit.  I  have  heard 
of  men,  rightly  or  wrongly,  turning  from  misstatements  of 
Christian  doctrine  which  revolted  their  moral  sense  in 
making  God  our  Father  as  cruel  as  Chemosh  or  Molech. 
I  have  heard  of  men,  rightly  or  wrongly,  refusing  to  enter 
places  of  worship  because  of  the  class  distinctions  which 
were  maintained,  and  the  strong  dislike  with  which  a 
stranger's  admission  into  the  family  pew  was  resented.  For 
these  things  too  many  excuse  their  refusal  of  the  Gospel 
and  their  absence  from  the  house  of  prayer. 

Not  content  with  their  extortionate  greed,  Hophni  and 


lUsponsibilitij.  25 

Phinehas  perpetrated  the  vilest  excesses  of  heathenism  amid 
the  woods  and  vineyards  of  Shiloh.  Licentious  rites  had 
from  time  immemorial  been  associated  with  heathen 
festivals,  but  never  before  had  they  sullied  the  sacred 
vestures  of  the  priests  of  Aaron's  line.  So  abandoned  were 
these  young  men,  though  they  had  wives  of  their  own,  that 
they  did  not  scruple  to  lead  astray  the  women  who  were 
appointed  to  perform  the  various  offices  about  the  sanctuary 
that  demanded  female  labour. 

Remonstrances  were  addressed  to  the  aged  priest ;  he 
heard  of  their  evil  doings  from  all  the  people  (ii.  23),  but 
instead  of  strong  disapproval  and  stringent  threats,  he  con 
tented  himself  with  a  mild  rebuke,  "  He  said  unto  them, 
Why  do  ye  such  things  ?  Nay,  my  sons,  for  it  is  no  good 
report  that  I  hear ;  ye  make  the  Lord's  people  to  trans 
gress."  On  this  the  Divine  Judge  makes  the  terrible  com 
ment  that  his  sons  made  themselves  vile,  and  he  restrained 
them  not.  He  had  reproved,  but  not  restrained  them. 
Even  supposing  they  had  disregarded  the  reproof  of  their 
father,  they  could  hardly  have  defied  their  deposition  insisted 
on  by  him  as  High  Priest,  embodying  as  he  did  so  the 
highest  authority  in  the  realm.  And  for  this  weak  laxity 
he  was  condemned  and  deposed.  "  Therefore  the  Lord, 
the  God  of  Israel,  saith,  I  said  indeed  that  thy  house  and 
the  house  of  thy  father,  should  walk  before  me  for  ever : 
but  now  the  Lord  saith,  Be  it  far  from  Me ;  for  them  that 
honour  Me  I  will  honour,  and  they  that  despise  Me  shall 
be  lightly  esteemed." 

THE  NEED  OF  FAMILY  TRAINING. — This  suggests  a  very 
serious  inquiry  for  those  who  take  a  prominent  position  in 
the  Church  and  before  the  world,  but  who  neglect  their 
own  families.  We  are  held  responsible  for  our  children. 
Our  weakness  in  restraining  them  is  sin,  which  will  be  in 
evitably  followed,  not  only  by  their  punishment,  but  by  our 
D 


26  ®{jC  fjoung  fdrite. 

own.  Better  do  less  in  the  Church  and  the  world  than 
allow  your  children  to  grow  up  a  misery  to  themselves  and 
a  reproach  to  you.  Remember  that  one  essential  qualifica 
tion  for  office  in  the  primitive  Church  was  the  wise  and 
wholesome  rule  of  house  and  children.  If  a  man  could  not 
keep  his  children  in  subjection,  with  all  gravity,  and  rule 
his  house  well,  he  surely  could  not  know  how  to  take  care 
of  the  house  of  God  (i  Tim.  iii.  4,  12).  Probably  Eli  had 
not  begun  early  enough.  The  wise  parent  will  begin  train 
ing  children  from  their  earliest  months,  to  say  nothing  of 
years ;  and  the  early  strain  of  careful  observation  and 
chastisement  may  well  be  lightened  and  eased  by  re 
membering  that  the  child  who  from  the  earliest  is  trained  in 
God's  way  will  not  depart  from  it  when  he  is  old. 

Above  all,  let  us  seek  the  conversion  of  our  young 
children  to  God.  The  Apostle  distinctly  affirms  that  God 
will  give  us  life  for  those  who  sin  not  nnto  death  ;  and  this 
description  is,  above  all,  applicable  to  little  children. 
Surely  He  will  not  be  unrighteous  to  forget  the  tears  and 
prayers,  or  to  overlook  the  faith,  of  those  who  travail  a 
second  time  till  Christ  is  formed  in  the  hearts  of  their 
offspring.  As  the  child  of  godly  parents,  who  cannot  date 
the  hour  of  my  conversion,  because  the  love  of  God  stole 
over  my  heart  in  early  boyhood  like  the  dawn  of  a  summer 
sky,  I  put  my  seal  to  that  word  of  God  as  true : — "  My 
Spirit  that  is  upon  thee,  and  my  words  which  I  have  put 
in  thy  mouth,  shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth,  nor  out  of 
the  mouth  of  thy  seed,  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed's 
seed,  from  henceforth  and  for  ever"  (Isa.  lix.  21,  and  i 
John  v.  1 6). 


IV. 


of 

(i  SAMUEL  iii.  ) 

"  Oh  !  give  me  Samuel's  mind, 
A  sweet  unmurmuring  faith, 
Obedient  and  resigned 

To  Thee  in  life  and  death  ; 
That  I  may  read  with  child-like  eyes 
Truths  that  are  hidden  from  the  wise." 

J.  D.  BURNS. 

IT  is  very  touching  to  notice  the  various  references  to 
the  child  Samuel  as  they  recur  during  the  progress  of 
the  narrative,  especially  those  in  which  an  evident 
contrast  is  intended  between  his  gentle  innocence  and  the 
wild  licence  of  Eli's  sons  —  it  is  like  a  peal  of  sweet  bells 
ringing  on  amid  the  crash  of  a  storm. 

Hannah  said,  "  .  .  .1  will  bring  him,  that  he  may  appear 
before  the  Lord,  and  there  abide  for  ever."  "And  she  .  .  . 
brought  him  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  Shiloh  ;  and  the 
child  was  young"  "  As  long  as  he  liveth  he  is  lent  to  the 
Lord.  And  he  worshipped  the  Lord  there."  "  And  the 
child  did  minister  unto  the  Lord  before  Eli  the  Priest." 
"  Now  the  sons  of  Eli  were  wicked  men  ;  they  knew  not  the 
Lord  :  but  Samuel  ministered  before  the  Lord,  being  a  child." 
"  Now  Eli  was  very  old,  and  he  heard  all  that  his  sons  did 
unto  all  Israel.  And  the  child  Samuel  grew  on,  and  was  in 
favour  with  the  Lord,  and  also  with  men."  "And  the  Lord 
said,  Behold,  I  will  do  a  thing  in  Israel,  at  which  both  the 
ears  of  every  one  that  heareth  it  shall  tingle.  .  .  .  And 
Samuel  grew,  and  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  did  let  none 
of  his  words  fall  to  the  ground. 


28  £{jc  Vision  of 


His  life  seems  to  have  been  one  unbroken  record  of 
blameless  purity,  integrity,  and  righteousness.  One  purpose 
ran  through  all  his  years,  threading  them  together  in  an 
unbroken  series.  There  were  no  gaps  nor  breaks  ;  no 
lapses  into  sensuality  or  selfishness;  no  lawless  deeds  in 
that  wild,  lawless  age.  Towards  the  end  of  his  long  life 
he  was  able  to  appeal  to  the  verdict  of  the  people  in 
memorable  words,  which  attested  his  consciousness  of 
unsullied  rectitude. 

It  was  a  beautiful  life  —  strong  in  its  faculty  of  administra 
tion,  wise  in  steering  the  nation  from  the  rule  of  the  judges 
into  the  royal  state  of  the  kings,  unimpeachably  just,  but 
blamelessly  pure,  towering  above  his  contemporaries  like  a 
peak  of  glistening  chrysolite,  on  which  the  sunlight  plays, 
while  all  the  valleys  beneath  are  wrapped  in  scudding  clouds 
and  sweeping  rain. 

Samuel  was  not  a  prophet  in  the  sense  of  foretelling  the 
long  future,  and  was  not  possessed  of  Isaiah's  genius  and 
eloquence  ;  his  only  contribution  to  his  age  was  a  saintly 
character,  and  it  was  by  the  saintliness,  the  moral  grandeur 
of  his  character,  that  he  arrested  the  ruin  of  his  people. 

We  too  may  be  called  to  face  an  era  of  change  ;  our  eyes 
may  have  to  witness  the  passing  of  the  old  and  the  coming 
of  the  new  ;  it  may  be  that  in  our  time  also  the  Lord  will 
shake  once  more,  not  earth  only,  but  heaven,  that  the  things 
which  cannot  be  shaken  may  remain  ;  in  our  time  also 
ancient  landmarks  may  be  removed,  as  familiar  and  sacred 
as  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh,  and  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  to 
Israel.  Bat  there  is  one  property  within  our  reach  which 
need  never  pass  away,  which  shall  remain  unimpaired  and 
radiant  through  the  years  —  and  that  is  an  unblemished 
character,  a  soul  stainlessly  arrayed,  and  the  holy  life  in 
which  these  shall  be  embodied.  "  Let  thy  work  appear 
unto  thy  servants,  and  thy  glory  unto  their  children,  and  let 
the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us,  and  establish 


%i  personal  JVpprcljension.  29 

Thou  the  work  of  our  hands  upon  us ;  yea,  the  work  of  our 
hands,  establish  Thou  it." 

The  noblest  gift  that  any  of  us  can  make  to  our  fatherland 
or  age  is  an  undefiled  character  and  a  stainless  life.  Let 
us  live  our  best  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  prove 
that  the  God  of  Pentecost  is  living  still. 

I.  THE  TRANSITION  OF  A  YOUNG  SOUL. — For  Samuel, 
however,  a  great  change  was  necessary  and  imminent.  Up 
to  this  moment  he  had  lived  largely  in  the  energy  and 
motive-power  of  his  mother's  intense,  religious  life.  It 
was  needful  that  he  should  exchange  the  traditional  for 
the  experimental.  His  faith  must  rest,  not  on  the  assertions 
of  another's  testimony,  but  on  the  fact  that  for  himself  he 
had  seen,  and  tasted,  and  handled  the  Word  of  Life.  Not 
at  second-hand,  but  at  first,  the  Word  of  the  Lord  must 
come  to  him,  and  be  passed  on  to  all  Israel. 

Probably  this  change  comes  to  every  one  who  desires  and 
seeks  after  the  best  and  richest  life.  You  may  be  the  child 
of  a  pious  home,  where  from  boyhood  or  girlhood  you  were 
trained  in  the  traditions  of  Evangelical  religion,  you  were 
expected  to  pray  and  to  serve  God,  you  have  been  borne 
along  by  a  blessed  momentum  ;  but  suppose  for  a  minute 
that  that  momentum  should  fail  you,  have  you  come  to 
apprehend  Christ  as  a  living  Reality  for  yourself?  It  may 
be  that  God,  out  of  mercy  to  you,  will  break  up  and  destroy 
the  traditions  and  forms  on  which  you  have  been  relying ; 
that  the  eternal  and  divine  may  stand  forth  apparent  to  your 
spiritual  apprehension,  and  be  apprehended  by  yourself  for 
yourself,  as  though  they  were  meant  for  you  alone.  It  is  a 
great  hour  in  the  history  of  the  soul  when  the  traditional, 
to  which  it  has  become  habituated  by  long  wont  and  use,  is 
suddenly  exchanged  for  the  open  vision  of  God  ;  when  we 
say  with  Job,  "  I  have  heard  of  Thee  with  the  hearing  of 
the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee  " ;  when  we  say  with 


30  ®!JE  Vision  0f 

the  Apostle,  "  Leaving  the  things  that  are  behind,  and 
reaching  forth  to  those  that  are  before,  I  press  toward  the 
mark." 

Will  you  believe  then  that  God  may  be  coming  very  near 
you,  and  is  about  to  reveal  Himself  to  you  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  as  not  unto  the  world  ?  He  is  about  to  transform 
your  life,  and  lift  it  to  an  altogether  new  level,  so  that 
though  you  may  have  to  face  the  old  circumstances,  it  shall 
be  from  a  higher  standpoint — as  the  spiral  staircase  is  always 
returning  to  the  same  view-point,  though  always  at  the 
elevation  of  some  few  additional  feet. 

II.  THE  VISION  OF  THE  YOUNG  EYES. — (i)  When  God 
came  near  his  young  servant,  it  seemed  as  though  He  placed 
his  seal  upon  his  faithfulness.  Hitherto  but  small  services 
had  been  required  of  him.  To  close  and  open  the  doors  of 
the  Tabernacle  ;  to  light  the  seven-branched  candlestick  in 
the  late  afternoon,  and  supply  it  with  pure  olive  oil  every 
morning  ;  to  render  little  services  to  the  aged  priest,  whether 
by  day  or  night — such  were  the  duties  assigned  to  him  and 
performed  with  punctilious  care.  It  was  meet  that  he  who 
had  shown  himself  faithful  in  a  very  little  should  have  a 
larger  and  wider  sphere  assigned  to  him. 

(2)  The  vision  came  as  night  was  beginning  to  yield 
to  dawn ;  but  "  the  lamp  had  not  yet  gone  out  in  the 
temple  of  the  Lord,  where  the  ark  of  God  was."  Thrice 
the  boy  was  startled  from  his  innocent  slumbers  on  his 
little  bed  in  the  chamber  he  occupied  adjacent  to  the 
sacred  building.  He  heard  his  name  called  softly,  tenderly, 
lovingly,  and  made  sure  that  Eli  needed  him,  and  thrice 
sped  across  the  intervening  space  to  report  himself.  Once, 
and  again,  and  yet  again,  he  ran  unto  Eli,  and  said,  "  Here 
am  I,  for  thou  calledst  me." 

When  God  approaches  us  to  reveal  his  Son  in  us,  the 
tendency  is  always  to  speed  with  all  haste  to  some  place,  or 


"ge  Still."  31 

some  spiritual  adviser,  where  we  suppose  that  the  interpre 
tation  of  the  vision  will  be  given.  Young  converts,  for 
instance,  are  apt  to  say,  "  If  only  I  could  have  my  questions 
answered  by  such  a  man  of  God,  I  am  sure  I  should  get 
blessing."  And  thus  they  are  kept  in  constant  perturba 
tion,  running  backwards  and  forwards,  repeating  Samuel's 
vain  experience — running  to  Eli  and  saying,  "  Surely  you 
called  me,  and  can  interpret  for  me  the  vision  and  the 
voice." 

(3)  Eli  was  very  wise  in  his  treatment  of  the  lad.  He 
might  have  posed  as  the  sole  depository  of  the  Divine 
secrets,  might  have  warned  the  lad  against  listening  to  vain 
delusions,  might  have  given  way  to  ungoverned  jealousy 
and  suspicion,  might  have  stood  on  the  dignity  and  pride 
of  office.  But  instead  of  any  of  these,  without  the  slightest 
trace  of  hurt  pride,  he  took  the  boy's  hand  in  his,  and,  so 
to  speak,  led  him  into  the  Divine  Presence,  knowing  full 
well  that  the  seals  of  sacred  office,  which  had  been  taken 
from  himself,  were  about  to  be  laid  on  those  youthful 
palms. 

If  Eli  had  inherited  the  traditions  of  the  priesthood 
merely,  he  would  have  stood  between  that  soul  and  God, 
hearing  its  confession,  wielding  over  it  a  terrorizing  influ 
ence,  and  directing  it,  as  in  the  place  of  God.  Instead  of 
this,  however,  the  old  man  said  sweetly,  "  Go,  lie  down  : 
and  it  shall  be  if  He  call  thee,  that  thou  shall  say,  '  Speak, 
Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth.' " 

It  is  not  the  business  of  the  Christian  minister  to  lord  it 
over  the  eager  and  aroused  disciple,  to  demand  confession, 
or  offer  absolution,  but  to  say  in  effect :  "  Thou  needest 
more  than  we  can  give.  God,  and  God  only,  can  suffice 
thee.  Go,  and  lie  down  again.  Be  quiet.  Let  thy  soul  be 
still  before  God.  Wait,  for  He  will  assuredly  come  again. 
And  it  shall  be,  if  He  call  thee,  that  thou  shall  say,  '  Speak, 
Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth.' " 


32  (Efce  Vision  of 

As  Thomas  a  Kempis  puts  it : — 

"  Let  not  Moses  speak  unto  me,  nor  any  of  the  prophets, 
but  rather  do  Thou  speak,  O  Lord  God,  the  Inspirer  and 
Enlightener  of  all  the  prophets  ;  for  Thou  alone  without 
them  canst  perfectly  instruct  me,  but  they  without  Thee 
can  profit  nothing. 

"  Speak  Thou  unto  me,  to  the  comfort,  however  imper 
fect,  of  my  soul,  and  to  the  amendment  of  my  whole  life, 
and  to  Thy  praise,  and  glory,  and  honour  everlasting." 

(4)  The  message  entrusted  to  the  lad  was  a  very  terrible 
one.     We  cannot  wonder  that  he  feared  to  show  Eli  the 
vision.     With  a  beautiful  modesty  and  reticence  he  set  about 
the  duties  of  the  day,  and  opened,  as  usual,  the  doors  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord.     It  was  not  for  him  to  blurt  out  the  full 
thunder  which  had  burst  on  him.     This  was  another  lovely 
trait  in  the  boy's  character.      But  he  had  mis-read  Eli's 
character ;  he  did  not  realize  that  men  like  him  will  die,  but 
not   murmur — will   resign   themselves  without   a   word   of 
expostulation  or  defence,  determined  to  know  the  worst,  and 
when  they  know  it,  meekly  answering,  "  It  is  the  Lord ;  let 
Him  do  what  seemeth  Him  good." 

(5)  It  is  well  to  notice  that  the  Lord  revealed  Himself  to 
Samuel  in  Shiloh  by  the  Word  of  the  Lord.     Let  us  not  seek 
for  revelations  through  dreams  or  visions,  but  by  the  Word 
of  God.     Nothing  is  more  harmful  than  to  contract  the 
habit  of  listening  for  voices,  and  sleeping  to  dream.     All 
manner  of  vagaries  come  in  by  that  door.     It  is  best  to  take 
in   hand    and   read    the   Scriptures    reverently,    carefully, 
thoughtfully,  crying,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for   thy  servant    hear- 
eth."     And  in  response  there  will  come  one  clear,  defined, 
and  repeated  message,   asseverated  and  accentuated  with 
growing  distinctness  from  every  part  of  the  inspired  volume, 
"  This  is  the  way — walk  in  it ;  this  is  my  will — do  it ;  this 
is  my  word — speak  it."     Let  us  hear  what  God  the  Lord 
shall  speak. 


V. 

J!ttsf0rtutu  on  jftisforiun*. 

(i  SAMUEL  iv.,  v.,  vi.). 

"Oh,  the  outward  hath  gone  !  but  in  glory  and  power, 
The  Spirit  surviveth  the  things  of  an  hour ; 
Unchanged,  undecaying,  its  Pentecost  flame 
On  the  heart's  secret  altar  is  burning  the  same." 

WHITTIER. 

THE  scanty  records  of  these  chapters  (iv.  i — vii.  7), 
bridge  over  a  considerable  tract  of  Scripture ; 
covering,  perhaps,  forty  years.  The  details  of 
Samuel's  life  and  growing  influence  given  by  the  sacred 
historian  during  that  period  are  very  fragmentary  ;  but  the 
narrative  of  events  is  profoundly  interesting,  and  must  be 
understood  by  those  who  would  have  a  right  conception  of 
the  great  service  that  Samuel  rendered  to  his  people.  It 
will  appear,  also,  that  there  is  a  remarkable  parallel,  not 
only  between  those  days  and  our  own,  but  between  the 
work  he  did  and  the  work  that  is  needed  as  urgently  now. 

It  was  an  age  of  disunion  and  anarchy.  After  the  deaths 
of  Joshua,  Caleb,  and  of  all  that  generation,  "  there  arose 
another  generation  after  them,  which  knew  not  the  Lord, 
nor  yet  the  work  which  He  had  wrought  for  Israel "... 
(Judges  ii.  10,  R.V.).  There  was  no  man,  and  no  tribe,  able  to 
unite  the  people  under  one  leadership,  or  recall  them  to  the 
lofty  Monotheism — the  worship  of  the  one  Jehovah — which 
characterized  the  founders  of  their  commonwealth.  The 
bonds  of  their  national  unity  were  loosened  ;  each  tribe  and 
each  great  city  asserted  its  independence  of  all  the  rest ;  the 
heart  of  the  national  life  beat  feebly,  and,  in  the  expressive 
E 


34  jEiafortune  0n  JJtisfortune. 

phrase  which  so  completely  represents  the  age  of  the  judges, 
"  Every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes." 

The  only  common  centre  was  afforded  by  the  Tabernacle, 
the  Ark,  and  the  High  Priesthood ;  but  even  the  influence 
of  these  had  become  greatly  reduced.  "The  children  of 
Israel  forsook  Jehovah,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  which 
brought  them  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  followed 
other  gods,  of  the  gods  of  the  peoples  that  were  round 
about  them,  and  bowed  themselves  down  unto  them." 

There  was,  therefore,  nothing  to  hinder  the  steady  en 
croachments  of  the  neighbouring  nations.  Now  it  was  the 
children  of  Ammon  on  the  east,  then  the  Amalekites  and 
Midianites  from  the  desert,  and  again  the  Philistines  on  the 
south-west,  that  broke  in  on  the  Land  of  Promise.  From 
time  to  time  judges  were  raised  up,  but  their  authority 
was  only  temporary  and  limited.  For  the  most  part  it 
ceased  with  their  death,  and  was  the  means  of  delivering 
only  a  section  of  the  land.  "  When  the  Lord  raised  them 
up  judges,  then  the  Lord  was  with  the  judge,  and  saved 
them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies  :  .  .  .  but  it  came 
to  pass,  when  the  judge  was  dead,  that  they  turned  back, 
and  dealt  more  corruptly  than  their  fathers "  (Judges  ii. 
18,  19.  R.V.). 

Our  story  is  specially  connected  with  the  southern 
and  midland  districts  of  Canaan,  which,  notwithstanding 
Samson's  heroic  exploits — for  he  was  contemporary  with 
Samuel's  early  years — lay  under  the  tyrannous  yoke  of  the 
Philistines,  who  seem  about  this  time  to  have  been  largely 
reinforced  from  the  original  seat  of  their  empire  in  the 
neighbouring  island  of  Crete,  and  to  have  made  the  position 
of  the  Hebrews  almost  intolerable. 

In  these  Philistines  stealing  up  from  their  own  territories 
and  cities  to  dominate  the  Hebrews,  in  the  land  which 
God  gave  them  for  an  heritage — a  land  to  which  the 
Philistines  could  have  no  possible  claim,  but  which  was 


Our  llational  $ntt0crs.  35 

certainly  the  allotted  possession  of  the  chosen  people — I  \ 
see  the  type  of  much  which  is  always  taking  place  in  our 
own  experience.  For  instance,  they  stand  for  unholy 
desires  and  evil  habits,  from  which  we  were  once  set  free 
by  the  risen  Son  of  God,  but  which,  in  subsequent  years,  , 
may  have  come  back  to  assert  their  former  sway  and 
tyranny.  And  again,  they  represent  the  inroads  of  world- 
liness  into  the  Church,  and  of  wickedness  into  the  State. 
The  forces  of  evil  are  never  at  rest.  Just  as  the  spirit  of 
destruction  and  waste  is  perpetually  at  work  in  untiling  our 
roofs,  stripping  off  our  wall-papers,  pulling  down  our  walls, 
and  sowing  our  gardens  with  weeds  whilst  we  sleep  ;  so  the 
evil  tendencies  in  the  heart,  the  Church,  and  the  nation» 
are  ever  warring  against  the  law  of  the  mind,  and  bringing 
men  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin. 

In  the  insidious. attempts  to  rob  us  of  our  Rest  Day,  and 
turn  it  into  one  of  public  amusement ;  in  the  unblushing 
effrontery  of  vice  in  various  forms  ;  in  the  threatened  domi 
nation  of  all  other  interests  by  the  mad  greed  for  money ; 
in  the  spirit  of  amusement  which  infects  society ;  in  the 
worldliness  and  luxury  which  divide  with  the  spiritual  and 
heavenly  the  hearts  and  lives  of  professing  Christians — 
we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  bands  of  the  Philistines 
as  they  steal  up  from  their  lowlands  to  the  uplands  of 
religious  constancy  and  strength.  They  have  no  rights,  but 
they  never  fail  to  assert  their  pretensions ;  and  sometimes 
we  almost  lose  heart  and  begin  to  question  whether  there 
is  any  use  in  opposing  them.  Why  this  constant  strife  ? 
Were  it  not  better  to  yield  the  point  in  controversy  and  to 
acquiesce  ?  At  other  times,  like  the  children  of  Israel,  we 
are  goaded  to  make  one  desperate  effort  for  freedom. 

I.  AN  ILL-FATED  ATTEMPT. — "Now  Israel  went  out 
against  the  Philistines  to  battle,  and  pitched  beside  Eben- 
ezer,  and  the  Philistines  pitched  in  Aphek."  From  these 


36  ^Htsfortttne  on  |Jtts  for  tune. 

words  we  infer  that  the  war  was  commenced  by  Israel 
because  the  yoke  of  Philistia  was  too  galling  to  be  endured ; 
but  it  is  almost  certain  that  from  the  first  it  was  an  ill- 
starred  and  badly-managed  campaign. 

Very  distinct  directions  were  issued  by  Moses  as  to  the 
way  in  which  a  campaign  should  be  commenced  and  con 
ducted  (Deut.  xx.),  but  none  of  them  seems  to  have  been 
put  in  force  on  this  occasion.  No  priest  was  called  in  to 
ask  counsel  of  God  ;  not  even  Samuel,  in  whom  the  people 
were  beginning  to  recognise  the  servant  and  prophet  of 
Jehovah,  seems  to  have  been  consulted.  It  was  the  sudden 
flaming  out  of  a  spirit  of  hatred  and  revenge  from  a  race 
of  slaves,  who  were  stung  to  the  quick  by  the  taunts,  the 
insults,  and  the  scorpion-whips  of  their  masters. 

Such  has  been  the  spirit  in  which  we  have  sometimes 
turned  on  the  powerful  sins  which  have  asserted  their 
mastery  over  us.  We  have  seen  the  ruin  to  which  they 
were  bringing  us  ;  we  have  winced  at  the  shame  and  indig 
nation  which  they  were  causing  to  others  ;  we  have  felt 
insulted  and  outraged  in  any  lingering  sense  of  honour  and 
nobility  that  may  have  escaped  the  general  wreck  ;  and  we 
have  turned  on  our  tormentors.  We  have  signed  the 
pledge  against  the  use  of  intoxicants ;  we  have  taken  a 
solemn  oath  nevermore  to  yield  to  our  besetting  sin  ;  we 
have  vowed  that  we  will  be  free.  But  within  a  month  we 
have  been  back  in  the  old  state.  It  has  not  gone  better 
with  us  than  with  Israel ;  for  this  battle  is  not  to  the  strong. 

The  Israelitish  hosts,  hastily  summoned  and  insufficiently 
armed,  suffered  a  heavy  defeat.  Four  thousand  men  lay 
dead  on  the  battlefield,  and  a  spirit  of  intimidation  and 
dismay  spread  through  the  entire  host.  Such  will  ever  be, 
the  result  when  God's  people  leave  Him  out  of  account.V 
Their  education  is  so  costly  and  necessary  that  He  can 
afford  to  let  them  suffer  again  and  again — that  an  arrest 
may  be  put  on  courses  that  are  not  good. 


£  gnrr  of  Disaster.  37 

II.  THE  ARK,  BUT  NOT  GOD,  TO  THE  RESCUE. — On  the 
evening  of  that  disastrous  day  the  elders  of  Israel  held  a 
council  of  war  (ver.  3).  It  was  evident  that  their  defeat 
must  be  attributed  to  some  failure  in  their  relations  with 
Jehovah.  They  said,  "  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us 
to-day  before  the  Philistines  ?  "  They  were  conscious  that 
they  had  left  Him  out  of  their  reckoning,  and  suddenly 
bethought  themselves  of  a  happy  expedient  by  which 
they  might  almost  compel  Him  to  take  sides  with  them 
against  their  foes.  "  Let  us  fetch,"  they  cried,  "  the  Ark 
of  the  Covenant  of  the  Lord  out  of  Shiloh,  that  it 
may  come  among  us,  and  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our 
enemies." 

They  remembered  the  wonderful  scenes  in  which  that 
Ark  had  played  a  part ;  how  the  waters  of  the  Jordan  had  fled 
before  it,  and  the  walls  of  Jericho  had  fallen  down.  Its 
going  forth,  in  the  words  of  tKeTTgreat  lawgiver,  had  always 
meant  the  scattering  and  flight  of  Jehovah's  foes.  Surely  it 
would  do  the  same  again.  They  did  not  realize  that  God's 
very  present  help  depended  not  on  the  presence  of  a 
material  symbol,  but  on  moral  and  spiritual  conditions, 
which  they  should  have  set  themselves  to  understand  and 
fulfil.  It  was  much  as  though  a  high  Sacramentarian  should 
depend  for  deliverance  from  trial  on  wearing  some  amulet 
or  charm,  or  even  carrying  a  piece  of  the  consecrated  wafer 
in  a  golden  casket  upon  his  person,  instead  of  exercising 
himself  in  manly  faith  and  prayer. 

The  arrival  of  the  Ark,  in  due  course,  borne  by  the 
Levites,  and  accompanied  by  the  sons  of  Eli  as  its  custo 
dians,  was  received  with  the  exultant  shouts  of  the  entire 
host.  Eli  had  evidently  been  most  unwilling  to  allow  it  to 
leave  the  sacred  enclosure—"  his  heart  trembled  for  the 
Ark  of  God" — but  he  had  yielded  too  often  and  too  long 
to  be  able  to  sustain  a  successful  protest ;  and  probably  no 
one  else  had  any  misgivings,  for  "  when  the  Ark  of  the 


38  IHisforhtttE  on  Ittisfortunc. 

Covenant  of  the  Lord  came  into  camp,  all  Israel  shouted 
with  a  great  shout,  so  that  the  earth  rang  again." 

As  soon  as  the  Philistines,  by  means  of  their  scouts,  were 
acquainted  with  the  cause  of  this  exuberant  outburst,  they 
were  correspondingly  depressed,  for  they,  too,  identified  the 
presence  of  the  God  of  Israel  with  the  advent  of  the  Ark, 
which  had  always  been  associated  in  their  minds  with  the 
hand  of  "  these  mighty  gods  that  smote  the  Egyptians." 
Neither  had  they  any  idea  of  those  moral  considerations  on 
which  alone  the  co-operation  of  God  could  be  given.  "  Woe 
unto  us  ! "  they  cried,  "  for  there  hath  not  been  such  a  thing 
heretofore.  Woe  unto  us  !  Who  shall  deliver  us  ?  " 

It  was  necessary  that  a  decisive  answer  should  be  given 
to  these  materialistic  conceptions  of  the  Hebrews  and  their 
foes.  It  must  be  demonstrated  that  the  mere  possession 
of  the  symbol  of  the  Covenant  was  valueless,  so  long  as  the 
strange  gods  and  the  Ashtaroth  were  tenaciously  cherished, 
and  the  abominations  of  the  heathen  were  constantly  and 
shamelessly  pursued  (vii.  3,  4).  The  asseveration  of  the  holy 
words,  the  quoting  of  venerable  precedents,  the  reliance  on 
sacred  emblems,  are  alike  in  vain,  unless  the  heart  is  pure 
and  the  hands  clean.  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart, 
the  Lord  will  not  hear  me." 

The  Philistines  seem  to  have  stirred  themselves  to  deeds 
of  desperate  valour,  because  they  believed  that  they  were  to 
fight,  not  only  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  the 
deities  which  had  led  Israel  in  one  long  succession  of 
victories.  They  advanced  to  the  conflict  with  the  words  of 
their  leaders  ringing  in  their  ears.  "  Be  strong,  and  quit 
yourselves  like  men,  O  ye  Philistines,  that  ye  be  not 
servants  to  the  Hebrews,  as  they  have  been  to  you.  Quit 
yourselves  like  men  and  fight  "  (see  i  Cor.  xvi.  13). 

The  issue  of  that  terrible  day  was  disastrous  in  the 
extreme.  "  Israel  was  smitten,  and  they  fled  every  man 
to  his  tent,  and  there  was  a  very  great  slaughter,  for  there 


&rh  f  alum.  39 

(  fell  of  Israel  thirty  thousand  footmen."  Around  the  Ark  the 
ground  must  have  been  heaped  with  corpses,  as  the  Hebrews 
fought  desperately  in  the  defence  of  the  symbol  of  their 
faith  ;  but  in  vain,  for  the  Ark  of  God  was  taken,  and  the 
two  sons  of  Eli  were  slain.  Thus  had  Samuel  foretold,  and 
thus  it  befell. 

That  afternoon  a  Benjamite,  with  his  clothes  rent  and 
dust  upon  his  head,  bore  the  tidings  to  the  hamlets  and 
villages  that  lay  all  along  the  ascending  and  open  road  to 
Shiloh  ;  and,  as  he  passed  through  eager  and  expectant 
groups,  a  wail  arose  that  grew  in  volume  as  he  sped 
onwards,  until  it  reached  its  climax  in  the  City  of  the  High 
Priest,  the  capital,  so  far  as  there  was  any,  of  the  entire 
land.  "  When  the  man  came  into  the  city,  and  told  it,  all 
the  city  cried  out."  On  the  still  evening  air  arose  a  piercing 
outburst  of  lamentation,  for  what  was  there  to  hinder  the 
immediate  march  of  the  victorious  army  on  the  city,  deprived 
in  one  day  of  its  warriors,  and  apparently  of  its  God  ! 

The  old  man,  Eli,  blind  and  anxious,  had  caused  himself 
to  be  seated  on  his  throne,  facing  on  the  main  thoroughfare. 
He  had  a  foreboding  that  bad  news  was  in  the  air,  and  when 
the  noise  of  the  tumult  arose,  he  anxiously  inquired  of  the 
attendant  priests  and  Levites,  and,  perhaps,  of  Samuel, 
waiting  as  usual  to  respond  to  his  least  appeal  for  help, 
"  What  meaneth  the  noise  of  this  tumult  ? "  At  the  same 
moment  the  messenger  appears  to  have  burst  into  the 
presence  of  the  little  group,  telling  Eli  who  he  was,  and  in 
answer  to  the  eager  inquiry  of  the  High  Priest,  "  How  went 
the  matter,  my  son  ?  "  without  warning  or  preface,  and  with 
no  care  to  soften  the  asperity  of  the  harsh  words,  he  blurted 
out,  with  an  ever-rising  climax  of  dread  awfulness  :  "  Israel 
is  fled  before  the  Philistines,  and  there  hath  been  also  a 
great  slaughter  among  the  people,  and  thy  two  sons  also 
are  dead,  and  the  Ark  of  God  is  taken." 

The  old  man  received  the  tidings  in  silence.     The  three 


4° 

first  shots  hit  him  severely,  but  not  mortally;  but  "when 
he  made  mention  of  the  Ark  of  God,  he  fell  from  off  his 
seat  backward  by  the  side  of  the  gate,  and  his  neck  brake 
and  he  died."  With  her  last  gasp  the  wife  of  Phinehas 
gathered  up  the  horror  of  the  situation  in  the  single  word 
which  she  uttered  as  the  name  of  her  child,  prematurely 
born.  It  was  sorrow  indeed  that  she  was  a  widow  ;  sorrow 
that  her  father-in-law  had  died  at  the  moment  when  he  was 
needed  so  sorely ;  but  sorrow  most  of  all  that  the  Ark  was 
taken,  for  with  it  the  glory  had  departed.  True  soul  that 
she  was,  and  worthy  to  be  classed  with  Hannah  in  her  loyal 
devotion  to  the  name  and  house  of  God  ! 

But  worse  troubles  still  befell.  In  frantic  haste  the 
Israelites  bore  away  the  remnants  of  the  sacred  tent  and 
its  furniture,  and  concealed  them.  In  subsequent  years 
they  were  at  Nob  (i  Sam.  xxi.  i).  The  removal  of  these 
precious  relics  was  hardly  effected  before  the  Philistine 
invasion  burst  on  the  deserted  city  as  an  overflowing  flood. 
"  Go  ye  now,"  says  Jeremiah,  in  the  Divine  Name,  "unto 
my  place  which  was  in  Shiloh,  where  I  caused  my  name  to 
dwell  at  the  first,  and  see  what  I  did  to  it  for  the  wickedness 
of  my  people  Israel"  (Jer.  vii.  12,  R.V.).  And  the  further 
fate  of  the  city,  which  for  three  hundred  years  had  been  the 
centre  of  the  national  life  and  worship,  may  be  guessed  from 
the  pathetic  words  of  the  Psalmist : — 

He  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  Shiloh, 

The  tent  which  he  placed  among  men  ; 

And  delivered  his  strength  into  captivity, 

And  his  glory  into  the  adversary's  hand. 

He  gave  his  people  over  also  unto  the  sword, 

And  was  wroth  with  his  inheritance ; 

Fire  devoured  their  young  men, 

And  their  maidens  were  not  praised  in  the  marriage  song  ; 

Their  priests  fell  by  the  sword, 

And  their  widows  made  no  lamentation. 

(Psa.  Ixxviii.  60,  K.V.,  &c. ) 


n  anb  Jfeljobalj.  41 

III.  THE  AWFUL  NAME  OF  GOD. — This  part  of  the 
history  more  closely  concerns  the  growing  illumination  of 
the  surrounding  nations  as  to  the  true  nature  of  the  God 
of  Israel. 

There  was  no  other  way  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  could 
inform  the  people  of  Philistia,  as  to  his  holiness  and  power, 
than  that  which  He  adopted  in  the  present  instance.  They 
bore  the  Ark  from  the  battle-field  to  the  Temple  of  Dagon 
in  exuberant  triumph.  It  seemed  as  though  they  had  not 
only  triumphed  over  Israel,  but  over  its  tutelary  deity,  and 
that  Dagon  was  superior  to  Jehovah.  But  it  would  have 
been  a  great  disaster  had  they  been  allowed  to  cherish  this 
idea  in  perpetuity.  As  in  Egypt,  centuries  before,  so  now 
in  Philistia  God  must  reveal  his  lonely  and  unapproachable 
supremacy.  He  cannot  give  his  glory  to  another,  nor  his 
praise  to  graven  images,  and  therefore  He  suits  Himself  to 
the  crude  and  materialistic  conceptions  of  these  blinded 
idolaters,  and  meets  them  in  their  own  sphere.  They  would 
not  have  been  impressed  by  the  message  of  a  prophet.  • 
They  would  have  scouted  and  stoned  any  who  opposed  the 
universal,  national  adoration  of  Dagon  ;  but  they  could  not 
resist  the  conclusions  forced  on  them  when,  on  two  follow 
ing  mornings,  they  found  his  image  prostrate  before  the 
emblem  of  Jehovah,  and  on  the  second  occasion  the  head 
and  arms  severed  from  the  body,  so  that  the  only  part 
which  was  left  intact  was  the  fish's  tail  with  which  the  figure 
ended.  That  it  might  be  made  still  clearer  that  this  was 
no  coincidence,  but  the  act  of  God,  and  that  He  had  a 
controversy  with  them,  a  terrible  plague  of  "tumours" 
broke  out  on  each  successive  city  to  which  the  Ark  was 
removed,  and  a  visitation  of  destructive  vermin  on  the 
country  districts  where  it  may  have  been  deposited. 

We  must  not  suppose,  of  course,  that  God  had  no  love 
towards  these  untutored  souls,  but  that  there  was  no  other 
way  of  convincing  them  of  his  real  nature  and  prerogatives. 


42  4Htsfartun£  on  ^Risforfune. 

The  plagues  of  Egypt  were  ordained,  not  only  to  punish  the 
sins  of  pride  and  obstinacy — with  which  Pharaoh  made 
himself  strong  against  the  Almighty — but  that  the  Egyptians 
might  be  forced  to  recognise  that  He  was  the  great  God  of 
Heaven,  of  whom  now  and  again  they  caught  a  glimpse. 
Similarly,  in  this  instance,  the  prostrated  form  of  Dagon, 
the  painful  disease  by  which  they  were  smitten,  and  the 
devastation  of  their  crops,  caused  them  to  cry  unto  heaven 
(ver.  12),  as  though  they  realized  that  they  were  being 
dealt  with  by  a  greater  than  Dagon — by  the  great  Being  who 
was  superior  to  all  local  gods. 

What  a  sublime  revelation  this  is  of  the  Divine  methods 
with  man  !  With  an  infinite  longing  He  desires  to  win  the 
allegiance  and  devotion  of  all  men.  The  consummate  and 
unapproachable  revelation  which  He  has  made  for  this  pur 
pose  is  in  the  Son  of  his  Love.  "  The  only  begotten  of  the 
Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."  But  of  what  use  had  it 
been  to  have  spoken  of  his  Son  in  those  early  days,  when 
the  hearts  of  men  were  darkened  by  the  grossest  concep 
tions  and  basest  morals  ?  No  !  Line  must  be  on  line,  pre 
cept  upon  precept  The  times  of  ignorance  must  be 
"  winked  at."  The  light  must  be  tempered  to  the  weak  and 
diseased  eyes.  God  must  adopt  the  language  that  could  be 
understood  by  the  children  of  men,  whom  He  loved,  just  as 
in  after  days  our  Lord  exposed  his  hands  and  side  to  the 
incredulous  Thomas,  condescending  to  a  method  of  demon 
stration  which  he  could  appreciate  and  had  himself  sug 
gested.  If  the  Philistines  could  have  understood  Epistles 
like  those  of  John,  they  would,  without  doubt,  have  been 
written  for  their  learning  and  correction,  and  commu 
nicated  to  them  by  some  man  of  God  ;  but  since  they  could 
not  understand  such  means  of  instruction,  they  were  reached 
by  the  overthrow  and  shattering  of  their  idol,  the  plagues 
which  accompanied  the  progress  of  the  ark,  and  the  direc 
tion  taken  by  the  milch  kine,  which,  whilst  lowing  for  their 


J9tmft  -Retribution.  43 

little  ones,  bore  their  sacred  burden  along  the  straight  road 
which  led  them  from  their  home  towards  Beth-shemesh. 

Similarly,  the  inhabitants  of  that  frontier  town  had  to  learn 
by  a  stern  lesson  that  God  was  a  holy  God,  and  that  He 
could  not  permit  them  to  manifest  a  wanton  curiosity  and  ir 
reverence  in  handling  the  sacred  emblem  of  his  presence.  To 
pry  into  the  Ark  as  they  did,  was  forbidden  to  the  priests, 
and  even  the  high  priest  himself;  how  much  more  to  them  ? 
It  had  been  distinctly  asserted,  when  the  two  sons  of  Aaron 
perished  on  the  day  of  their  inauguration  to  the  priesthood, 
that  God  would  be  sanctified  in  all  that  came  nigh  Him,  and 
before  all  the  people  He  would  be  glorified  (Lev.  x.  3). 

The  reverence  due  to  Him  must  be  shown  to  the  vessels 
of  the  sanctuary,  which  were  carefully  veiled  by  the  priests 
before  they  were  taken  up  for  transportation  by  the  Levites 
(Num.  i.  50,  51  ;  iv.  5,  16-30).  The  swift  retribution  which 
followed  on  this  act  of  irreverence  extorted  the  reverent 
acknowledgment  of  the  awful  holiness  of  God,  as  the  men  of 
Beth-shemesh  said,  "  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy 
Lord  God  ?  "  When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Ark  had  been 
reverently  borne  to  Kirjath-jearim,  the  city  of  the  woods, 
some  three  miles  distant  from  the  great  valley  of  Beth- 
shemesh,  on  which  the  crops  were  goldening  in  the  sun,  and 
had  been  carefully  entrusted  to  the  custody  of  Abinadab 
and  his  son  Eleazar,  the  blessing  that  befell  his  house  was 
an  indication  of  the  tender  love  and  pity  of  the  Divine 
nature,  who  is  willing  to  dwell  with  him  that  is  of  a  humble 
and  lowly  heart,  and  that  trembleth  at  his  word. 

Oh,  do  not  fear  Jehovah  with  the  dread  of  a  craven  heart, 
but  with  the  loyal  love  and  devotion  of  sons,  and  open  your 
heart  to  receive  not  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  only,  but  Him 
whom  God  hath  set  forth  for  a  propitiation,  and  who  is  the 
Propitiation  for  our  sins,  i.e.,  the  mercy-seat  which  covers 
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  sprinkled  with  blood,  and  exactly 
fitting  and  hiding  the  Tables  of  Law  beneath. 


VI. 


(i  SAMUEL  vii.  2.) 

"  Be  still  and  strong 
O  Man,  my  Brother  !  hold  thy  sobbing  breath 

And  keep  thy  soul's  large  window  pure  from  wrong  ! 
That  so,  as  life's  appointment  issueth, 

Thy  vision  may  be  clear  to  watch  along 
The  sunset  consummation  —  lights  of  death  !  " 

E.  B.  BROWNING. 

WHILST  the  events  described  in  the  last  chapter 
were  in  progress,  Samuel  was  giving  himself  to 
the  great  and  noble  work  of  reconstruction. 
As  soon  as  our  flesh  is  lacerated,  or  our  bones  broken,  Nature 
begins  to  pour  out  her  reparative  forces  to  renew  the  damaged 
tissues,  and  so  rebuild  the  ruined  temple.  As  it  is  in 
physical  life,  so  in  spiritual,  there  are  always  holy  and  gentle 
natures  that  are  charged  with  the  Divine  work  of  bridging 
over  the  roaring  torrent  of  revolution,  and  of  rearing  new 
continents  of  order  from  the  weltering  ocean  waste  by  which 
the  previous  land  had  been  engulfed.  Blessed  work,  indeed, 
is  this,  like  the  work  of  the  Almighty,  who,  when  the  earth 
was  without  form  and  void,  began  to  build  in  the  midst  of 
her  the  habitable  places  for  man's  existence. 

To  this  Samuel  devoted  the  twenty  years  that  followed 
directly  on  the  field  of  Aphek.  The  Philistine  invasion 
seems  to  have  somewhat  subsided  from  its  first  triumphant 
outburst,  and  to  have  retired  from  the  occupancy  of  the 
interior  portions  of  Israel.  He  was  thus  able  to  pursue  his 
quiet  and  unobtrusive  toils  for  his  fatherland,  free  from  the 
zealous  supervision  and  opposition  to  which,  otherwise,  he 
must  have  been  subjected. 


Rational  ®nit|r.  45 

He  seems  to  have  taken  up  his  abode  in  Ramah,  so 
intimately  associated  with  his  earliest  days.  Here  were  his 
headquarters,  where  young  men  gathered  to  him,  and  were 
formed  into  the  earliest  of  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  and 
where  also  he  married,  and  became  the  father  of  two  sons. 
Their  names  are  suggestive  of  their  father's  piety  and  walk 
with  God — the  name  of  the  one  being  Joel — "  Jehovah  is 
God,"  and  of  the  other  Abiah — "Jehovah  is  my  Father." 
Amid  the  general  disturbance  of  the  religious  life  in  which 
he  had  been  nurtured,  with  the  Ark  in  one  place  and  the 
remnants  of  the  Tabernacle  in  another,  with  the  discontinu 
ance  of  the  sacred  rites  and  feasts,  which  had  been  so  great 
an  assistance  to  piety  in  former  years,  Samuel  nevertheless 
was  able  to  walk  with  God,  and  to  preserve  a  devout 
religious  life.  Probably  this  is  why  God  permits  from  time 
to  time  so  great  a  shaking  of  the  things  that  are  made,  that 
the  things  which  cannot  be  shaken,  the  unseen  and  eternal, 
may  be  more  clearly  defined  and  more  eagerly  sought  unto. 
In  this  present  age  we  have  heard  Him  saying,  "  I  will 
overturn,  overturn,  overturn ; "  we  have  seen  theories  of 
inspiration  rudely  assailed;  churches  menaced  with  destruc 
tion;  ancient  creeds  ruthlessly  questioned;  but  out  of  it  all 
true  religion  is  destined  to  emerge  in  undiminished  lustre, 
as  gold  from  the  purifying  furnace.  In  the  meanwhile,  let 
us  say  with  Samuel,  Jehovah  is  God  and  Jehovah  is  my 
Father.  Let  us  hold  fast,  above  all,  to  the  unchanging  love 
of  our  Father,  who  loves  us  with  a  love  with  which  there  is 
nothing  to  compare  in  heaven  or  earth. 

Samuel  knew  that  there  were  two  objects  which  must  be 
realized  before  Israel's  sad  condition  could  be  remedied  or 
the  Divine  ideal  realized.  First :  The  national  unity  must 
be  recovered  from  the  anarchy  in  which  it  had  been  over 
whelmed.  It  was  useless  to  think  of  holding  the  land 
against  the  inroads  of  the  neighbouring  people  so  long  as 
each  tribe  was  content  with  an  isolated  existence,  repelling 


46  ®rje  (itork  of  llcranstnution. 

its  own  enemies  for  a  time,  but  indifferent  to  the  condition 
of  its  neighbours  and  of  the  country  at  large.  Israel  must 
be  one,  animated  by  a  common  enthusiasm  for  its  future 
independence  and  integrity.  Let  each  tribe  be  proud  of  its 
idiosyncrasy,  and  fulfil  its  own  distinctive  mission  ;  but  let 
all  be  one  in  asserting  the  independence  and  glory  of  the 
chosen  people. 

This  is  no  less  desirable  in  our  own  age.  The  divisions 
of  the  Church  are  her  bane,  and  render  her  impotent  before 
her  foes.  Ephraim  envies  Judah,  and  Judah  vexes  Ephraim ; 
and  their  common  enemies  make  profit  out  of  their  mutual 
recriminations  and  rivalries.  It  is  a  sad  spectacle  to  witness 
the  divisions  beween  Christians  in  the  face  of  a  mocking 
world,  and  we  shall  never  be  able  to  make  men  believe  till 
we  have  learned  to  magnify  the  points  of  agreement,  and  to 
bear  with  all  those  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  are  united 
with  Him  as  their  living  Head,  though  their  method  of 
stating  the  truth  may  differ  widely  from  our  own. 

Secondly  :  The  evils  that  had  eaten  into  the  nation's  heart 
must  be  put  away.  The  people  had  forsaken  the  God  of 
their  fathers  for  the  Phoenician  and  Philistine  deities,  whose 
images  were  worshipped  in  his  stead.  Shrines  to  Baal  and 
Ashtoreth  covered  the  land.  Foul  orgies  of  shameless 
impurity  were  everywhere  rife.  And  it  was  evident  that 
only  a  widespread  revival  of  religion  could  save  the  people 
from  rotting  away  before  the  very  evils  for  which  the  ancient 
Canaanites  had  been  destroyed. 

This  was  Samuel's  opportunity.  "And  Samuel  spake 
unto  all  the  .house  of  Israel,  saying,  If  ye  do  return  unto  the 
Lord  with  all  your  heart,  then  put  away  the  strange  gods 
and  the  Ashtaroth  from  among  you,  and  prepare  (or  direct) 
your  hearts  unto  the  Lord,  and  serve  Him  only."  Men 
cannot  live  permanently  without  God.  There  may  be  long 
periods  of  irreligious  carelessness,  of  unholiness,  and  sinful 
self-indulgence,  which  are  the  counterparts  of  the  Baalim 


of  prater.  47 


and  Ashtaroth  of  the  old  nature-worship  ;  but  there  will  be 
a  flow  where  there  has  been  an  ebb  ;  and  all  Israel  will 
presently  lament  after  God.  Let  the  sen-ant  of  God  be 
then  prepared  to  strike  in,  for  his  hour  has  come. 

Samuel  was  pre-eminently  a  man  of  prayer.  He  is  known 
on  the  subsequent  pages  of  Scripture,  as  he  that  called  on 
the  Divine  Name  (i  Sam.  ix.  6,  7,  S,  9;  Psa.  xcix.  6; 
Jer.  xv.  i).  In  addition,  he  was  a  man  of  blameless  repu 
tation  and  life  —  in  themselves  eminent  qualifications.  It 
has  been  truly  said  that  the  special  work  of  guiding, 
moderating,  and  softening  the  jarring  counsels  of  men  is 
the  particular  privilege  of  those  who  have  grown  up  into 
natural  strength  from  the  early  beginnings  of  purity  and 
goodness  ;  of  those  who  can  humbly  and  thankfully  look 
back  through  middle  age,  and  youth,  and  childhood,  with 
no  sudden  rent  or  breach  to  their  pure  and  peaceful 
recollections  —  and  such  was  certainly  Samuel's  happy  lot. 
He  was  also  a  man  of  practical  sagacity,  and  by  his  appeals 
wrought  upon  the  national  conscience  ;  so  that,  as  the 
result  of  his  efforts,  "  it  came  to  pass,  while  the  Ark  abode 
in  Kirjath-jearim,  that  the  time  was  long  ;  for  it  was  twenty 
years  :  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  lamented  after  the 
Lord." 

Notice  those  two  phrases  :  all  the  house  of  Israel  —  there 
is  the  restoration  of  the  lost  unity  ;  lamented  after  the  Lord 
—  there  is  the  national  repentance,  which  was  followed  by 
a  widespread  reformation  :  "  Then  the  children  of  Israel 
did  put  away  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth,  and  served  the  Lord 
only."  Would  that  there  might  be  a  similar  turning  unto 
God  in  our  time  and  land  !  "  Revive,  O  Lord,  thy  work  in 
the  midst  of  the  years.  In  the  midst  of  the  years  make 
known." 


VII. 

ftljt  &irt0rtJ  of 

(i  SAMUEL  vii.  1-14.) 

' '  Oh  bring  us  back  once  more 

The  vanished  days  of  yore, 

When  the  world  with  Faith  was  filled ! 

Bring  back  the  fervid  zeal, 

The  hearts  of  fire  and  steel, 

The  hands  that  believe  and  build." 

LONGFELLOW. 

ATER  twenty  years  of  quiet  and  unobtrusive  toil, 
Samuel  had  led  his  people  to  desire  both  to  feel 
and  manifest  the  old  unity,  which  had  made  them 
one  before  their  enemies,  and  there  was  a  distinct  yearning 
after  Jehovah.  The  sacred  writer  tells  us  that  all  the  house 
of  Israel  "  was  drawn  together  "  after  Jehovah  (verse  2,  R.V., 
tnarg.).  In  being  drawn  to  God  they  were  drawn  towards 
each  other,  as  the  spokes  of  a  wheel  centre  in  the  hub.  If 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  centre  of  our  heart-life,  we  must 
inevitably  be  drawn  into  friendship  with  all  those  to  whom 
He  is  also  first  and  best. 

In  verses  3  and  4  we  probably  have  the  substance  of 
innumerable  exhortations  which  Samuel  delivered  to  all  the 
house  of  Israel.  From  end  to  end  he  traversed  the  country, 
urging  the  people  to  return  to  Jehovah  ;  to  put  away  the 
false  gods  and  Ashtaroth,  to  direct  their  hearts  to  the  God 
of  their  fathers  and  serve  Him  only.  On  every  hand  idols 
were  cast  from  their  pedestals,  and  the  vicious  orgies  were 
brought  to  an  end  in  the  groves  and  valleys. 


31  gag  of  Confession.  49 

I.  THE  CONVOCATION  AT  MIZPEH. — The  movement  at 
last  demanded  a  public  demonstration,  and  Samuel  sum 
moned  all  Israel  to  Mizpeh. 

The  day  was  devoted  to  fasting,  as  the  law  enjoined  on 
the  great  Day  of  Atonement.  The  people  confessed  their 
sins,  afflicted  their  souls,  and  humbled  themselves  before 
Jehovah.  In  addition,  a  somewhat  novel  rite  was  intro 
duced.  Water  was  brought  from  a  neighbouring  well,  and 
solemnly  poured  out  before  the  Lord,  as  afterwards  at  the 
Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Whenever  that  great  festival  had 
nearly  run  its  course,  as  it  was  being  celebrated  in  the 
Temple,  it  was  the  custom  for  the  priests  to  go  forth  to  the 
Spring  of  Siloam,  accompanied  by  the  Levite  choir,  and 
bring  thence  water  in  a  golden  vessel ;  this  was  poured  out 
at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  at  the  hour  of  the  morning  sacrifice, 
while  all  around  the  white-vestured  choir  chanted  Isaiah's 
words,  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation."  Whether  this  scene  in  the  life  of  Samuel  was 
the  origin  of  that  solemn  procession,  it  is  impossible  to  say. 
Such  may  have  been  the  case,  though  it  is  generally  assumed 
that,  as  used  in  the  Temple  service,  the  pouring  out  of 
water  was  a  memorial  of  the  flowing  of  water  from  the 
smitten  rock  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  type  of  the  pouring 
out  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (John  vii.  37-39). 

The  pouring  forth  of  water  may  have  implied  that  they 
poured  forth  from  their  full  hearts  floods  of  penitence  and 
tears ;  that  they  desired  by  the  heaviness  of  their  grief  to 
wash  their  land  free  from  the  accumulated  evil  of  the  past 
years ;  or  that  the  people  realized  their  utter  helplessness, 
so  that  they  were  as  water  spilt  on  the  ground,  which 
could  not  be  gathered  up.  But  whatever  it  may  have 
signified,  it  must  have  been  a  very  striking  spectacle,  when 
Samuel,  as  the  representative  of  his  countrymen,  brought 
the  whole  nation  back  to  true  loyal  allegiance  to  the  God 
of  their  fathers.  It  was  a  worthy  act  for  his  manhood's 
G 


50  flfte  tfictorji  of 


prime,  and  we  are  not  surprised  to  learn  that,  as  by  a  sudden 
outburst  of  acclamation,  he  was  appointed  judge  (ver.  6). 

Oh,  who  shall  induce  the  professing  Church  of  God  to 
put  away  the  evil  things  by  which  her  testimony  is  now 
impaired  !  Sometimes  in  buildings  connected  with  the 
Church  we  hear  of  fancy-fairs,  raffles,  full-dress  soirees, 
dances,  theatricals,  comic  concerts,  and  many  other  such 
like  things,  which  indicate  the  corruption  of  the  spiritual 
life,  as  certainly  as  an  army  of  fungi  indicate  the  damp  and 
unwholesome  atmosphere  in  which  they  thrive.  What 
would  not  be  the  blessed  result  if  the  children  of  God 
would  come  to  another  Mizpeh  and  confess,  as  Israel  did, 
"  We  have  sinned  against  the  Lord  "  ! 

II.  THE  VICTORY  OF  FAITH.  —  The  tidings  of  this  great 
convocation  reached  the  Philistines,  who  looked  upon  it  as 
an  unmistakable  sign  of  the  returning  spirit  of  national 
life,  and  "  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  went  up  against 
Israel"  (ver.  7).  From  every  part  the  contingents  of  a 
great  army  were  assembled,  and  there  was  every  reason  to 
fear  that  the  terrible  experiences  of  Aphek  would  be 
renewed.  A  panic  of  fear  spread  through  the  multitudes 
of  Israel.  There  appeared  but  one  hope  :  God  must  arise 
to  his  people's  help,  or  they  would  be  trampled  beneath  the 
heel  of  the  conqueror.  What  could  timid  sheep  do  against 
wolves  ?  What  could  unarmed  peasants  do  against  such 
soldiers  ?  How  could  the  national  life,  which  was  just  reviv 
ing,  after  the  discouragement  and  anarchy  of  years,  with 
stand  the  onset  of  these  bitter  foes  ?  "  Cease  not  to  cry 
unto  the  Lord  our  God  for  us,"  the  people  said  to  Samuel, 
"  that  He  will  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines." 

Ah,  soul  !  this  is  the  only  hope  for  thee.  Thou  hast  been 
ground  down  beneath  tyrant  sins,  which  have  held  thee  in 
subjection  as  the  Philistines  did  Israel  ;  thou  hast  groaned 
in  the  prison-house,  like  another  Samson  shorn  of  his  locks. 


^Joiner  of  |Jraijer.  51 

There  seems  no  help  or  hope  of  deliverance,  because  thy 
moral  life  is  impaired  by  the  permission  of  evils  analogous 
to  those  which  infected  the  Hebrew  nation  in  the  days 
of  the  Judges.  Only  put  these  away,  and  stand  clear  of 
them  ;  in  the  name  of  God  pour  out  all  your  self-confidence 
before  the  Cross  where  Jesus  died ;  receive  the  forgiveness 
which  is  never  withheld  from  the  penitent  and  believing 
soul ;  and  then,  however  many  be  the  obstacles,  tempta 
tions,  and  sins  that  beset  thee,  know  that  the  Lord  will  save 
thee  out  of  the  hand  of  thine  enemies. 

If  only  the  tempted  and  overwhelmed  would  bathe  their 
souls  in  the  purifying  waters  of  the  Word  of  God,  and 
cultivate  the  spirit  of  unwavering  prayer  and  faith,  the  Lord 
would  fight  for  them,  and  they  might  hold  their  peace. 

The  power  of  Samuel's  prayers  was  already  known 
throughout  the  land,  like  those  of  John  Knox  in  the  days  of 
Queen  Mary.  The  people  had  come  to  believe  in  them  ; 
they  felt  them  to  be  the  palladium  of  their  liberties.  If 
only  Samuel  would  pray,  they  might  count  on  deliverance. 
They  knew  that  he  had  prayed ;  they  now  entreated  that  he 
would  not  cease. 

But  Samuel  did  more  than  pray.  He  took  a  sucking 
lamb,  and  offered  it  as  a  whole  burnt-offering  to  the  Lord, 
symbolizing  thus  the  desire  of  Israel  to  be  wholly  yielded 
to  the  Divine  will.  There  must  be  consecration  before 
there  can  be  faith  and  deliverance.  It  is  not  enough  simply 
to  put  away  sin  ;  we  must  also  give  ourselves  absolutely  and 
entirely  to  God.  There  must  be  a  wholeness  in  the  offering, 
the  yielding  ourselves — spirit,  soul,  and  body — to  be  what 
ever  God  would  have  us  be.  Failure  in  the  walk  always 
denotes  failure  in  the  heart-life.  If  you  are  perpetually 
overcome  by  the  Philistines,  be  sure  that  there  is  a  flaw  in 
your  inner  consecration. 

While  the  smoke  of  this  offering  was  rising  in  the  calm 


52  ®IjE  Uictorg  of 

air,  and  the  eyes  of  tens  of  thousands  were  fixed  upon  the 
figure  of  Samuel,  who,  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  was  within 
his  rights  in  superseding  the  Levitical  priests  in  this  solemn 
function ;  and  while  his  piercing  cries  for  Divine  help  were 
rising  to  heaven,  the  Philistines  drew  near  to  battle  against 
Israel.  Can  you  not  see  them  creeping  up  the  mountain 
slopes,  and  encircling  the  defenceless  crowd  which  had  no 
might  nor  power  to  resist  ?  But  suddenly  the  voice  of  God 
answered  the  voice  of  the  prophet.  "  The  Lord  thundered 
with  a  great  thunder  (Hebrew,  the  voice  of  God)  on  that  day 
upon  the  Philistines,  and  discomfited  them."  The  sky  was 
suddenly  black  with  tempest,  peal  after  peal  rolled  through 
the  mountains.  Then  at  a  signal  from  Samuel,  the  men 
of  Israel  flung  themselves  upon  the  flying  foe.  Down  the 
steep  they  sped,  catching  up  the  arms  which  were  cast  away 
in  flight,  and  stripping  the  dead  of  their  weapons.  Josephus 
tells  of  another  circumstance  that  added  to  the  horrors  of 
that  irresistible  onslaught.  "  God  destroyed  their  ranks 
with  an  earthquake ;  the  ground  trembled  under  their  feet, 
so  that  there  was  no  place  whereon  to  stand  in  safety.  They 
either  fell  helpless  to  the  earth,  or  into  some  of  the  chasms 
that  opened  beneath  them." 

The  pursuit  only  stayed  when  the  Philistines  came 
beneath  the  shadow  of  their  own  fortress  of  Bethcar,  the 
Well  of  the  Vineyards,  as  it  is  now  called. 

This  is  the  great  message  of  the  whole  story  for  us.  If 
only  the  Church  of  God  would  put  away  the  evils  that 
grieve  his  Holy  Spirit,  if  only  we  would  ourselves  come 
out  and  be  separate,  not  touching  the  unclean  thing,  and 
cleansing  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh,  the  Spirit 
would  interpose  for  us  too.  The  Lord  would  deliver  us, 
fighting  on  our  behalf  against  our  foes,  so  that  we  should  be 
more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loveth  us,  and 
have  to  do  nothing  more  than  take  the  spoil. 


VIII. 

Stonw  of  l^lp. 

(i  SAMUEL  vii.  12.) 

"  And  in  the  strength  of  this  I  rode, 
Shattering  all  evil  customs  everywhere, 
And  past  through  Pagan  realms,  and  made  them  mine ; 
And  clash'd  with  Pagan  hordes,  and  bore  them  down  ; 
And  broke  through  all ;  and  in  the  strength  of  this 
Came  victor." 

TENNYSON. 

"  r  ¥  ^HEN    Samuel   took  a  stone,  and  set  it   between 

Mizpeh  and  Shen,  and  called  it  Eben-ezer  (the 

stone  of  help)  saying,  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord 

helped  us."     This  was  the  same  spot  upon  which  Israel 

had  suffered  the  great  defeat  which  led  to  the  capture  of 

the  Ark  (iv.  i).     How  wonderful  this  was,  that  the  story 

of  the  victory  should  be  told  upon  the  plain  which  had  been 

the  scene  of  defeat ! 

From  that  moment  Samuel's  supremacy  in  the  country 
was  established.  The  Philistines  came  no  more  during 
his  judgeship  within  the  border  of  Israel.  The  hand  of  the 
Lord  was  against  the  Philistines  all  his  days.  The  alienated 
cities  which  the  Philistines  had  taken  from  Israel  were 
restored  to  Israel,  from  Ekron  even  unto  Gath.  The  very 
Amorites,  who  had  taken  part  with  the  Canaanites,  found  it 
to  their  advantage  to  side  with  Samuel  and  abstain  from 
hostilities  (verse  14).  As  Dean  Spence,  in  "  Ellicott's  Com 
mentary,"  says  :  "  This  success  at  Eben-ezer  was  no  mere 
solitary  victory,  but  was  the  sign  of  a  new  spirit  in  Israel, 
which  animated  the  nation  during  the  lifetime  of  Samuel, 
and  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon  and  of  the  great 
Hebrew  kings.  The  petty  jealousies  had  disappeared  and 


54  ®bc  JStottt  of  Help. 

had  given  place  to  a  great  national  desire  for  unity.  The 
old  idol-worship  of  Canaan,  which  degraded  every  nation 
ality  which  practised  it,  was  in  a  great  measure  swept  away 
from  among  the  chosen  people,  while  the  pure  religion  of 
the  Lord  of  Hosts  was  established,  not  only  through  the 
care  and  guardianship  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  but  by  the  new 
order  of  the  prophets." 

What  cannot  prayer  do  ?  It  can  not  only  open  and  close 
heaven,  but  will  give  the  soul  that  prays  an  undisputed 
supremacy  over  his  times,  so  that  men  will  acknowledge 
that  the  saviour  of  the  city  is  not  so  much  the  politician, 
the  man  of  intellect,  or  the  man  of  affairs,  but  he  who  has 
learned  how  to  walk  with  God,  and  by  his  character  and 
intercession  to  be  the  palladium  of  the  national  liberties 
and  existence. 

There  are  many  such  monoliths  as  the  "  Stone  of  Help," 
to  be  found  strewn  through  these  northern  lands,  from  such 
venerable  circles  as  those  of  Stonehenge,  to  the  single  ones 
which  are  pointed  out  to  the  traveller  in  Northern  Wales — 
the  last  home  of  the  Druids  and  ancient  Britons. 

Throughout  the  world,  man  has  endeavoured  to  associate 
himself,  and  the  history  of  his  life,  with  the  permanent 
monuments  of  nature.  In  this  he  has  approved  alike  his 
littleness  and  his  greatness — his  littleness,  because  every 
such  endeavour  is  a  confession  on  his  part  of  the  transience 
of  his  days,  and  his  consciousness  that  he  has  so  slight  a 
hold  on  the  earth,  on  which  he  is  but  a  sojourner  and  a 
pilgrim  ;  his  greatness,  because  he  is  capable  of  investing 
with  a  halo  of  undying  interest  wild  glens  and  barren  rocks, 
darksome  caves  and  deep,  rushing  rivers.  It  is  for  this 
reason  that  every  spot  in  the  older  countries  of  the  world 
teems  with  interest.  It  is  with  difficulty  that  the  tourist 
can  make  his  way  through  England  or  Scotland,  Germany 
or  Italy;  whereas  he  will  haste,  without  hesitation  or  halting, 
through  thousands  of  miles  of  Canada  or  the  Western 


Ifessons  of  (Bnraurarjemcnt.  55 

States.  How  different,  for  instance,  is  the  interest  of 
travelling  through  the  New  England  States  to  travelling 
through  Dakota  and  Wisconsin.  Each  square  mile  of  the 
one  is  fragrant  with  some  interesting  reminiscence  of  the 
past,  whilst  the  other  only  recalls  a  vanished  race. 

At  the  foot  of  this  stone  let  us  linger  for  a  little,  to  learn 
one  or  two  lessons  more.  For  stones  have  ears  and  voices. 
Joshua  said  that  the  stone  which  he  reared,  at  the  end  of 
his  life-work,  had  heard ;  and  our  Lord  said  that  the  stones 
around  Him  might  be  expected  to  cry  out  (Joshua  xxiv.  27  ; 
Luke  xix.  40). 

I.  ITS  SITE. — It  stood  on  ground  which  had  witnessed 
a  terrible  defeat  and  disaster.  We  are  told,  in  the  fourth 
chapter,  that  the  great  battle  of  Aphek  was  fought  on  this 
spot.  "  Israel  went  out  against  the  Philistines  to  battle, 
and  pitched  beside  Eben-ezer,  and  the  Philistines  pitched 
in  Aphek."  "  Now  the  Philistines  had  taken  the  Ark  of 
God,  and  they  brought  it  from  Eben-ezer  unto  Ashdod" 
(iv.  i  ;  v.  i). 

Many  who  gathered  around  Samuel,  when  he  raised  and 
named  this  stone,  must  have  been  present  twenty  years 
before  on  that  fatal  field,  the  Flodden  of  Israel's  glory. 
Here  the  fight  had  been  fiercest,  the  slain  thickest ;  there 
the  corpses  of  Hebrews  and  Philistines  had  fallen  like 
leaves  in  Vallombrosa,  trampled  beneath  the  feet  of  the 
combatants  ;  yonder  the  fight  had  raged  around  the  Ark  of 
God,  as  it  was  taken  and  re-taken,  and  taken  again.  At  this 
point,  desperate  deeds  of  valour  had  been  done  to  turn  back 
Israel  from  a  shameful  flight,  but  in  vain.  There  Hophni 
fell,  and  there  Phinehas.  In  this  place  a  brief  stand  was 
made,  but  again  the  ill-formed  line  was  broken,  and  the 
children  of  a  chosen  race,  whose  forefathers  turned  not 
back  in  the  day  of  Gideon  and  Jephthah,  fled  like  sheep 
before  the  wolf. 


56  ®Ije  j$t0ttE  of 

But,  notwithstanding  all  this,  and  though  the  spot  was 
associated  with  the  memories  of  disgrace  and  shame,  which, 
in  turn,  were  the  result  of  deep  transgression  on  the  part 
of  people  and  priesthood,  yet  there  was  the  stone  erected 
which  spoke  so  eloquently  of  the  Divine  help. 

What  living  encouragement  is  contained  in  this  for  us 
all  !  We,  too,  may  be  traversing  at  this  very  hour  battle 
fields  which  have  been  sadly  marked  by  defeat.  Again  and 
again  we  have  met  the  foes  of  our  peace  in  mortal  conflict, 
only  to  be  repulsed.  Our  hopes  have  been  dashed  to  the 
ground  and  our  banners  rolled  in  dust  and  blood.  We 
meant  never  to  yield  again,  but  we  did  yield.  We  meant 
that  that  solemn  vow  should  be  kept,  that  holy  resolution 
carried  into  effect ;  but  they  were  shivered  in  pieces.  We 
have  been  overthrown  by  our  adversary,  and  overpowered, 
in  spite  of  all  our  efforts,  by  our  besetting  sin.  Yet  take 
heart.  At  the  very  place  where  you  have  fallen  you  shall 
stand,  for  "  God  is  able  to  make  you  stand";  where  you  have 
been  overthrown  you  shall  be  more  than  a  conqueror.  You 
shall  tread  those  very  fields  with  songs  of  joy.  The  rocks 
which  saw  the  withered  leaves  of  autumn  swirl  in  eddies 
around  you  shall  behold  the  young  green  of  spring  and  the 
mature  fulness  of  summer.  Be  of  good  cheer  !  The  stone 
of  Eben-ezer  shall  be  raised  on  the  very  field  of  the  fatal 
battle  of  Aphek. 

II.  ITS  RETROSPECT. — What  a  story  this  stone  had  to 
tell,  if  all  were  unfolded,  of  the  wonderful  dealings  of  God 
with  his  people.  It  looked  back  on  the  twenty  years  of 
patient  work,  by  which  the  prophet  Samuel  had  been  lead 
ing  the  people  homeward  to  the  God  of  their  fathers — 
quiet,  unobtrusive,  and  unseen  work,  like  that  of  the  coral 
insects  from  the  bottom  of  the  mighty  ocean,  till  presently 
the  islet  emerges  with  its  crown  of  fronded  palms. 

It   looked    back    on    many   a  scene   of  iconoclasm   as, 


foohttuj  gfuh.  57 


from  Dan  to  Beersheba,  there  had  been  a  general  putting 
away  of  the  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth,  the  cutting  down  of 
groves  and  overthrow  of  altars.  It  looked  back  on  that 
memorable  convocation  of  all  Israel  at  Mizpeh,  when  water 
was  poured  out  before  the  Lord  in  confession  of  sin  and 
humble  penitence. 

It  looked  back  specially,  to  the  offering  of  the  burnt- 
offering,  which  declared  Israel's  resolve  to  be  henceforth 
wholly  devoted  to  God,  and  to  Samuel's  piercing  cry  of 
intercession.  Above  all,  it  looked  back  on  that  memorable 
moment,  when,  as  the  Philistines  drew  near  to  battle  against 
Israel,  "  the  Lord  thundered  with  a  great  thunder  upon  the 
Philistines,  and  discomfited  them,  and  they  were  smitten 
down  before  Israel."  If  that  stone  had  engraved  slabs  of 
memory  within  its  old  heart,  as  well  as  eyes  and  ears,  it 
surely  never  would  forget  the  mad  onslaught  of  the  men  of 
Israel  on  their  fleeing  and  panic-stricken  foes,  to  avenge  in 
one  brief  hour  the  wrongs  and  oppressions  of  twenty  long 
years. 

Has  anything  like  this  taken  place  in  your  life  ?  On  your 
answer  much  will  depend.  If  since  your  last  failure  and 
defeat  there  have  been  no  acts  of  the  soul,  like  those  which 
took  place  at  Mizpeh,  believe  me,  there  is  no  probability  of 
there  being  any  break  in  the  long  monotony  of  your  reverses. 
As  you  have  been  defeated,  so  you  will  be  defeated  ;  as  you 
have  failed,  so  you  will  fail  ;  unless  there  is  the  pouring  out 
of  your  heart  before  God,  the  putting  away  of  idols,  and  the 
resolve  to  follow  Him  fully. 

If  I  may  be  permitted  to  quote  my  own  experience,  I 
must  bear  witness  to  the  incessant  failure  of  my  life,  so  long 
as  I  cherished  things  in  my  heart  which  were  alien  to  God's 
holy  will.  Rules  for  holy  living,  solemn  and  heart-stirring 
conventions,  helpful  books  and  addresses,  produced  but  very 
small  result.  There  was  temporary  amendment,  but  little 

else.     But  when  the  scene  at  Mizpeh  had  been  reflected  in 
H 


58  ®rje  %tam  at  Help. 

the  inner  mirror  of  the  soul,  then  victory  took  place  on  the 
very  spot  marked  by  defeat.  Let  my  reader  ponder  this. 
You  cannot  keep  the  moth  out  of  your  house,  so  long  as 
one  old  blanket,  stored  in  some  neglected  cupboard  or  box, 
is  full  of  it.  You  cannot  keep  diphtheria  from  your  home, 
so  long  as  one  crack  in  the  drains  is  emitting  the  poison  of 
sewer-gas.  You  will  never  raise  your  stone  of  Eben-ezer 
until  you  have  stood  on  the  watch-tower  of  Mizpeh  and  put 
away  all  known  sin,  all  complicity  with  what  is  grievous  in 
the  eyes  of  Christ.  Only  so  will  even  his  keeping  power 
avail. 

You  say  that  you  cannot.  The  evil  thing  clings  to  you 
as  the  serpent  folds  around  Laocoon  and  his  sons.  The 
deadly  creeper  has  wound  itself  around  the  tree  of  your 
life,  and  threatens  to  crush  it  to  death  in  its  deadly  embrace. 
How  can  you  rid  yourself  of  that  which  has  so  strong  a 
fascination  that  you  feel  you  cannot  live  apart  from  it  ? 
Ah,  that  is  the  point  where  the  Great  Physician  is  willing 
to  interpose  for  your  rescue  and  deliverance  !  What  you 
cannot  do  for  yourself,  He  will  do.  The  only  question  is, 
Are  you  willing  ?  or,  Are  you  willing  to  be  made  willing  ? 
Often  enough  in  the  history  of  the  soul  it  happens  that  the 
will,  like  a  tough  piece  of  iron,  resists  and  resents.  Then 
there  is  one  glad  resource — take  it  to  Christ,  tell  Him  that 
you  cannot  be  as  you  would,  or  that  you  will  not  be  as  you 
should,  and  pray  Him  to  undertake  your  difficult  and 
almost  desperate  case. 

Do  not  doubt  the  result.  He  takes  what  we  give  at  the 
moment  of  our  giving  it ;  and  when  once  He  has  taken  it, 
we  may  press  to  our  heart  the  consolation  which  the  good 
Naomi  gave  to  Ruth  in  a  memorable  moment  of  her  life  : 
"Sit  still,  my  daughter;  ...  for  the  man  will  not  rest  until 
he  have  finished  the  thing  this  day." 

III.  ITS  INSCRIPTION. — "  Hitherto  hath  the  Lord  helped 


Our  (Bbcn-c^crs.  59 

us."  Surely  if  the  stone  had  a  retrospect,  as  we  have  seen, 
it  had  also  a  prospect.  It  looked  forward  as  well  as  back 
ward.  It  seemed  to  say,  As  God  has  helped,  so  He  will 
help.  It  would  have  been  impossible  to  secure  such  results 
as  those  twenty  years  had  witnessed,  culminating  in  this 
glorious  victory,  unless  He  had  been  a  very  present  help; 
and  could  He  have  done  so  much  without  being  prepared 
to  finish  what  He  had  commenced?  Would  he  have  begun 
to  build  without  calculating  on  his  ability  to  finish  ?  Would 
He  have  entered  on  a  campaign  without  counting  the  cost 
of  carrying  it  to  a  conclusion  ? 

As  we  go  through  life,  let  us  be  careful  to  erect  our 
Eben-ezer  stones,  so  that  when  new  responsibilities  begin 
to  crowd  on  us,  or  fresh  and  unforeseen  difficulties  threaten, 
we  may  be  emboldened  to  sing  with  Newton  : — 

His  love  in  time  past  forbids  me  to  think 

He'll  leave  me  at  last  in  trouble  to  sink  ; 

Each  sweet  Eben-czer  I  have  in  review 

Confirms  his  good  pleasure  to  help  me  quite  through. 

All  through  life,  if  you  will  only  trust  God,  if  only  by 
faith  you  will  derive  from  Him  grace  for  grace,  if  only  you 
will  claim  a  continuance  and  a  crowning  of  all  that  He  has 
begun — you  will  have  occasions  to  raise  these  stones  of  help 
and  to  say  with  the  Apostle,  "  Having,  therefore,  obtained 
the  help  that  is  from  God,  I  stand  unto  this  day,  testifying 
both  to  small  and  great."  The  last  stone  that  we  shall 
erect  will  be  on  the  margin  of  the  river.  As  we  turn  our 
back  for  ever  on  the  land  of  our  pilgrimage,  and  enter  on 
the  work  and  worship  of  eternity,  we  shall  set  up  a  great 
stone  to  the  glory  of  our  God,  saying  once  more,  with  a 
deep  sigh  of  perfected  satisfaction,  "  Hitherto  hath  the 
Lord  helped." 


IX. 

&  (teat  Disapp0inttmttt 

(i  SAMUEL  vii.,  viii. ) 

' '  They  who  have  steeped  their  souls  in  Prayer 

Can  every  anguish  calmly  bear  ; 
They  who  have  learnt  to  pray  aright 

From  pain's  dark  well  draw  up  delight." 

HOUGHTON. 

THE  supreme  test  of  character  is  disappointment  and 
apparent  failure.  When  the  flowing  stream  is  with 
us,  and  our  plans  are  ripening  into  fruition,  it  is 
easy  enough  to  be  at  our  best.  But  what  we  really  are  does 
not  appear  under  such  conditions.  Let  the  tide  turn 
against  us;  let  men  avert  their  faces  and  refuse  our  counsels; 
let  us  be  driven  to  stand  on  the  defence  against  a  world  in 
arms — then  our  true  metal  is  approved.  We  are  now  to  see 
how  Samuel  bore  himself  in  the  face  of  a  keen  disappoint 
ment.  This  at  least  may  be  said  of  him,  as  of  old  it  was 
said  of  Job,  that  he  still  held  fast  his  integrity. 

I.  How  THE  DISAPPOINTMENT  BEFEL. — During  the 
years  that  followed  the  glorious  victory  of  Aphek,  Samuel 
set  himself  to  build  up  in  the  hearts  of  his  fellow-country 
men  something  of  that  profound  belief  in  the  Reign 
of  the  Divine  King,  which  we  know  as  the  Theocracy,  and 
which  was  so  dear  to  all  devout  Hebrews. 

His  headquarters  and  home  were  at  Ramah,  the  scene  of 
his  happy  childhood's  years.  Thence  he  went  on  itinerating 
journeys,  and  wherever  he  came,  Samuel  strove  to  act  only  as 
the  representative  and  agent  of  the  Divine  King.  Who  was 
he  but  the  messenger  and  minister  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  ? 


JVn  Inspiring  Conception.  61 

With  all  the  force  of  his  character  and  eloquence  of  his 
speech  he  insisted  that  the  people  were  the  subjects  of 
Jehovah,  owing  allegiance  to  Him  alone,  and  receiving  from 
Him  direction  in  times  of  perplexity,  and  deliverance  in  days 
of  battle.  They  needed  no  king — Jehovah  was  King ;  no 
officials,  but  those  who  uttered  His  messages ;  no  code  of 
laws,  but  those  that  emanated  from  Him.  It  was  a  beauti 
ful  and  inspiring  conception ;  and  as  he  went  to  and  fro 
throughout  the  land  of  Israel,  still  upon  his  lips,  like  a 
musical  refrain,  the  words  were  constantly  being  breathed, 
"  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth." 

The  same  object  was  in  his  mind  as  he  instituted  the  schools 
of  the  prophets.  To  Samuel's  wise  interpretation  of  his 
times  we  must  attribute  the  institution  of  these  seats  of 
learning.  The  priesthood  had  forfeited  its  right  to  stand 
between  Jehovah  and  his  people.  Eli  and  his  sons  had 
failed  too  abjectly  and  entirely  to  realize  the  purpose  for 
which  their  office  was  instituted,  to  encourage  the  hope  of 
the  resuscitation  of  the  priestly  order.  It  was  clear  that 
some  other  religious  body  must  be  called  into  existence. 
The  times  demanded  an  order  of  men,  who  should  be 
trained  in  the  law  of  God,  who  should  be  fitted  to  interpret 
the  holy  oracles  to  the  people,  and  from  the  midst  of  whom 
men  should  arise  from  time  to  time  to  tell  in  the  light  what 
they  had  heard  in  the  darkness,  to  proclaim  on  the  house 
tops  what  God  had  whispered  to  their  ears  in  secret.  We 
find  these  schools  flourishing  in  the  days  of  Elijah  and 
Elisha — some  apparently  on  the  same  sites,  where  they  had 
been  instituted  by  Samuel  (x.  3-5  ;  xix.  23,  24;  2  Kings  ii.). 

As  Samuel  laboriously  built  up  these  institutions,  he  had 
but  one  purpose  in  his  heart.  It  was  his  eager  desire  to 
imbue  the  minds  of  his  countrymen  with  his  own  sublime 
conceptions  of  the  Divine  Kingship  ;  and  how  would  he  do 
it  better  than  by  these  young  and  ardent  disciples  ?  And 
it  must  have  been  a  constant  inspiration  to  them  to  live  in 


62  JC  (great  §  is  appointment. 

contact  with  this  great  and  illustrious  man,  who  was  states 
man  and  saint  in  one,  whom  they  revered  for  the  loftiness 
of  his  character,  whilst  they  felt  the  inspiration  of  his  high 
ideals.  They  saw  how  respected  he  was  in  his  own  city  by 
young  and  old  (ix.  12,  13);  how  accessible  he  was  to  all 
who  needed  his  assistance  (ver.  9) ;  how  mightily  he  wrestled 
and  prevailed  in  prayer  (vii.  17  ;  viii.  10,  21,  22)  ;  and  they 
counted  it  their  highest  honour  to  be  associated  with  him. 

But  the  faihtre  to  realize  his  high  purpose  seems  to  have 
befallen,  through  the  failure  of  his  sons.  As  Samuel  became 
old,  he  was  less  able  to  administer  justice,  and  continue  to 
act  as  the  adviser  of  his  people  in  their  national  and 
domestic  affairs.  The  burden  of  administering  the  govern 
ment,  in  the  name  of  the  unseen  King,  became  too  heavy 
for  him,  and  he  appointed  his  sons  to  assist  him  on 
the  extreme  frontiers  of  the  South  country.  The  experi 
ment  proved,  however,  to  be  a  disastrous  failure.  They 
"  walked  not  in  his  ways,  but  turned  aside  after  lucre,  and 
took  bribes,  and  perverted  judgment." 

This  precipitated  the  catastrophe  ;  and  "all  the  elders  of 
Israel,"  who  evidently  formed  a  kind  of  representative  and 
popular  assembly,  came  to  Samuel  at  Ramah,  to  urge  that 
he  should  make  more  satisfactory  and  permanent  arrange 
ments  for  the  perpetuation  of  his  authority.  They  said 
"Behold,  thou  art  old,  and  thy  sons  walk  not  in  thy  ways  ; 
now  make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  nations." 

Looked  at  from  the  human  standpoint,  there  was 
much  to  warrant  the  request.  The  Philistines  were  pushing 
their  outposts  into  the  heart  of  the  country  (xiii.  3,  5)  ; 
Nahash  the  Ammonite  was  a  dangerous  neighbour  on  the 
Eastern  frontier  (xi.  i) ;  there  was  fear  that  disintegration 
might  again  separate  the  people  on  Samuel's  death.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  request  shattered  the  prophet's  hopes. 
It  showed  him  that  his  ideal  was  too  lofty  and  spiritual  for 
the  people  to  appreciate  and  maintain.  They  could  not 


Stttiirersal  failure.  63 

believe  only  in  the  invisible ;  they  must  have  the  outward 
symbols  and  splendour  of  royalty. 

This  is  the  universal  failure  of  the  heart  of  man.  It  is 
always  craving  for  the  sensuous  and  visible.  Like  the 
children  of  Israel,  with  their  cry,  "  Make  us  gods  which 
may  go  before  us,"  men  demand  something  which  they  may 
see  and  handle,  and  before  which  they  may  prostrate  them 
selves.  Hence  all  spiritual  worship  shows  a  tendency  to 
become  materialistic.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  God  is  a 
Spirit,  and  that  He  must  be  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in 
truth ;  it  is  easier  to  enter  into  the  debate,  whether  "in  this 
mountain  or  in  Jerusalem  men  ought  to  worship." 

This  chapter  was  written  in  a  country  where  this  fact  is 
strikingly  illustrated.  Its  national  Church  was  the  earliest 
product  of  Apostolic  days — the  Church  of  Athanasius,  Cyril, 
and  Chrysostom.  From  its  earliest  days  it  recited  the 
prayers  and  read  the  Scriptures  in  the  tongue  of  the  people; 
eschewed  images,  and  insisted  on  spiritual  worship.  Yet 
its  churches  are  full  of  the  pictures  of  the  saints,  before 
which  women  burn  candles  and  men  cross  themselves;  the 
Holy  of  Holies  is  shut  off  from  the  common  foot  by  golden 
gates ;  the  deep  bass  of  the  reader  mingles  with  the  exquisite 
voices  of  boys  in  rendering  the  service  in  an  almost  unknown 
tongue — everything  that  can  appeal  to  the  sense  is  called 
into  requisition.  Apparently  the  people  love  to  have  it  so, 
for  they  stand  in  dense  crowds  on  the  spacious  pavements, 
following  each  invocation  of  the  Divine  Name  with  profuse 
genuflections  and  obeisance.  As  I  turned  from  these  ornate 
and  splendid  symbols  to  other  gatherings  of  God's  people, 
in  which  the  eye  has  nothing  to  allure,  or  the  ear  to  attract; 
where  the  thought  is  centred  on  God,  and  the  only 
splendour  is  in  those  great  conceptions  that  elevate  and 
ennoble — I  did  not  wonder  that  the  nature  of  the  ordinary 
man  rebels  and  cries  out  for  something  more  suited  to  the 
common  levels  of  daily  experience. 


64  Q,  (§r*at  g  is  appointment. 

To  combat  desires  like  these,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
was  written,  that  our  minds  and  hearts  might  thither  ascend, 
and  there  continually  dwell,  where  the  Lord  has  gone 
before  us.  For  us,  not  a  mount  that  can  be  touched,  but  a 
mount  not  less  certainly— Mount  Zion  ;  not  a  city,  whose 
minarets  and  monuments  catch  the  rays  of  the  rising  and 
setting  sun,  but  a  city  as  surely,  whose  streets  we  may 
walk  each  day — the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  not  the  festal 
crowds  of  worshippers  that  jostled  each  other  in  their  climb 
to  the  Temple  of  Solomon,  but  fellow-worshippers  equally 
real  and  numerous — the  hosts  of  angels,  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect,  the  Church  of  the  firstborn,  with  whom 
we  come  into  contact  at  each  hour  of  prayer. 

II.  How  SAMUEL  BORE  HIS  DISAPPOINTMENT. — "  The 
thing  displeased  Samuel  when  they  said,  Give  us  a  king  to 
judge  us."  It  was  not  so  much  that  they  had  rejected  him 
self,  but  that  they  had  rejected  God — that  He  should  not 
be  King  over  them.  They  had  failed  to  grasp  the  great 
conception,  and  had  fallen  to  the  level  of  the  nations 
around.  The  one  hope  that  had  arisen  in  his  soul,  nur 
tured  by  the  dew  and  sun  of  every  summer,  was  frustrated ; 
and  it  was  clear  that  there  could  never  be  the  realization 
of  his  cherished  dream,  since  it  was  impossible  to  imagine 
circumstances  more  favourable  for  giving  it  effect.  If  it  failed 
in  Israel  it  would  fail  entirely — unless,  indeed,  the  Divine 
Kingdom  could  be  set  up,  which  would  never  pass  away. 

Under  these  bitter  circumstances,  he  made  for  the  one 
Harbour  of  Refuge — the  one  assured  safeguard  for  all 
broken  hearts  and  wrecked  lives,  for  all  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden  :  "  Samuel  prayed  unto  the  Lord." 

By  how  many  disappointed  ones  these  words  may  be 
read  !  Women  whose  young  hearts  were  filled  on  their 
marriage-day  with  high  and  buoyant  hope,  as  they  dreamed 
of  an  ideal  life  of  love  and  blessedness,  but  who  are  mourning 


gttrine  J$gtnpatljtT.  65 


over  the  withered  vows,  the  broken  promises,  the  irrecover 
able  sense  of  trust  and  peace  !  Men  that  meant  to  effect 
such  great  things  by  their  lives,  to  succeed  in  business,  to 
lead  society,  to  mould  and  fashion  the  State  !  Ministers 
who,  on  the  threshold  of  their  sacred  calling,  saw  visions 
of  consecration,  tenderness,  shepherd-care,  and  paternal 
solicitude,  which  have  vanished,  as  the  pictures  of  foliage 
reflected  in  deep  lakes  when  a  breath  of  wind  stirs  the  sur 
face  of  the  water!  What  are  such  to  do?  Whither  can 
they  go  ?  What  resort  is  there  for  broken  hearts  ? 

There  is  no  answer  to  these  questions  but  that  suggested 
by  Samuel's  action,  when  he  prayed  unto  the  Lord.  Go 
to  Him,  and  tell  everything.  Weep  your  tears  out  at  his 
feet.  He  can  understand,  can  sympathize,  can  bind  and 
heal.  There  is  Balm  in  Gilead;  there  is  a  Physician  there. 
There  is  help  for  the  helpless,  and  comfort  for  the  comfort 
less.  To  tell  God  everything  is  to  be  far  along  the  road  to 
peace  ;  and  where  you  cannot  tell,  where  the  sobs  choke 
the  utterance,  there  the  Father  seeth,  knoweth,  and  com- 
forteth.  Through  his  love  you  may  be  as  one  whom  his 
mother  comforteth. 

Then  the  Lord  answered  his  servant.  He  always  does, 
and  will,  answer.  The  voice  may  be  so  soft  and  low  as  to 
be  almost  inaudible  ;  but  it  will  be  there.  The  words  may 
not  quite  chime  in  with  our  notions  at  first.  Unlike  the 
prophet's  roll,  they  may  be  bitter  in  the  mouth,  but  they 
will  be  sweet  to  the  heart.  "  Be  careful  for  nothing,  but 
in  everthing  by  prayer  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving, 
let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God  ;  and  the  peace 
of  God  that  passeth  all  understanding  shall  guard  your 
hearts  and  your  thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus." 

III.  THE  DIVINE  ANSWER  AND  ENCOURAGEMENT.— 
When  Samuel  cried  to  the  Lord  about  his  sore  trouble, 
in  the  Divine  answer  it  was  made  clear  that  the  cherished 

i 


66  Jl  (great  g  is  appointment. 

ideal  of  a  lifetime  would  have  to  be  abandoned.  The 
distinct  impression  was  borne  in  on  the  prophet's  mind 
that  he  must  renounce  his  high  purpose,  abdicate  his 
position,  and  step  down  to  become  subordinate  to  a  king. 
"  Now,  therefore,"  said  his  Almighty  Friend  and  Confidant, 
"hearken  unto  their  voice." 

At  the  same  time  his  sorrow  was  greatly  mitigated  by 
discovering  that  God  was  his  Fellow-Sufferer,  and  that  the 
sorrow  of  the  Divine  heart  was  infinitely  greater  than  his  own. 
"They  have  not  rejected  thee,  but  they  have  rejected  Me." 
It  is  a  great  honour  when  a  man  is  summoned  to  enter  into 
fellowship  with  God  in  the  awful  pain  and  grief  which  men 
bring  on  his  tender  and  Holy  Spirit. 

The  Suffering  of  God.  Surely  none  will  count  the  phrase 
extravagant  which  attributes  suffering  to  God,  on  account 
of  his  rejection  by  human  hearts,  which  refuse  his  reign 
and  do  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  his  Grace.  Did  not 
Jesus  suffer  when  his  own  received  Him  not ;  when  his 
brethren  believed  not ;  when  the  city,  which  He  loved 
with  patriot  devotion,  refused  to  shelter  under  his  shadow 
ing  wings,  and  when  his  chosen  disciples  forsook  Him  and 
fled  ?  The  very  abandonment  of  his  self-sacrifice  proved 
the  tenderness  of  his  yearning  love,  and  this  could  not  have 
been  present  to  so  large  an  extent  within  Him  without 
exposing  Him  to  excessive  suffering  on  account  of  human 
sin.  It  has  been  beautifully  said  by  a  modern  writer  : 
"  There  is  a  common  saying  that  cruelty  and  cowardice  go 
together,  so  also  do  self-sacrifice  and  tenderness.  They 
are  different  sides  of  the  same  idea,  and  all  the  delicacy  of 
Christian  tenderness  is  perceptibly  an  outgrowth  of  the 
Cross.  It  seems  as  though,  till  Christ  had  lived  and  died, 
that  fulness  of  human  sympathy  was  impossible."  Now,  if 
that  be  true — if  the  Cross  of  Christ  has  exhaled  through 
the  world  the  aroma  of  tender  sympathy — how  strong  this 
element  must  have  been  in  his  Holy  Nature,  and  how 


31  ^oknttt  protest.  67 

acutely  He  must  have  suffered  when  the  keepers  of  the 
vineyard  cast  Him  out  and  slew  Him.  But  He  did  not 
surfer  alone;  they  that  saw  Him  saw  the  Father.  He 
taught  us  that  God  was  not  impassive ;  but  that  He  yearned, 
sorrowed,  loved,  as  human  fathers  do,  only  with  heights  and 
depths  of  intensity  which  are  indeed  Divine. 

Thou  who  hast  borne  all  burdens  bear  our  load — 
Bear  Thou  our  load,  whatever  load  it  be  : 
Our  guilt,  our  shame,  our  helpless  misery. 
Bear  Thou  who  only  canst,  O  God,  my  God, 
Seek  us  and  find  us,  for  we  cannot  Thee. 

The  prophet  says  that  God  was  pressed  beneath  the  sin 
and  rebellion  of  men,  as  the  groaning  waggon  is  pressed 
beneath  its  sheaves. 

IV.  SAMUEL'S  NOBLE  BEHAVIOUR  TOWARDS  THE  PEOPLE 
demands  our  notice. 

The  request  of  the  people  for  a  king  was,  no  doubt,  in 
part  based  on  Deut.  xvii,  14,  which  seemed  to  anticipate 
just  such  a  crisis  as  had  now  arisen.  In  Hannah's  song, 
also,  there  had  been  an  unmistakable  prophecy  of  the  day 
when  Jehovah  should  give  strength  to  his  king  and  exalt 
the  horn  of  his  anointed  (i  Sam.  ii.  10).  But  the  present 
request  had  been  sprung  on  Samuel  prematurely,  and  with 
undue  passion  and  haste.  Instead  of  seeking  to  ascertain 
the  mind  of  God,  the  people  had  made  up  their  own  mind  ; 
instead  of  consulting  the  aged  prophet,  they  dictated  the 
policy  on  which  they  had  set  their  hearts. 

Under  these  circumstances,  and  with  the  express  direction 
of  God,  he  protested  solemnly  to  the  deputation  of  elders, 
and  through  them  to  the  people,  showing  the  manner  of  the 
king  that  would  reign.  It  was  impossible  that  a  king 
demanded  in  such  a  spirit  as  characterized  the  people  could 
be  a  man  after  God's  own  heart.  They  wanted  one  who, 
in  his  stature  and  bearing,  in  his  martial  prowess  and  deeds, 


68  JV  (great  ^Ji 

should  be  worthy  to  compare  with  neighbouring  monarchs. 
This  was  much  more  to  them  than  character,  obedience  to 
God,  or  loyalty  to  the  Mosaic  code.  And  as  they  desired, 
so  it  was  done  unto  them.  Ah  !  how  often  it  happens  that 
God  gives  us  according  to  our  request,  but  sends  leanness 
into  our  souls  (Psa.  cvi.  15). 

Dangers  that  Samuel  foresaw.  All  the  Oriental  extrava 
gance  and  prodigality  of  human  life,  which  were  the 
familiar  accompaniment  of  royalty  in  neighbouring  coun 
tries,  were  destined  to  reappear  in  the  court  of  the  Kings  of 
Israel.  They  would  enforce  the  service  of  the  young  men 
to  fabricate  their  weapons,  fight  their  battles,  and  minister 
to  their  royal  state.  They  would  exact  unremunerated 
labour  in  the  tillage  of  their  lands.  From  the  daughters 
and  wives  of  the  people  they  would  demand  confection- 
aries  and  bakemeats,  and  other  elaborate  luxuries  for  the 
royal  appetite.  A7ineyards  and  olivcyards,  farms  and  lands, 
would  be  confiscated  at  their  caprice.  A  system  of  heavy 
taxation  would  be  imposed  on  the  produce  of  the  land,  and 
on  the  flocks  and  herds  which  covered  the  pasture  lands  ; 
while  the  people  would  have  to  stand  still  and  see  their 
hard-earned  money  squandered  on  the  pleasures  and  self- 
indulgence  of  the  palace.  A  brief  experience  of  this  kind 
would  lead  to  a  universal  outcry,  as  the  nation  awoke  to  its 
grievous  mistake ;  but  the  step  so  rashly  taken  would  be 
found  to  be  irreparable.  "Ye  shall  cry  out  in  that  day, 
because  of  your  king  which  ye  shall  have  chosen  you  ;  and 
the  Lord  will  not  answer  you  in  that  day." 

Samuel's  protest  and  remonstrance  were,  however,  alike 
in  vain.  "  The  people  refused  to  hearken  unto  the  voice  of 
Samuel ;  and  they  said,  Nay ;  but  we  will  have  a  king  over 
us."  They  trusted  in  man,  and  in  the  arm  of  flesh;  their 
heart  departed  from  the  Lord  ;  and  in  the  sequel  they  were 
destined  to  see  their  king  slain,  their  land  over-run,  and  the 
national  fortunes  reduced  to  the  lowest  possible  ebb. 


Samuel's  IHagttnnimitiT.  69 


Does  thy  heart  cry  out  for  a  king  —  for  one  who  shall 
reduce  the  conflicting  passions  of  thy  nature  to  unity  and 
order  —  beware  lest  thou  choose  after  the  sight  of  thine 
eyes,  or  the  hearing  of  thine  ears  ;  let  not  sense  nor  appetite 
make  the  selection  ;  take  heed  of  the  lust  of  thy  flesh,  the 
lust  of  thy  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  thy  life  !  Let  thy  King 
be  the  Man  whom  God  hath  chosen,  the  Man  of  Calvary, 
whom  He  hath  exalted  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour. 
He  will  not  exact  from,  but  bring  to  thee.  He  does  not 
impoverish,  but  enrich.  His  sceptre  is  the  broken  reed  ; 
his  steed,  a  foal  ;  his  crown,  of  thorns  ! 

When  Samuel  saw  that  the  people  had  made  up  their 
mind,  he  dismissed  the  assembly,  and  set  himself  with 
remarkable  magnanimity  to  do  the  best  he  could  for  them. 
He  did  this  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  summons,  which  lay 
along  the  line  of  his  own  thoughts. 

This  is  very  remarkable,  and  justifies  the  remark  of 
Ewald  :  "  Samuel  is  one  of  the  few  great  men  in  history 
who,  in  critical  times,  by  sheer  force  of  character  and 
inimitable  energy,  terminate  the  previous  form  of  a  great 
existing  system  —  at  first  against  their  own  will,  but  after 
wards,  when  convinced  of  the  necessity,  with  all  the  force  and 
eagerness  of  their  nature;  and  who  then  initiate  a  better  form 
with  the  happiest  results,  amid  much  personal  suffering." 

During  the  early  years  of  his  life,  and  well  on  into  the 
maturity  of  his  power,  Samuel  sought  to  vitalize  the  existing 
institutions,  which  were  ready  to  his  hands.  Only  slowly, 
and  against  his  wishes,  he  awoke  to  realize  that  he  must 
abandon  further  efforts  in  this  direction,  and  set  himself  to 
build  up  an  entirely  new  organization.  In  doing  this  he 
had  to  sacrifice  his  previous  convictions,  and  do  violence 
to  his  better  judgment  ;  he  had  to  pull  down  the  very 
structure  that  he  had  been  at  such  pains  to  establish  ;  he 
had  to  be  second,  where  he  had  been  an  unchallenged 


7°  &  (Smtt  £1  is  appointment. 

first.  But  when  once  he  realized  that  there  was  no  alterna 
tive,  he  became  the  most  devoted  and  efficient  organizer  of 
the  new  age ;  just  as  Dr.  Chalmers,  when  he  found  that  it 
was  impossible  to  secure  what  he  sought  within  the  borders 
of  the  Established  Church  of  Scotland,  stepped  out  from 
its  pale,  and  began  to  build  the  Free  Church,  which  has 
become  one  of  the  greatest  Churches  of  the  age. 

"And,"  continues  Ewald,  "if  David's  visible  deeds  are 
greater  or  more  dazzling  than  Samuel's,  still  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  David's  blaze  of  glory  would  have  been  im 
possible  without  Samuel's  less  conspicuous,  but  far  more 
influential  career ;  so  that  all  the  greatness  of  which  the 
following  century  boasts  goes  back  to  him  as  its  real 
author." 

There  are  supreme  crises  in  the  lives  of  some  of  us,  which 
search  us  to  the  quick.  The  people  whom  we  have  loved, 
have  suffered  and  sacrificed  for,  suddenly  turn  from  us.  They 
want  something  else,  and  something  more.  We  realize  that 
we  must  abdicate,  and  are  tempted  to  do  it  with  grudging 
courtesy  and  an  ill  grace.  Why  should  we  make  way  for 
others — why  renounce  our  rights  and  refuse  to  press  our 
claims  ?  At  such  times  let  us  remember  Samuel's  heroism  ; 
let  us  acknowledge  that  God's  will  is  leading  us  by  a  right 
way ;  let  us  care  for  the  flock  over  which  we  have  been 
placed  as  overseers  more  than  we  care  for  ourselves ;  let  us 
adapt  ourselves  to  the  new  order;  nay,  let  us  expedite  it 
with  all  the  grace  and  grit  that  we  can  command,  knowing 
that  the  blood  of  our  self-sacrifice  will,  by  God's  blessing,  be 
the  best  cement  of  our  handiwork. 


X. 

of  Circumstances. 

(i  SAMUEL  ix.,  x.) 

' '  Yes  !  thou  dost  well  to  build  a  fence  about 

Thine  inward  faith.     O  mount  a  stalwart  guard 
Of  answers,  to  oppose  invading  doubt. 
All  aids  are  needful,  for  the  strife  is  hard." 

COLERIDGE. 

"  T  T  7HOSO  is  wise  and  will  observe  these  things, 
y  V  even  he  shall  understand  the  loving-kindness 
of  the  Lord."  In  these  words  the  psalmist 
sums  up  his  five  tableaux  of  human  life  (Psa.  cvii.).  The 
track  of  the  pilgrim-host,  the  experience  of  the  prisoner 
languishing  in  his  chains,  the  recovery  of  the  sick  from  long 
depression,  the  deliverance  of  the  storm-tossed  crew  from 
the  angry  breakers,  the  evolution  of  a  smiling  paradise  from 
an  arid  and  parched  wilderness — all  these  things,  if  carefully 
observed,  yield  their  testimony  and  assurance  that  God  is  in 
all  events  permitting,  directing,  controlling,  and  causing  all 
things  to  work  out  his  perfect  plan. 

In  all  Scripture  there  is  no  passage  more  illustrative  of 
this  than  the  chapters  before  us,  which  show  how  clearly 
and  mightily  God  is  in  the  circumstances  of  our  lives. 

It  was  the  spring  of  the  day.  With  exquisite  clearness 
and  purity  the  dawn  was  breaking  in  the  Eastern  sky,  when 
three  men  descended  the  steep  ascent  on  which  Ramah 
stood,  and  emerged  from  the  city  gate  (vers.  u,  12,  14,  26). 
The  group  was  a  remarkable  one,  comprising  the  aged  seer; 
"  a  young  man  and  a  goodly,"  who  was  the  king-elect, 
though  he  did  not  realize  it ;  and  a  herdsman,  Doeg,  so 
tradition  states,  who  afterwards  attained  such  an  unhappy 


72  f&ljz  Waitz  of  Cirtutnatanaa. 

notoriety,  but  was  at  that  time  simply  a  servant  in  attendance 
on  his  master's  son.  When  the  city  gate  had  been  left 
behind,  the  servant  was  sent  on  in  front,  that  he  might  not 
be  a  witness  to  the  solemn  transaction,  which  inaugurated  a 
new  epoch  in  the  life  of  Saul.  "  As  they  were  going  down 
at  the  end  of  the  city,  Samuel  said  to  Saul,  Bid  thy  servant 
pass  on  before  us,  but  stand  thou  still  at  this  time,  that  I 
may  cause  thee  to  hear  the  Word  of  God." 

I.  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  THAT  LED  UP  TO  THIS  INCIDENT. 
— (i)  The  asses  of  Kish,  Saul's  father,  were  lost.  But  they 
were  too  valuable  to  lose.  "And  Kish  said  to  Saul,  his  son, 
Take  now  one  of  the  servants  with  thee,  and  arise,  go  seek 
the  asses." 

But  when  they  left  home  they  little  realized  how  far  their 
search  would  lead  them.  "  And  he  passed  through  the  hill 
country  of  Ephraim,  and  passed  through  the  land  of 
Shalisha,  but  they  found  them  not ;  then  they  passed 
through  the  land  of  Shalim,  and  there  they  found  them  not; 
and  he  passed  through  the  land  of  the  Benjamites,  but  they 
found  them  not."  Three  days  were  consumed  in  this 
fruitless  search,  in  stopping  every  traveller,  asking  many 
questions,  scrutinizing  every  trail — but  all  to  no  purpose. 

Lost  she-asses  !  Well,  what  of  them  !  Let  them  stray  ! 
Yes,  but  they  are  worth  seeking,  not  for  their  worth  only, 
but  because  the  man  who  tracks  them  will  presently  come 
on  a  kingdom  !  Be  faithful  in  a  little,  and  God  will 
promote  thee  to  be  faithful  in  much.  Do  what  thou  hast  to 
do  for  God,  and  He  shall  call  thee  for  the  highest  service  ! 
Often  the  finding  of  the  hid  treasure  depends  on  the  care 
with  which  we  drive  the  plough  of  lowly  labour  along  the 
common  furrow  of  daily  toil. 

(2)  By  God's  providence,  which  some  call  chance,  the 
seekers  found  themselves  in  the  land  of  Joseph,  and  there 
the  thought  of  his  father's  possible  anxiety  arrested  the  steps 


gibine  $lan.  73 

of  the  young  farmer,  and  he  said,  "  Come,  and  let  us  return, 
lest  my  father  leave  caring  for  the  asses,  and  take  thought 
for  us."  This  remark  indicated  a  good  and  commendable 
trait  in  Saul's  character.  On  the  whole,  a  man  who  cares 
for  the  feelings  of  those  nearest  to  him  is  likeliest  to  be  a 
good  ruler  of  men.  Would  that  all  our  young  men  and 
women,  especially  those  who  are  away  from  home  in  our 
great  cities,  would  be  a  little  more  considerate  of  the  heart 
strings  stretched  even  to  breaking,  and  the  eyes  that  often 
brim  with  tears,  because  the  tidings  of  their  welfare  are  so 
scanty  and  intermittent !  Saul  feared  the  effect  of  thre"e 
days  on  his  father.  What  would  he  have  thought  of  three 
weeks  or  months  without  tidings  ? 

(3)  Having  arranged  for  the  offering  of  the  piece  of 
silver  which  was  discovered  in  the  bottom  of  the  servant's 
pocket,  as  their  gift  to  the  Seer,  the  two  men  made 
for  the  gate  of  the  little  city,  "which  was  set  on  a  hill,"  its 
white  houses  glistening  in  the  intense  sunshine.  The 
maidens  of  whom  they  made  inquiries,  the  fact  that  Samuel 
was  in  the  city,  and  on  his  way  to  a  feast  in  the  high  place, 
the  encounter  with  Samuel  himself  in  the  main  street,  and 
the  tidings  that  the  asses  were  found — were  like  so  many  sign 
posts  that  pointed  them  by  the  way  which  they  should  go, 
till  they  came  to  the  place  that  awaited  them,  the  seat  and 
portion  prepared  by  the  instruction  of  the  prophet. 

How  evidently  a  Divine  hand  was  in  all  these  circum 
stances  !  They  could  not  have  happened  by  chance. 
Clearly  every  separate  detail  had  been  wrought  out  in  a 
designing  mind  with  the  express  purpose  of  driving  Saul 
into  the  precise  position  where  he  might  stand  still  and 
hear  the  word  of  the  Lord. 

But  if  it  was  so  with  these  circumstances,  must  we  not 
believe  that  as  much  may  be  said  of  all  circumstances  ?  If 
a  hair  cannot  fall  to  the  ground  from  our  head,  or  a  sparrow 
from  the  tree,  apart  from  God,  can  we  say  of  anything, 

K 


74  ®l)£  3J0:«  of  (KimtmstntueB. 

that  it  is  too  trivial  to  come  into  the  Divine  plan  ?  Even 
let  it  be  granted  that  many  incidents  happen  at  the  instiga 
tion  of  evil  men,  yet  they  are  permitted  to  reach  us  by  the 
will  of  God,  and  therefore  we  may  as  much  trace  God's 
will  in  them  for  our  own  discipline  and  ennoblement,  as  in 
those  others  which  are  evidently  of  his  direct  sending. 
God's  purpose  ran  through  the  wicked  deeds  of  the  betrayers 
and  murderers  of  our  Lord.  There  was  not  a  single  event 
on  all  those  fateful  days  that  was  not  marked  on  the  chart 
of  Divine  Providence;  and  since  God  is  everywhere  the 
same,  and  the  same  infinitely,  so  that  we  cannot  say  that 
He  is  more  present  there  than  here,  or  was  more  powerful 
then  than  now,  we  must  admit  that  He  is  still  as  much  in 
every  circumstance  of  our  lot,  as  on  those  memorable  and 
awful  days  when  creation  herself  beheld  the  scenes  of 
Gethsemane  and  Calvary  with  evident  emotion. 

Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  straying  asses,  an  unexpected 
encounter  in  the  street,  the  presence  of  a  coin  in  the  pockets 
or  its  absence,  are  all  part  of  a  Divine  plan.  He  who  has 
opened  eyes  may  read  the  Father's  handwriting,  and  take 
the  direction  of  his  path,  as  though  angels  had  flashed 
before  his  eyes  to  direct  him.  And  the  prepared  path 
always  leads  to  the  vacant  seat  and  the  waiting  portion. 
The  road  may  be  long,  but  the  Father  never  leads  his 
trustful  and  obedient  child  into  a  quagmire,  or  leads  him 
out  on  the  moorland  to  perish  of  exposure  to  the  cold. 
There  is  always  a  destination  to  which  the  road  leads,  and 
it  only  awaits  the  quick  eye,  the  ready  ear,  and  the  obedient 
heart,  to  detect  the  things  that  God  hath  prepared  for  them 
that  love  Him. 

II.  THE  INCIDENT  or  SAUL'S  FIRST  ANOINTING. — Saul 
slept  at  Samuel's  house  that  night,  and  on  the  housetop. 
The  prophet  had  prepared  his  couch  there  with  a  special 
purpose,  which  burnt  like  a  clear  flame  in  his  heart;  for 


75 

when  the  house  was  quiet,  he  stole  up  to  the  young  man, 
who  was  pondering  the  strange  events  of  the  day,  and 
"  communed  with  Saul  on  the  housetop." 

He  longed  to  stir  his  soul  with  a  profound  sympathy  in 
his  own  passionate  and  patriotic  longings.  He  may  have 
poured  into  the  listening  ear  the  story  of  his  hopes  and 
fears,  of  hopes  that  had  been  frustrated,  of  fears  that 
seemed  on  the  point  of  being  realized.  Probably  he  told 
the  story  of  his  own  rejection,  and  of  the  failure  of  his  sons. 
He  may  have  whispered  into  those  young  ears  his  longing 
that  some  one  might  appear  at  this  juncture,  who  would 
gather  up  the  frayed  and  tangled  threads  and  work  out  the 
Divine  pattern.  Thus,  with  careful  skill,  Samuel  awoke 
the  sleeping  soul  of  the  young  son  of  the  soil,  who  probably 
had  lived  in  a  narrow,  circumscribed  sphere,  interested  in 
flocks  and  herds,  in  vines  and  crops,  in  the  talk  of  the  coun 
try-side,  but  with  few  thoughts  of  the  national  welfare. 

He  was  awoke  by  Samuel  before  the  breath  that  an 
nounced  the  dawn  had  stirred  the  leaves  of  the  sleeping 
woods.  "  Samuel  called  to  Saul  on  the  housetop,  saying, 
Up,  that  I  may  send  thee  away."  Then  on  the  descent  at 
the  end  of  the  city  the  servant  was  sent  on,  and  as  the  two 
stood  together,  Samuel  took  from  out  of  his  breast  the  vial 
of  oil,  and  poured  it  upon  the  strong  young  head  bent 
beneath  his  touch,  giving  him  the  anointing  which  de 
signated  the  king,  and  kissing  him  in  token  of  his  own 
fealty.  "Is  it  not,"  said  he,  "that  the  Lord  hath  anointed 
thee  to  be  prince  over  his  inheritance  ?  " 

It  was  a  great  hour  in  Saul's  life.  No  wonder  that "  when 
he  had  turned  his  back  to  go  from  Samuel,"  it  was  with 
"  another  heart.1'  The  chronicle  does  not  say  that  he 
received  a  new  heart;  there  was  no  saving  regeneration  or 
conversion,  no  such  radical  change  as  comes  over  the  soul 
at  the  hour  of  the  new  birth,  or  he  would  never  have  per 
ished  as  he  did  on  the  field  of  Gilboa.  But  he  had  new 


76  ®lj£  ftaicz  of  (Kircumatanaa. 


aims,  new  conceptions  of  the  importance  and  significance 
of  life,  new  determinations  and  resolves.  In  a  sense, 
though  not  the  deepest,  old  things  had  passed  away,  and 
everything  had  become  new. 

Let  us  mark  this  distinction.  It  is  possible  to  have 
another,  but  not  a  new  heart  —  to  be  arrested  by  some 
stronger  mind,  and  inspired  by  a  fresh  ideal  ;  but  beneath 
the  rapid  sprouting  of  the  seed  there  may  be  a  slab  of 
impenetrable  and  unchangeable  rock.  The  work  has  been 
only  on  the  surface,  but  the  dew  has  sped  before  the  sun,  and 
the  cloud  which  seemed  to  presage  rain  has  dissolved  again 
into  the  sky.  See  that  you  make  sure  work  for  eternity. 

III.  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  THAT  FOLLOWED.  —  When  we 
are  on  God's  path,  we  may  certainly  count  on  the  corrobor- 
ation  of  outward  circumstances.  If,  in  travelling  by  the 
railway,  one  questions  whether  one  is  in  the  right  train,  it 
is  a  comfort  to  consult  the  time-tables,  to  see  if  the  names 
of  the  stations,  as  we  hurry  through  them,  are  those  which 
are  mentioned  in  the  list.  So,  when  questions  arise,  as  they 
will  when  we  are  confronted  by  difficulties  and  obstacles,  of 
whether  we  are  in  the  line  of  God's  will,  it  is  an  immense 
reassurance  to  meet  with  corroborating  circumstances  which 
tell  us  that  we  are  right.  Is  not  this  what  is  meant  by  the 
words,  "  I  will  make  my  mountains  a  way  "  ? 

It  was  not  enough  that  Peter  should  hear  a  voice  speak 
ing  to  his  heart,  or  see  the  sheet  let  down  from  heaven  ;  he 
must  hear  the  knock  of  the  three  men  sent  from  Cornelius, 
as  they  stand  at  the  door  enquiring  for  him  (Acts  x.).  In 
all  great  decisions  seek  the  corroboration  of  circumstance. 
We  will  trace  this  in  the  subsequent  chapter. 


XL 

JVs  (Drrasion 

(i  SAMUEL  x.  7.) 

"  There  lies  no  desert  in  the  land  of  life  ; 

For  e'en  that  tract  that  barrenest  doth  seem, 
Laboured  of  thee  in  faith  and  hope,  shall  teem 
With  heavenly  harvests,  and  rich  gatherings  rife." 

KEMBLE. 

CIRCUMSTANCES  led  up  to  Samuel's  secret  desig 
nation  of  Saul  as  king;  and  circumstances,  so 
special  and  significant  as  to  carry  on  their  brow 
the  Divine  impression,  were  destined  to  corroborate  the 
momentous  act.  With  unerring  accuracy  the  old  prophet 
anticipated  them,  and  with  unfailing  precision  each  of  them 
took  place.  "  All  those  signs  came  to  pass  that  day." 

(i)  First,  by  Rachel's  tomb,  in  the  border  of  Benjamin, 
two  men  met  him  to  say  that  the  asses  had  been  found,  and 
that  his  father  had  left  the  care  of  the  asses,  and  was  taking 
thought  for  his  son,  saying,  "  What  shall  I  do  for  my  son?  " 
This  was  a  very  significant  evidence  of  the  Divine  will  and 
choice.  It  indicated  that  he  was  to  be  henceforth  relieved 
of  the  care  of  the  farm  and  the  field,  to  devote  himself  to 
other  and  higher  work.  Asses  could  be  found  without  his 
interposition.  Others  could  attend  to  them  and  their  like, 
but  for  him  the  kingdom  was  waiting,  and  the  hearts  of  men 
were  being  prepared.  The  home-ties,  the  love  of  father  and 
family,  would  always  have  a  claim,  but  he  must  leave  to 
others  the  care  of  the  estates  at  Gibeah. 

This  sign  is  still  of  inestimable  value  to  those  who  feel 
called  to  give  themselves  wholly  to  direct  service  for  God. 
If  it  be  the  case  that  they  are  needed  at  home,  to  provide 


78  3V 

for  the  maintenance  of  aged  parents  or  sisters,  of  wife  or 
child,  they  have  no  right  to  withdraw  from  that  sacred  duty 
— that  holy  obligation — until  God  gives  them  an  honourable 
discharge.  The  message  to  all  such  most  certainly  is  that 
which  the  Apostle  gave  in  a  time  of  great  unsettlement  to 
the  Corinthian  disciples.  "  Let  each  man  abide  in  that 
calling  wherein  he  was  called."  "  Brethren,  let  each  man, 
wherein  he  was  called,  therein  abide  with  God"  (i  Cor. 
vii.  20,  24,  R.V.). 

When  God  has  given  a  call,  as  clear  and  unmistakable 
as  that  which  Saul  received  at  the  lips  of  Samuel,  let  the 
recipient  wait  trustfully  and  patiently  for  his  hand  to  slacken 
the  hold  of  circumstances.  Without  long  delay  the  mes 
sage  will  come  in  one  form  or  another:  "The  asses  are 
found."  Any  circumstance  of  that  kind  will  be  an  un 
mistakable  assurance  that  the  Lord's  voice  has  been  speaking 
to  the  heart,  and  that  his  cloud  is  beckoning  us  to  follow. 

(2)  Next,  as  he  went  forward,  filled  with  bewilderment 
and  awe,  near  the  oak,  or  terebinth,  of  Tabor  (the  situation 
of  which  is  absolutely  unknown),  Saul  met  three  men  going 
on  a  sacred  pilgrimage  to  Bethel,  which,  from  the  days  of 
Abraham  and  Jacob,  had  been  hallowed  by  the  most 
sacred  associations. 

These  men  were  carrying,  as  Samuel  said  they  would, 
their  votive-offerings  to  the  shrine — three  kids,  three  loaves, 
and  a  bottle  (or  skin,  taarg.}  of  wine.  First  they  saluted 
him  with  the  invariable  Eastern  greeting,  Peace  be  unto 
thee  ;  and  presented  him  with  two  of  the  loaves,  as  though 
obeying  an  inner  conviction  which  was  pressed  home  on 
them  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  that  he  whom  they  had 
encountered  was  no  ordinary  wayfarer,  but  one  who  might 
share  their  homage  even  with  Almighty  God. 

What  significance  lay  hid  in  this  act  also !  Did  it  not 
imply  that  God  would  compel  the  respect  and  reverence  of 
the  nation  to  arise  towards  the  king  whom  He  had  chosen, 


JC  ^Hcmornblc  lesson.  79 

and  that  there  should  be  no  lack  of  the  supplies  which  were 
required  to  sustain  his  royal  state  ?  Was  it  not  an  assurance 
that  he  need  not  be  anxious  about  what  he  should  eat  or 
drink,  or  how  he  should  be  clothed,  since,  if  he  sought  first 
the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  all  things  besides 
would  certainly  be  added  ? 

This,  too,  will  befall  each  servant  of  God  who  steps  out 
on  the  path  of  obedience.  He  may  be  leaving  a  well- 
established  business  and  giving  up  some  lucrative  source  of 
income ;  he  may  seem  to  be  stepping  from  the  boat  on  to 
the  heaving,  changeful  waters ;  he  may  be  blamed,  as  Moses 
was  no  doubt  blamed,  for  casting  himself  and  those  de 
pendent  on  him  on  to  the  trackless,  inhospitable  desert;  but 
if  he  will  be  only  true  to  God's  call,  he  will  have  no  reason 
to  repent,  his  bread  shall  be  given  him,  and  his  water  shall 
be  sure,  the  manna  will  fall  where  the  cloud  broods  over 
head  ;  first  the  ravens,  then  the  widow  woman,  and  then  the 
angels  will  be  commanded  to  provide  bread  that  he  may 
eat ;  God  will  care  for  his  body  in  life,  and  in  death  will 
bury  it  with  his  own  hands,  as  in  the  case  of  Moses,  or  by 
the  hands  of  devout  men,  as  when  Stephen  was  carried  to 
his  grave  amid  great  lamentations. 

On  one  occasion  in  the  Lord's  life,  He  gave  a  memorable 
lesson  on  this  matter  to  his  Apostles.  The  tax-collector 
had  come  to  Peter  with  a  demand  which  Peter  could  not 
meet,  and  he  came  to  the  Master  with  it.  Doubtless,  if  the 
fisherman  had  still  been  plying  his  craft,  there  would  have 
been  no  need  for  anxiety — out  of  the  produce  of  his  labour 
he  would  have  been  well  able  to  meet  the  application;  but, 
as  it  was,  there  was  no  money  in  his  purse  or  house  available 
for  the  purpose.  "  Go  thou  to  the  sea,"  said  the  Master, 
"  and  cast  a  hook,  and  take  up  the  fish  that  first  cometh  up; 
and  when  thou  hast  opened  his  mouth,  thou  shalt  find  a 
shekel;  that  take  and  give  unto  them  for  Me  and  thee." 
It  was  in  obedience  to  the  Saviour's  call  that  Peter  had 


8o  JU  (Suasion 

given  up  his  own  means  of  livelihood ;  and  the  Lord 
recognised  that  the  responsibility  of  providing  for  the  needs, 
that  would  otherwise  have  been  met  by  his  toil,  was 
.incumbent  on  Himself.  He  identified  Himself  in  the 
common  need  when  He  said,  "for  Me  and  thee."  If 
you  go  forth  on  Christ's  errands,  He  will  not  be  unrighteous 
to  forget  ;  you  may  surely  trust  Him  to  pay  the  taxes,  and 
all  other  legitimate  dues.  Do  not  set  your  hope  on  "the 
uncertainty  of  riches,"  or  on  the  doles  of  the  wealthy,  but 
on  God  who  giveth  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy. 

(3)  Finally,  Saul  came  to  "  the  hill  of  God  "  (Gibeah,  R.V., 
marg.).  The  A.V.  and  R.v.  note  that  there  was  a  garrison 
of  Philistines  there  ;  but  other  commentators,  thinking  it 
unlikely  that  Samuel  would  announce  to  Saul  a  fact,  which 
must  have  been  so  well  known  to  him,  have  preferred  to 
employ  the  other  meaning  of  the  word  translated  garrison, 
and  have  rendered  the  sentence,  where  the  "  erection, 
column,  or  monument,"  of  the  Philistines  stands,  probably 
reared  by  them  to  commemorate  some  famous  victory. 

Hard  by  this  spot,  and  probably  almost  within  sight  of  his 
home,  Saul  encountered  a  band  of  young  men  connected 
with  the  prophetic  school  which  Samuel  had  established. 
They  were  coming  down  from  the  high  place  with  a  psaltery, 
and  a  timbrel,  a  pipe,  and  a  harp.  The  afflatus  of  prophetic 
fervour  and  ecstasy  was  upon  them,  and  as  Saul  beheld  their 
holy  rapture  he  fell  under  its  spell.  So  great  a  change  had 
passed  over  him  during  his  brief  absence  from  his  home, 
that  he  had  now  a  sympathy  with  these  divine  raptures 
which  he  had  never  known  before.  Chords  within  his  soul, 
which  had  never  vibrated  before,  began  to  answer  in  strange 
unison.  Yearnings  after  God,  susceptibility  to  spiritual  im 
pressions,  the  sense  of  the  unseen  and  eternal,  filled  his 
soul.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  came  mightily  upon  him,  and  he 
prophesied  among  them." 

This  remarkable  assertion  need  not  astonish  us.     It  is 


JV  (Blorioua  $ribiU0e.  81 

by  no  means  uncommon  to  find  men  temporarily  and 
spasmodically  affected  by  strong  religious  impressions,  who 
are  not  permanently  and  savingly  delivered  from  their 
former  worldly  or  selfish  manner  of  life.  It  is  possible  to 
be  enlightened,  to  taste  of  the  heavenly  gift,  to  be  a  par 
taker  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  solemnized  by  the  powers  of 
the  world  to  come,  and  yet  fall  away.  A  land  may  have 
drunk  of  the  rain  and  been  moistened  with  the  gentle  dew, 
and  yet  bear  thorns  and  thistles.  Seed  may  spring  up 
quickly  where  there  is  no  depth  of  earth,  and  yet  wither 
away.  Simon  was  deeply  wrought  on  by  all  he  saw  and 
felt  during  Philip's  visit  to  Samaria,  but  the  Apostle  declared 
that  he  was  still  "in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bond  of 
iniquity." 

But  what  to  Saul  was  only  a  transient  and  superficial 
influence  may  become,  in  each  of  us,  a  permanent  posses 
sion.  The  Spirit  of  God  may  come  on  us  to  fill  us,  and 
abide,  as  He  did  with  those  on  whom  He  came  in  the  early 
days  of  the  Church.  In  successive  waves  of  power  and 
grace  He  may  come  on  us,  so  that  we  may  not  only  be 
filled  suddenly  and  mightily  for  special  work,  but  be  con 
stantly  sensible  of  the  holy  infillings,  as  were  the  first  con 
verts  in  the  highlands  of  Asia  Minor,  so  that  we  may  be 
permanently  full,  as  was  Stephen.  (Compare  Acts  iv.  8 ; 
xiii.  52  ;  vi.  5  ;  note  the  change  of  tenses,  eic.} 

Whenever  God  calls  us  to  special  service  He  provides  a 
special  anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Remember  how  the 
Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  "  See,  I  have  called  by 
name  Bezaleel  the  son  of  Uri ;  and  I  have  filled  him  with 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  wisdom,  and  in  understanding,  and  in 
knowledge,  and  in  all  manner  of  workmanship."  This  is 
universally  true.  As  certainly  as  there  is  the  call,  there  will 
be  the  equipment.  But  we  must  look  up  for  it,  we  must 
claim  and  appropriate  it ;  without  feeling  it,  we  must  reckon 
that  it  is  ours,  and  step  out  on  the  predestined  path.  It  is  in 
L 


82  JU  ©rraston 

the  act  of  obedience  that  we  become  suddenly  and  thank 
fully  aware  of  the  possession.  Oh,  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
may  come  mightily  on  all  his  servants,  so  that  they  may  be 
equipped  for  the  demands  of  the  present  age,  and  that  the 
Master  may  say  of  each  of  them,  "  Behold  my  servant,  whom 
I  uphold.  ...  I  have  put  my  Spirit  upon  him,  and  he 
shall  bring  forth  judgment  to  the  people." 

This  transformation  in  the  young  farmer  amazed  all  that 
knew  him  beforetime;  and  they  said  one  to  another,  "  Is  Saul 
also  among  the  prophets  ?  "  It  made  as  great  a  stir  as  when 
Saul  of  Tarsus  joined  the  Christians,  whom  he  had  perse 
cuted,  or  when  Bunyan  and  Newton  became  ministers  of  the 
Word.  One  of  the  older  people,  however,  divined  the  reason. 
Rumours  of  Saul's  interview  with  Samuel  were  beginning  to 
circulate,  and  he  said  in  effect :  "  Has  he  not  been  with 
Samuel,  the  father  of  these  blessed  and  exalted  movements  ? 
What  wonder,  then,  if  he  partake  of  his  gifts  !  " 

When  the  first  tremor  of  excitement  had  passed,  and  Saul 
regained  full  mastery  of  himself,  he  went  up  to  the  high 
place,  probably  for  meditation  and  prayer,  that  he  might 
comprehend  the  full  significance  of  the  crowding  events 
which  had  transpired  within  the  recent  hours.  To  whom  can 
we  turn,  most  Holy  God,  in  the  supreme  moments  of  life, 
but  unto  Thee  ?  Only  Thou  canst  understand. 

Ere  Samuel  dismissed  his  astonished  and  awe-stricken 
guest,  he  bade  him  act  in  each  circumstance  as  occasion 
served  (ver.  7).  There  is  always  room  for  the  exercise  of 
sanctified  common  sense.  The  circumstances  may  be 
Divinely  contrived,  but  we  must  use  them  for  good  or 
evil,  making  them  stepping-stones  or  stumbling-blocks.  The 
same  circumstances  may  come  to  all ;  but  one  man  receives 
their  lesson  and  transmits  his  answer  in  a  very  different 
spirit  from  his  friend  and  neighbour.  In  one  case,  the  sun 
and  shower  produce  flowers  and  com  ;  in  another,  weeds  and 


feat  Ketoartr.  83 

poppies.  The  Divine  guidance  of  our  lives  does  not  obviate 
the  necessity  for  the  exercise  of  prudence,  that  looks  before 
and  after,  and  upzvards,  in  order  to  ascertain  what  the  will 
of  the  Lord  is. 

There  is  always  in  the  regimen  of  life  an  abundant  need 
for  the  exercise  of  our  judgment,  through  which  the  light 
of  God  may  be  shining  as  through  a  clear  pane  of  glass. 
We  are  not  dumb,  driven  cattle,  nor  the  creatures  of  fate  or 
chance.  We  are  not  automatons.  So  long  as  we  look  for 
guidance,  it  will  be  freely  given ;  but  when  it  is  given  we 
must  use  it,  and  it  is  useless  unless  we  do.  Only  they  that 
receive  the  abundance  of  grace  and  the  gift  of  righteousness 
shall  reign  in  life. 

On  that  memorable  night  when  God's  angel  achieved 
the  deliverance  of  Peter  from  his  prison,  we  are  told  that 
the  celestial  visitant  led  the  dazed  Apostle  through  the  first 
and  second  streets,  and  then  departed  from  him ;  and  when 
Peter  had  considered  the  thing,  he  went  to  the  house  of 
Mary.  So  long  as  he  was  bewildered,  and  half  asleep, 
living  in  a  trance,  walking  in  dreamland,  it  was  necessary 
that  he  should  be  carefully  watched  and  led  ;  but  so  soon 
as  the  sharp  morning  air  had  revived  him,  so  that  he  was 
able  to  consider,  he  was  left  to  act  on  the  decision  of  his 
own  sanctified  understanding. 

To  him  that  overcometh,  the  Master  promises  to  give  a 
white  stone,  which  is  surely  the  Urim  and  Thummin  stone 
— a  judgment  through  which  the  Shekinah  light  glows  and 
shines.  May  it  be  our  happy  privilege  to  receive  it  at  his 
hands,  that  we  may  be  able  to  say  with  our  Lord,  "  My 
judgment  is  just,  because  I  seek  not  my  own  will,  but  his 
that  sent  me." 


XII. 

Ittiur  attfc  (Du&r  Conflicts. 

(i  SAMUEL  xi.) 

"  What  if  He  hath  decreed  that  I  shall  first 
Be  try'd  in  humble  state  and  things  adverse, 
By  tribulations,  injuries,  insults, 
Contempts,  and  scorns,  and  snares  and  violence  !  " 

MILTON. 

THE  eleventh  verse  records  a  great  victory.  It  was 
the  first  public  act  of  the  reign  of  Saul,  taking  place 
a  month  after  his  inauguration.  It  at  once  justified 
his  selection,  and  silenced  the  voice  of  detraction  ;  he  stood 
forth  before  the  eyes  of  his  own  people,  and  of  surrounding 
nations,  as  every  inch  a  man  and  a  king. 

But  in  this  chapter,  for  eyes  that  have  looked  beneath  the 
surface,  there  is  the  record  of  another  fight.  There  was  the 
outward  fight  that  Saul  made  for  Israel ;  there  was  the  inner 
and  previous  fight  that  Saul  made  for  himself,  against 
himself;  and  it  was  because  he  had  conquered  in  the  latter, 
of  which  there  was  probably  no  symptom  to  the  outward 
eye,  that  he  carried  himself  erect  in  the  fight  with  Nahash. 

This  is  always  so ;  within  the  fight  there  is  another  fight. 
Within  the  fight  that  men  are  waging  with  the  sin  and 
darkness  of  the  world,  there  is  always  the  inner  fight,  which 
they  must  wage  with  themselves,  and  for  themselves.  If, 
to  use  the  suggestion  of  another,  you  had  been  familiar  with 
Howard,  the  great  prison  evangelist,  or  had  known  Clarkson, 
who  delivered  the  slave  ;  if  you  had  been  permitted  to  read 
the  secrets  of  the  heart  of  Garrison,  the  great  American 
philanthropist— you  would  have  known  that,  full  often,  each 
was  sick  and  weary  with  the  inward  combat,  and  closed  the 
door  of  his  heart  upon  the  outward  fight,  that  he  might  turn 


JV  Double  Victory.  85 

his  thought  and  attention  to  himself ;  and  you  would  have 
heard  the  soldier  of  Christ  saying  bitterly  to  himself :  "  It 
would  be  easy  for  me  to  conquer,  and  to  win  the  battle  for 
my  Lord  against  these  outward  ills,  if  only  I  had  not 
perpetually  to  wage  this  inward  fight,  if  only  I  had  solid 
ground  to  stand  on,  instead  of  the  shifting  sand  of  my  own 
vacillating  nature  and  irresolute  temper."  Perhaps  you 
might  even  have  heard  these  great  soldiers  saying  :  "  Surely 
it  would  be  better  to  relinquish  the  outward  conflict,  so  as 
to  bend  all  attention  to  the  rule  of  the  Home-land." 

Yet  it  is  good  for  us  all  that  these  two  conflicts  should 
go  on  side  by  side;  for  if  a  man  were  only  conflicting 
against  the  evil  of  the  world,  and  knew  nothing  about  the 
inward  fight,  he  might  become  arrogant,  and  suppose  that 
he  stood  aloof  from  the  common  sin  and  the  common 
temptation — whereas  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  were  only  to 
confine  ourselves  to  the  inward  conflict,  we  might  grow 
morbid  and  self-centred,  dispirited  and  depressed. 

No,  let  those  two  go  on  together,  and  let  the  victories 
that  we  win  for  God  in  the  outward  field  of  vision  be 
weighed  against  the  awful  consciousness  of  failure  that  we 
all  carry  in  our  inner  experience.  Let  these  two  go  on 
side  by  side,  and  let  every  man  know  that  if  he  conquers 
within,  he  will  conquer  without,  and  that  if  he  fails  within 
he  will  fail  without.  It  is  just  in  proportion  as  we  are  able 
to  overcome,  as  Saul  did,  in  his  heart,  that  we  shall  over 
come,  as  he  did,  against  the  Ammonites. 

Two  thoughts  lie  upon  this  chapter  which  are  full  of 
interest — first,  Saul's  inward  fight  and  conquest ;  secondly, 
Saul's  outward  fight  and  conquest. 

I.  SAUL'S  INWARD  FIGHT,  CONFLICT,  AND  VICTORY. — (i) 
He  fought  the  subtle  temptation  to  pride.  Samuel,  eager  to 
constitute  the  new  kingdom,  called  a  great  national  assembly 
at  Mizpeh,  where  so  great  a  defeat  and  victory  had  been 


86  inner  nntr  ©uter  (Konflkta. 

recorded  in  earlier  days.  In  their  teeming  multitudes  the 
Israelites  gathered  there,  and  proceeded  to  elect  their  king 
by  an  appeal  to  God  through  a  lot.  After  prayer  the  lot 
was  cast,  and  the  disposing  of  it  was  left  to  God.  First  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin  was  taken,  then  the  clan  of  the  Matrites, 
then  the  family  of  Kish,  and  ultimately  the  lot  indicated 
Saul,  the  son  of  Kish  ;  but  he  was  not  to  be  found.  He 
knew  from  his  previous  conversation  with  Samuel  that  he 
was  God's  designated  king ;  that  the  anointing  oil  had 
flowed  over  his  head  ;  that  he  was  possessed  of  a  kingly 
presence,  standing  head  and  shoulders  above  all  ordinary 
men.  If  ever  a  man  might  have  stood  to  the  front,  and 
allowed  ambition  to  master  him,  that  was  the  moment  when 
Saul  might  have  stood  forth  and  presented  himself  to  his 
people  as  the  unrivalled  candidate  for  the  crown.  However, 
he  was  not  to  be  found.  They  looked  for  him  everywhere 
in  vain.  And  it  was  only  when,  for  the  second  time,  they 
appealed  to  the  direction  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  that 
he  was  discovered  hiding  among  the  baggage-waggons. 

This  modesty  was  extremely  beautiful,  and  our  admiration 
of  the  natural  traits  of  Saul's  character  cannot  but  be 
greatly  enhanced  by  his  unobtrusiveness.  It  reminds  one 
of  Athanasius,  who  left  the  city  of  Alexandria  that  he  might 
not  be  elected  bishop ;  and  of  Ambrose,  who  more  than 
once  sought  to  evade  the  responsibility  which  was  thrust 
upon  him  at  Milan.  It  reminds  us  also  of  John  Living 
stone,  who,  when  he  was  chosen  to  preach  that  famous 
sermon  of  Kirk  o'  Shotts,  travelled  as  quickly  as  possible 
in  another  direction,  and  only  after  some  hours  was  led  by 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  turn  again  and  assume  the  blessed 
burden.  Those  that  assume  to  themselves  high  positions, 
yielding  before  the  proud  spirit  of  self-assumption,  fail ;  but 
they  who  humble  themselves,  who  generally  think  others 
better  than  they  are,  who  deprecate  notoriety  and  show — 
are  such  whom  God  exalts. 


Jt  Strong  temptation.  87 

(2)  There  was  the  strong  temptation  which  assailed  him  to 
vindictiveness.  Amid  the  shouts,  "  God  save  the  King  !  " 
which  applauded  his  nomination,  there  were  the  voices  of 
detractors,  men  of  Belial,  who  whispered,  "  How  shall  this 
man  save  us  ?  "  One  such  voice  is  enough  to  spoil  all  the 
adulation  that  may  be  strewn  before  us  by  the  crowd. 
What  public  man  is  there  who  has  not  felt  that  the  clamour 
of  kind  voices  was  marred  by  the  one  sentence  of  criticism 
and  spite,  so  that  the  drop  of  vinegar  turned  all  the  rest 
acid  ?  These  voices  must  have  stung  the  heart  of  Saul. 
The  adder's  poison  must  have  penetrated  to  his  heart ;  but 
he  conquered  the  desire  for  revenge,  and  trampled  beneath 
his  feet  the  smouldering  embers  of  vindictiveness.  It  was 
not  that  he  was  pusillanimous,  for  we  are  told  in  this  same 
chapter,  that  when  he  heard  of  the  cry  of  Jabesh-gilead, 
"his  anger  was  kindled  greatly."  He  was  capable  of 
flaming  forth  against  wrong,  but  in  this  case  he  held  himself 
well  in  hand.  To  use  the  old  English  phrase  of  the  A.V., 
He  held  his  peace.  The  more  one  examines  that  phrase, 
the  more  fascinating  it  is — to  hold  your  peace,  not  to  let 
it  go,  not  to  let  it  be  taken  or  snatched  from  you,  not  to  let 
it  be  trampled  under  foot  in  anger,  but  to  hold  to  it  in  the 
midst  of  irritation  and  fret — to  hold  your  ground. 

The  Hebrew,  as  suggested  by  the  margin,  is  still  more 
striking.  "  He  was  as  though  he  had  been  deaf  " — he  pre 
tended  not  to  hear.  He  did  hear  ;  every  word  had  struck 
deep  into  his  soul,  but  he  made  as  though  he  were  deaf. 
It  is  a  great  power  when  a  man  can  act  as  though  he  were 
deaf  to  slander,  deaf  to  detraction,  deaf  to  unkind  and  un 
charitable  speeches,  and  treat  them  as  though  they  had  not 
been  spoken,  turning  from  man  to  God,  leaving  with  God 
his  vindication,  believing  that  God  sooner  or  later  will  give 
him  a  chance,  as  He  most  certainly  gave  Saul  a  chance,  of 
vindicating  the  true  prowess  and  temper  of  his  soul. 

If  Saul  had  listened  to  these  men  and  noticed  them,  he 


Inner  nnfc  Outer  ©onflkfs. 

might  have  drifted  into  an  awkward  and  perplexing  position, 
for  if,  on  the  one  hand,  he  had  passed  over  their  slander, 
he  might  have  laid  himself  open  to  the  imputation  of 
cowardice  ;  whereas  if,  on  the  other,  he  had  noticed  it,  he 
might  have  been  goaded  to  act  tyrannically,  and  so  as  to 
alienate  a  large  number  of  his  people.  He  could  not  have 
done  better  than  to  act  as  though  he  were  deaf,  and  to  con 
quer  the  spirit  of  revenge  by  the  spirit  of  self-restraint. 

(3)  There  was  one  more  temptation  by  which  he  must  have 
been  plied — the  temptation  to  ostentation.  When  the  assem 
blage  was  dispersed  he  returned  from  Mizpeh  to  Gibeah. 
He  had  been  designated  by  Samuel,  and  kissed  by  him  in 
token  of  homage.  Sign  after  sign  had  indicated  him  to  be 
God's  choice  for  Israel ;  he  had  stood  forth  amid  the 
people's  clamour,  the  acknowledged  king  of  the  land ;  a 
number  of  young  men,  whose  hearts  were  fired  by  loyal 
enthusiasm,  had  thronged  about  his  path,  and  with  songs  of 
rejoicing  had  accompanied  him  to  his  home ;  he  was  con 
scious  of  being  able  to  rally  about  him  the  chivalry  and 
strength  of  his  fatherland ;  and  yet,  when  he  was  back 
again  in  Gibeah,  in  spite  of  every  temptation  to  ostentation 
and  excess,  he  was  noble  enough  to  return  to  his  rustic 
life ;  he  took  again  in  hand  his  plough,  and  for  one  whole 
month  he  drove  the  oxen  across  the  fields,  meditating  much 
on  the  strange  chance  which  had  befallen,  and  wondering 
when  God  would  open  the  door  for  him  to  step  forth  into 
the  manifestation  of  the  royalty  which  was  already  his. 

These  were  the  elements  of  a  truly  great  soul.  We  do  not 
forget  Gilboa  ;  the  frenzied  insanity  by  which  his  career  was 
afterwards  blasted  ;  how  more  than  once  or  twice  he  hurled 
his  javelin  at  David  ;  that  he  became  moody  and  morose ; 
that  he  betrayed  the  heart  of  a  murderer  and  died  the  death 
of  a  suicide  ;  but  at  this  time  of  his  life  at  least,  he  remained 
humble ;  he  put  his  foot  upon  the  spirit  of  revenge  and  left 
it  with  God  to  vindicate  him ;  he  put  his  foot  upon  that 


&  petition  for  IMp-  89 

love  of  ostentation  that  tempts  us  all,  setting  himself  to 
do  his  daily  work,  and  waiting  until  God  summoned  him 
to  take  the  helm  of  the  state.  We  cannot  but  admire  this 
greatly. 

You,  too,  may  be  conscious  of  the  presence  of  many 
amiable  natural  traits,  but  unless  the  natural  virtues  of  your 
soul  be  possessed  and  strengthened  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  they  will  not  be  able  ultimately  to  withstand 
the  awful  conflict  of  the  world.  See  to  it  that  in  and 
through  the  traits  of  your  own  amiable  nature  there  may 
come  the  transcendent  life  of  the  ever-glorious  Saviour,  that 
your  character  may  not  be  the  wild  growth  of  nature,  but  the 
established  and  permanent  indwelling  of  the  Son  of  God. 

II.  THE  OUTWARD  CONFLICT. — One  evening,  as  Saul 
came  back  from  the  field,  he  heard  that  low  wail  of  distress 
and  panic  by  which  the  Eastern  populace  makes  known  its 
anguish ;  and  as  he  drew  near  to  Gibeah  he  asked  what  it 
meant.  "  What  aileth  the  people  that  they  weep  ?  "  Then 
the  story  was  told  how,  across  the  Jordan,  in  the  land  of 
Gilead,  the  city  of  Jabesh-gilead  was  hard  pressed  by  the 
Ammonites,  who,  a  hundred  years  before,  had  been 
disastrously  defeated  by  Jephthah,  but  who  had  never 
relinquished  their  claim  to  the  land.  Under  Nahash,  the 
king,  they  had  gathered  in  overwhelming  numbers  around 
the  beleaguered  city.  Its  citizens  had  tried  their  best  to 
extricate  themselves,  but  in  vain.  One  week  of  respite 
alone  had  been  extracted  from  the  contemptuous  clemency 
of  Nahash ;  and  if  at  the  end  of  that  week  no  deliverance 
came,  then  the  right  eye  of  every  man  would  be  put  out, 
which,  undoubtedly,  would  make  him  useless  for  purposes  of 
war,  because  the  left  eye  was,  of  course,  always  covered  by 
the  shield. 

In  despair  the  messengers  came  to  Gibeah,  of  Benjamin, 

because  in  the  days  of  the  judges  Jabesh-gilead  had  refused 
M 


9°  ifnttcr  anfc  ©titsr  (Konflirts. 

to  join  in  the  war  of  extermination  against  the  Benjaminites, 
and  had  given  four  hundred  of  its  daughters  in  marriage  to 
their  sons.  There  was,  therefore,  a  blood-tie  between  the 
people  of  Jabesh-gilead  and  those  of  Gibeah,  and  in  this  awful 
hour  they  felt  they  had  a  claim  for  help — if  they  would  not 
help  who  would  !  But  the  people  of  Gibeah  despaired.  It 
seemed  as  if  it  were  impossible  in  that  short  space  to  send 
effectual  help.  Saul  was  living  in  the  midst  of  them, 
but  they  had  no  hope  that  he  could  help  them.  The  day 
threatened  to  close  in  hopeless  despondency. 

Then  the  man  who  had  conquered  himself  became 
suddenly  aware  of  the  uprising  of  an  altogether  new  power 
in  his  heart.  We  are  told  that  "  the  Spirit  of  God  came 
mightily  upon  Saul  "  ;  a  little  further  on  we  learn  that  "  the 
fear  of  the  Lord  fell  on  the  people  " ;  and  still  further  on, 
"  the  Lord  wrought  a  great  salvation  for  Israel." 

If  you  will  be  true  in  the  inward  battle,  if  by  the  grace 
of  God  you  will  trample  upon  the  sins  which  so  easily  beset 
you,  the  time  will  come  in  your  life  also,  when  the  Spirit 
of  God  will  come  upon  you  with  an  almost  overwhelming 
power,  and  bear  you  forward  to  do  what  otherwise  would 
be  absolutely  impossible  ;  and  as  He  works  on  you,  He 
will  work  also  on  the  people  and  on  the  foe. 

Instantly  Saul  laid  hold  of  his  bullocks,  slew  them,  cut 
them  in  pieces,  and  by  messengers  sent  those  pieces  through 
out  the  land.  In  some  such  way,  as  Sir  Walter  Scott  tells 
us,  the  old  Highland  chieftains  used  to  summon  the  clans 
for  war  by  the  mission  of  the  fiery  cross. 

Similarly  the  entire  people  throughout  the  whole  land  of 
Israel  obeyed  the  royal  summons.  They  were  at  first  but  an 
undisciplined  mob ;  but  Saul,  in  the  power  of  God,  mar 
shalled  them,  directing  them  by  three  different  routes  to 
fall  upon  the  Ammonites  in  the  morning.  A  message  was 
sent  to  Jabesh-gilead  to  tell  the  people  that  help  was 
coming,  and  their  hearts  were  glad.  Then,  as  the  morning 


91 

broke  over  the  quiet  hills  and  valleys  of  Gilead,  from  three 
different  sides  Saul  launched  his  army  upon  the  sleeping 
hosts.  Panic-stricken,  they  sprang  to  their  feet;  hardly 
awake,  they  were  unable  to  resist  the  onset  of  the  men  of 
Israel ;  and  the  rout  was  so  complete  that,  by  the  noontide, 
two  men  were  not  left  together.  It  was  a  wonderful  victory, 
and  an  auspicious  beginning  for  the  new  reign. 

Would  you  not  win  such  a  victory  over  the  sin  of  the 
world  ?  If  so,  there  must  be  the  self-mastery.  Gird  your 
selves  to  fight  "  the  good  fight  of  faith."  We  are  reminded 
that  there  are  several  circles  to  that  fight.  First,  there  is,  of 
course,  the  outer  circle  of  circumstances.  A  man  must  always 
begin  with  these,  and  rightly  so.  It  is  quite  wise  on  your 
part  to  give  up  that  business  which  is  a  constant  source  of 
temptation ;  to  remove  from  that  house  where  bad  people 
live;  to  renounce  that  literature,  those  books,  and  that 
recreation,  which  are  constantly  causing  you  to  offend ;  to 
extricate  yourself  from  that  friendship  or  fellowship  which 
has  been  your  curse.  That  is  the  first  thing  to  do.  Get 
right  with  your  circumstances ;  touch  not,  taste  not,  handle 
not ;  come  out  and  be  separate.  At  any  cost  deliver  your 
self  from  the  conditions  of  life  that  tempt  you  to  sin. 

Secondly,  there  is  the  inner  circle  of  habit ;  for  if  our 
circumstances  are  like  our  clothes,  our  habits  are  like  our 
skin,  and  every  man  has  got  to  fight  his  lonely  fight  against 
habit :  it  may  be  of  alcoholism  ;  it  may  be  of  narcotism;  it 
may  be  of  impurity  and  immorality — nothing  but  the  power 
of  God  can  break  the  bonds  that  bind  you.  That  is  the 
second  great  fight  in  a  man's  life. 

Thirdly,  there  is  the  battle  against  heredity.  It  may  be 
that  your  father  was  a  passionate  man,  and  has  passed  on, 
perhaps  from  his  ancestors,  strong  and  vehement  desires  ; 
that  your  mother  was  a  vain,  or  proud,  or  quick-tempered 
woman,  and  that  she  has  passed  on  to  you  something  of  her 
own  quick,  sensitive  nature,  that  you  cannot  keep  calm  and 


9 2  Inner  anfc  Outer  Conflicts. 

still,  cannot  hold  your  peace,  cannot  seem  as  if  you  were 
deaf.  Every  one  has  to  meet  with  a  certain  number  of 
predispositions  in  his  life  which  he  has  inherited,  and  which 
make  the  battle  harder.  Enumerate  them,  consider  them, 
know  them  ;  then  in  the  name  of  God  put  the  grave  of  Christ 
between  you  and  them,  and  let  them  meet  you  only  through 
Him  that  died.  Die  to  them  all,  die  to  the  first  Adam,  die 
to  yourself  because  you  have  risen  to  the  second.  In  acting 
thus  you  may  break  the  entail,  and  arrest  for  others  that 
awful  inheritance  into  which  you  have  come. 

Then,  after  all,  when  all  this  is  said  and  done,  when 
your  outward  circumstances  are  adjusted,  when  by  the 
grace  of  God  you  have  broken  the  spell  of  habit,  when  you 
have  died  to  heredity — then  you  come  face  to  face  with  the 
inner  citadel  of  yourself .  There  are  things  that  you  must 
not  do,  temptations  to  which  you  must  not  yield,  an  inner 
self  which  you  must  crucify.  Ah,  that  lonely  fight !  Ah, 
the  flowers  and  grass  that  become  trampled  down  in  the 
wrestle  whilst  the  blood  of  your  heart  is  sprinkled  on  the 
sward,  and  you  know  that  all  the  possessions  of  your  out 
ward  life  are  as  nothing  to  you  compared  to  the  agony  of 
the  inward  conflict.  What  is  success  ?  What  is  applause  ? 
What  is  the  crown  of  victory  compared  with  your  confessed 
failure  to  yourself?  Thus  we  fight  our  fight,  and  win  in 
the  power  of  the  loving  Christ.  And  then  Ammon, 
Ammon,  Ammon.  Ah,  not  two  men  will  be  left  together. 
Fight,  fight,  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  ;  lay  hold  upon  the 
life  which  is  life  indeed. 


XIII. 


(i  SAM.  xii.  22.) 

"  For  the  glory  and  the  passion  of  this  midnight 
I  praise  thy  name,  I  give  Thee  thanks,  O  Christ ! 
Thou  that  hast  neither  failed  me  nor  forsaken 
Through  these  hard  hours  with  victory  overpriced  ; 
Now  that  I  too  of  thy  passion  have  partaken, 
For  the  world's  sake — called — elected — sacrificed  !  " 

H.  HAMILTON  KING. 

7HILST  the  whole  land  was  ringing  with  the  news 
of  Saul's  exploit  in  the  deliverance  of  Jabesh- 
gilead,  it  appeared  to  Samuel  to  be  an  auspi 
cious  moment  for  confirming  the  kingdom  in  his  hand ; 
and  therefore  he  summoned  a  great  convocation  of  the 
nation  at  Gilgal. 

On  that  spot  Israel  had  encamped  for  the  first  night  after 
crossing  the  Jordan,  and  the  twelve  great  stones  commemo 
rating  that  event  were  still  visible.  There  the  act  of  circum 
cision  had  been  performed,  cleansing  the  people  of  the 
neglect  of  the  wilderness  ;  and  there,  too,  the  first  Passover 
in  the  Land  of  Promise  had  been  celebrated.  Amid  these 
great  memorials  and  memories  of  the  past  the  people 
gathered  from  far  and  near  to  crown  Saul  king.  He  had 
been  designated  at  Mizpeh  ;  he  was  to  be  crowned  at  Gilgal ; 
it  was  the  inauguration  of  his  reign,  its  ratification  and 
confirmation  by  the  entire  people.  After  this  great  cere 
mony,  Saul  and  his  people  rejoiced  together  with  peace- 
offerings  and  thank-offerings  before  God ;  and  this  was  the 
moment  that  Samuel  chose  to  lay  down  his  office  as  judge — 
the  last  of  the  judges,  and  the  first  of  the  prophets. 

I.  SAMUEL'S  RESIGNATION. — An  end  must  come  to  the 


94  JForsaken  ? 

longest  and  most  successful  ministry,  and  the  author  of  the 
Book  of  Ecclesiasticus,  reverting  to  this  event  in  Samuel's 
life,  says  :  "  Before  his  long  sleep  Samuel  made  protestation 
of  his  innocence  before  God  and  the  people."  Yes,  the 
long  sleep  will  come  to  all,  and  happy  are  they  who  before 
they  lay  their  heads  down  to  the  last  sleep,  and  their  spirits 
enter  to  receive  their  final  award,  are  able  to  extend  their 
hands  and  bare  their  hearts  before  those  who  have  known 
them  best,  and  say,  "These  at  least  are  clean." 

This  is  what  Samuel  by  the  grace  of  God  was  able  to  do. 
Standing  bare-headed  before  the  vast  audience  of  the  men 
of  Israel,  and,  pointing  to  his  white  locks,  he  said,  "  I  am 
old  and  grey-headed,  and  I  have  walked  before  you  (as  in 
Eastern  lands  a  shepherd  precedes  his  flock)  from  my  boy 
hood  up."  His  had  been  an  unblemished  career,  and  for 
his  own  sake  and  the  sake  of  God,  on  whose  behalf  he 
stood,  he  was  anxious  to  obtain  from  the  people  a  vindica 
tion  of  the  blamelessness  of  his  career.  He  therefore  pro 
tested  :  "  I  have  not  defrauded  you,  nor  oppressed  you. 
Whose  ox  have  I  taken  ?  Whose  ass  ?  Can  any  man  con 
front  me  as  having  taken  from  his  hand  even  a  sandal,  as  a 
bribe,  that  I  should  turn  away  mine  eyes  from  his  mis 
doing  ?  "  And  all  the  people,  with  one  unanimous  consent, 
cried  :  "  Thou  hast  not  defrauded,  nor  oppressed,  nor  taken 
anything  from  our  hand." 

But  the  old  man  was  not  content ;  he  wanted  to  bind 
the  people  by  a  solemn  oath,  as  in  the  very  sight  of  God 
and  the  king  ;  and,  therefore,  he  said,  lifting  his  hand  to 
heaven,  "  I  call  God  to  witness  against  you  this  day,  and 
his  anointed  king,  that  what  you  have  said  is  true."  And 
again,  from  the  lips  of  all  the  people,  with  one  unanimous 
shout,  there  came  the  response,  "  God  is  witness."  The 
old  man  was  comforted,  and  added,  "Yes,  God  is  witness: 
the  very  God  who  brought  our  people  out  of  Egypt,  and 
appointed  Moses  and  Aaron." 


^  fJIamdcss  JUcorfc.  95 

Oh,  that  all  our  public  men  to-day  were  as  clean-handed 
and  pure-hearted  as  Samuel  was  !  that  when  the  records  of 
their  actions  are  rehearsed  before  the  judgment-seat  of  God, 
it  may  be  discovered  that  those  who  have  been  high  in 
office  have  not  prostituted  their  high  position  for  their 
own  emolument,  or  acted  for  private  gain,  but  that  they 
were  clean-handed  and  pure-hearted.  Happy  is  that  nation 
whose  public  men  are  free  from  all  complicity  with  bribery 
and  from  making  profit  out  of  the  necessities  or  the  sore 
distress  of  their  fatherland  ! 

II.  HE  DESIGNATED  HIS  PEOPLE'S  SIN. — It  was  a  great 
opportunity  to  show  them  where  they  had  done  wrong ;  and 
a  man  whose  own  hands  are  clean  is  permitted  to  be  the 
sincere  critic  of  others'  misdoing.  See  to  it  that  your  own 
eye  is  single,  and  that  the  beam  is  extracted  from  it,  before 
you  essay  to  remove  the  mote  from  your  brother's  eye.  In 
several  particulars  he  pleaded  with  that  dense  mass  of 
people,  and  dared  to  hold  up  the  crimes  of  his  nation,  that 
they  might  see  them  as  they  were. 

First,  he  set  himself  to  show  the  difference  between  their 
former  and  their  latter  method  of  procedure.  He  carried 
their  thoughts  back  to  Egypt,  and,  in  effect,  said :  When 
your  fathers  were  in  bondage  to  the  Egyptians,  and  under 
the  oppression  of  Pharaoh,  you  cried  unto  Jehovah,  and  in 
gracious  answer  He  raised  up  deliverance.  And  when  in 
the  days  of  the  Judges  you  were  oppressed  first  by 
Sisera,  then  by  the  Philistines,  and  then  by  the  people  of 
Moab,  you  cried  to  God  for  deliverance,  and  it  came  ;  but 
now,  when  the  threatened  invasion  of  Nahash,  the  King  of 
the  Ammonites,  is  filling  the  horizon  with  thunder-clouds, 
instead  of  holding  a  great  convocation  for  prayer,  you  insist 
upon  my  appointing  a  king.  Why  have  you  deteriorated  ? 
Why  was  prayer  your  natural  resort  three  hundred  years 
ago,  and  now  it  is  neglected?  Is  it  not  because  you  are 


96  ^Forsaken  ?     |lcbcr  ! 

prayerless  that  you  have  drifted  from  your  ancient  moor 
ings  ?  In  this  is  a  great  sin. 

Must  not  we  always  take  care  that,  instead  of  saying 
impulsively  and  impetuously,  "  We  will  do  this  or  that,"  we 
should  constantly  wait  before  God  that  He  would  appoint  a 
deliverer  ? 

Secondly,  in  his  dealing  with  the  people,  he  put  a  new 
reading  upon  past  history.  On  their  side,  they  pointed  out 
the  successive  catastrophes  which  had  befallen  their  coun 
try  •  how  the  Ammonites,  the  Philistines,  the  Moabites,  and 
Sisera,  and  other  surrounding  nations,  had  oppressed  them, 
and  brought  them  under  their  power ;  and  therefore,  as  a 
way  of  deliverance  from  such  troubles,  they  had  argued 
the  necessity  of  having  a  king.  Samuel,  of  course,  admitted 
the  successive  afflictions  which  had  befallen  his  people, 
but  he  did  not  put  the  same  reading  upon  them.  He  said  : 
"  You  demand  a  king  who  shall  make  such  catastrophes  no 
longer  possible  ;  but  I  tell  you  on  the  other  hand,  that, 
whether  you  have  a  king  or  not,  if  you  forget  God,  as  you 
have  forgotten  Him,  and  if  you  turn  to  Baalim  and  Ash- 
taroth  as  you  have  turned  to  them,  neither  your  king,  nor 
any  alternative  mode  of  government  you  can  invent,  will 
deliver  you  from  the  consequences."  In  other  words,  he 
made  it  clear  that  it  was  not  the  presence  or  absence  of  a 
monarchy,  but  the  want  of  singleness  of  purpose,  and  devo 
tion  to  Jehovah,  which  had  been  the  cause  and  root  of 
all  their  troubles. 

Thirdly,  he  indicated  to  the  people  that  God  had  never 
failed  to  send  them  a  man  when  a  man  was  wanted.  He 
said :  "  Look  back  upon  your  past  history.  Even  apart 
from  an  hereditary  line  of  kings,  with  the  prestige  of  Royal 
descent,  God  has  always  raised  up  a  man  to  help  you  in  an 
emergency.  Consider — did  not  He  raise  up  Moses  and 
Aaron  ?  Did  not  He  raise  up  Jephthah  and  Barak  (see 
R.V.,  marg.),  Gideon  and  myself?  See  how  perpetually  in 


's  ^Faithfulness.  97 

the  dark  hour,  in  answer  to  prayer,  God  has  sent  you  the 
man  that  was  needed.     Could  you  not  have  trusted  Him ; 
and  instead  of  being  so  urgent  for  a  king,  have  waited  for 
Him  to  do  for  you,  as  He  had  done  aforetime  ?  " 

Lastly,  he  said :  "  My  countrymen,  you  have  greatly 
deteriorated ;  you  have  failed  in  your  faith ;  you  have 
demanded  a  visible  king,  but  have  forgotten  the  invisible 
Lord  ;  you  have  magnified  the  arm  of  flesh,  but  have  for 
gotten  the  mighty  power  of  the  Eternal.  You  have  been 
sheltering  under  the  idea  of  a  new  royalty,  whereas  God  was 
your  King,  your  true  Head,  the  Leader,  and  Patron  of  the 
nation.  You  should  have  rested  only  on  Him." 

Are  we  not  all  liable  to  the  same  lapse  of  faith  ?  We  look 
to  the  visible  and  forget  the  invisible.  The  air  is  filled  with 
anxiety,  clamour,  and  controversy ;  whilst  in  the  shadow, 
behind  the  thin  veil  of  sense,  stands  the  eternal  crowned 
Christ,  waiting  ever  to  trim  the  lamps  of  the  golden  candle 
sticks  and  to  hold  the  stars  in  his  right  hand.  It  was  a 
brave  thing,  a  noble  thing,  a  right  thing,  for  Samuel  to  show 
to  his  people  how  they  had  drifted  from  the  old  true  stand 
ing  ground  of  faith  into  practical  atheism  and  unbelief. 

III.  SAMUEL'S  ASSURANCE. — Having  handed  over  his 
office  to  Saul,  who  henceforth  was  to  be  the  shepherd  and 
leader  of  the  chosen  people,  and  having  dealt  with  their 
failure  and  deterioration,  he  went  on  to  say  with  inimitable 
sweetness,  "  The  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people  for  his 
great  Name's  sake."  Oh,  take  these  words  to  heart,  and  let 
them  sink,  like  a  refrain  of  music,  into  your  soul.  The 
Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people  !  They  may  have  lost  their 
ideal ;  for  a  moment  they  may  have  drifted  from  their 
ancient  moorings  of  childlike  confidence ;  but  the  Lord 
cannot  forsake  his  people,  for  his  great  Name's  sake. 

How  perpetually  this  argument  was  used  by  the  holy  men 
of  the  old  time.  For  instance,  in  Exodus  xxxii.  12,  where 

N 


98  JForsalum  ?     lister  ! 

God  talks  of  casting  away  his  people,  when  they  had  made 
the  golden  calf  and  worshipped  it  with  garlands  and  dances, 
Moses  dares  to  go  into  the  Divine  Presence,  and  say : 
"  Lord,  Thou  canst  not  do  it,  for  if  Thou  dost,  the  Egyptians 
will  say,  '  He  was  not  able  to  bring  them  in  ;  his  power  was 
not  sufficient  to  accomplish  that  to  which  He  had  put  his 
hand.'  Thou  canst  not  do  it.  Thy  credit  is  at  stake  ! " 

And  in  Joshua  vii.  9,  when  Israel  had  fled  before  the 
men  of  Ai,  Joshua  threw  himself  upon  the  ground  before 
the  Ark  and  cried,  "  O  my  God,  if  thy  people  fail  like  this, 
what  will  the  Egyptians  say  ?  What  will  the  Philistines  say? 
What  will  the  nations  of  Canaan  say  ?  And  what  wilt  Thou 
do  for  thy  great  Name.  Before  Heaven  and  earth  Thou 
wilt  stand  discredited  if  Thou  failest  to  give  us  this  land  as 
Thou  hast  promised." 

Then  in  Isa.  xlviii.  9,  n,  later  on  in  the  history  of  the 
chosen  people,  Isaiah,  dealing  with  their  sins,  and  speaking 
to  them  in  God's  name,  says  :  "  For  my  Name's  sake  will  I 
defer  mine  anger ;  and  for  my  praise  will  I  refrain  for  thee 
that  I  cut  thee  not  off."  "  For  mine  own  sake,  for  mine 
own  sake,  will  I  do  it ;  for  how  should  my  Name  be  pro 
faned  ?  and  my  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another." 

In  Ezek.  xx.  these  remarkable  words  are  repeated  thrice ! 
"  I  wrought  for  my  Name's  sake,  that  it  should  not  be  pro 
faned  in  the  sight  of  the  nations,  among  whom  they  were." 
God's  name  is  God's  character.  He  is  bound  by  his  self- 
respect  not  to  forsake  his  people. 

The  old  prophet  went  on  to  say :  "  It  hath  pleased  the 
Lord  to  make  you  his  people."  God  hides  his  reasons. 
He  loves  because  He  will.  The  flame  of  his  love  requires 
no  fuel.  The  bush  is  not  consumed  for  its  maintenance. 
We  may  put  alongside  with  these,  those  words  of  the  great 
Apostle  :  "  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  that  He  might  redeem 
us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  Himself  a  people  for 
his  own  possession."  This  assurance  applies  to  men  : — 


's  (Unfailing  ~$abe.  99 

(1)  As  individuals.     God  will  not  forsake  you.     He  did 
not  choose  you  because  of  your  goodness  or  beauty,  and 
He  will  not  forsake  you  because  you  have  failed  of  your 
best.     He  has  made  you  his  child  by  adoption  and  grace, 
not  that  there  was  anything  in  you  to  specially  attract  Him, 
but  because  He  would.     Some  day  He  may  explain  to  you 
his  reason,  but  just  now  there  is  no  reason  that  any  of  us 
can  guess  at,  why  we  have  been  chosen  from  the  rest  of 
men  to  be  his.     //  has  pleased  Him  to  make  us  his  sons 
and  daughters.     We  may  have  sinned  against   Him  and 
grieved  his  Holy  Spirit ;  we  may  have  mixed  ourselves  with 
the  seed  of  the  people  amongst  whom  we  dwell — but  God 
will  not  forsake  his  people.     If  He  did,  there  would  be  a 
charge  against  his  love  that  it  was  not  infinite,  that  it  ceased 
after  sin  had  reached  to  a  certain  height  of  outrage,  that  it 
could   not   abound  over  sin.      His  power  also  would  be 
impugned,  for  the  lost  spirits  in  hell  would  boast  that  He 
had  attempted  more  than  He  was  able  to  perform — that 
He  had  not  counted  the  cost. 

There  would  also  be  an  imputation  upon  his  immutability. 
It  would  be  spread  through  the  universe  that  He  took  up  a 
sinful  soul,  cleansed  and  clothed  it,  loved  and  blessed  it, 
and  then  He  changed.  At  the  news  that  God  could  be 
fickle,  the  palace  of  eternity  would  rock,  the  throne  of 
Heaven  shake,  and  the  mighty  vault  of  space  would  reel  to 
destruction.  God  dare  not  surrender  the  work  which  He 
has  begun  in  the  heart  of  man.  That  is  why  we  may  count 
on  being  saved.  We  have  no  positive  claim  on  God ;  there 
is  no  native  beauty  nor  attractiveness  to  Him  who  sees  the 
inner  life  ;  there  is  nothing  necessary  in  our  service — but 
He  has  set  his  love  upon  us,  and  He  must  go  through  with 
it,  and  stand  to  his  bargain  before  all  worlds.  O  soul  of 
man,  God  will  not  forsake  thee. 

(2)  As  a  Church.     Why  could  not  God  forsake  Israel  ? 
Because  the  chosen  people  was  the  type  of  what  He  desired 


ioo  ^Forsaken  ?    |leher  ! 

every  nation  to  become ;  and  therefore  He  must  needs  go 
on  building  up  Israel,  that  his  type  might  not  be  broken  ; 
and  He  had  to  work  through  Israel  to  bring  other  nations 
to  its  level.  If  God  had  abandoned  Israel,  how  could  He 
have  hoped  to  regenerate  the  world  ? 

What  was  true  of  Israel  may  be  true  of  a  Church.  There 
may  be  many  failures  and  inconsistencies  in  her  that  ought 
to  be  altered.  But  God  cannot  cast  her  away  in  spite  of 
all  her  sinful  imperfections.  He  will  refine  and  purify  her 
till  she  realize  his  ideal  and  become  his  perfect  Bride. 

(3)  As  a  Nation.     Our  country  cannot  go  drifting  on 
into  materialism  and  irreligion,  as  she  is  doing.    God  cannot 
afford  to  let  her  become  immoral  and  debased  ;   cannot 
permit  her  to  follow  in   the  way  of  Rome  and  Greece ; 
cannot  forsake  the  people  whom  He  has  blessed  and  used 
since  the  days  of  Alfred,  who  have  been  the  pioneers  of 
missionary  and    Christian   civilization    through   the   entire 
world.     For  his  Name's  sake  He  cannot  do  it.     No,  it  is 
certain  that  sooner  or  later  a  great  revival  of  religion  will 
bring  us  back  to  our  first  love. 

(4)  As  a  World.     God  cannot  forsake  this  world,  reeking 
though  it  be  with  blasphemy  and  impurity,  with  tyranny 
and  sin.     It  has  been  saturated  with  the  blood  of  his  Son 
and  of  myriads  of  his  saints.     It  has  been  bedewed  with 
the  tears  of  the  noblest  souls  that  have  ever  breathed,  and 
it  is  yet  destined  to  shine  amidst  its  sister  stars  with  an 
untarnished  beauty ;    it  is  to  be  the  specimen  to  all  the 
universe  of  what  God  can  do  with  a  fallen  world  and  a 
degraded  race.      God  cannot  forsake  our  earth,  and  some 
day  we  shall  see  her  glistening  in  the  light  that  shone  over 
Paradise,  and  the  children  of  men  walking  in  the  white  robes 
of  purity,  love,  and  truth.      "  The  Lord  will  not  forsake  his 
people  for  his  great  Name's  sake,  because  it  hath  pleased 
the  Lord  to  make  you  a  people  unto  Himself." 


XIV. 

Crasing  in 

(i  SAMUEL  xii.  16-25.) 

"  O,  who  can  tell  how  many  hearts  are  altars  to  his  praise, 
From  which  the  silent  prayer  ascends  through  patient 

nights  and  days ! 

The  sacrifice  is  offered  still  in  secret  and  alone  : 
O  world,  ye  do  not  know  them,  but  He  can  help  his  own." 

A.  PROCTER. 

IN  all  Samuel's  career  there  is  nothing  finer  than  the 
closing  scene  of  his  public  action  as  the  judge  and 
leader  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  Had  he  died  young, 
his  place  in  the  annals  of  his  country,  and  indeed  in  history, 
would  have  been  much  lower,  and  our  appreciation  of  his 
character  much  less.  Naturally  he  found  it  difficult  to  step 
down  from  his  premiership,  and  inaugurate  a  regime  with 
which  he  had  no  sympathy,  since  it  seemed  to  be  a  setting 
aside  of  Israel's  greatest  glory  in  having  God  for  King. 
But  he  suppressed  his  strong  personal  antipathies,  and  did 
his  very  best  to  start  the  nation  on  the  new  path  it  had 
chosen,  selecting  a  king  with  the  utmost  care,  and,  regard 
less  of  personal  suffering,  bridging  over  the  gulf  between 
the  old  order  and  the  new. 

We  cannot  turn  from  the  record  of  the  great  convocation, 
assembled  before  the  Lord  at  Gilgal,  to  ratify  Saul's  election, 
without  noticing  the  repeated  allusions  to  Samuel's  power 
in  prayer.  He  appears  to  have  been  the  John  Knox  of 
his  age,  as  mighty  in  prayer  as  in  statesmanship.  His 
whole  career  seems  to  have  been  bathed  in  the  spirit  of 
supplication. 

As  a  boy,  with  hands  meekly  clasped,  as  Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds  has  depicted  him,  he  asked  God  to  speak,  whilst 


102  £lot  (Eeasiruj  in 

his  ear  was  quick  and  attent  to  catch  his  lowest  whispers. 
In  the  Book  of  the  Psalms  he  is  mentioned  as  chief  among 
those  that  call  on  God's  name,  and  as  having  been 
answered  (xcix.  6).  The  prophet  Jeremiah  alludes  to  the 
wonderful  power  which  he  exercised  in  intercessory  prayer 
when  he  pleaded  for  his  people  (xv.  i).  All  Israel  knew 
the  long,  piercing  cry  of  the  prophet  of  the  Lord.  In  their 
perils  his  intercessions  had  been  their  deliverance,  and  in 
their  battles  his  prayers  had  secured  them  victory  (i  Sam. 
vii.  8;  viii.  6).  There  was  "an  open  road"  between  God 
and  him,  so  that  thoughts  of  God's  thinking  were  able  to 
come  into  his  heart ;  and  he  reflected  them  back  again  with 
intense  and  burning  desire. 

I.  SAMUEL'S  PRAYER  FOR  THUNDER  AND  RAIN. — The 
heart  of  man  cries  out  for  Divine  authentication.  In  every 
age  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation  seeks  a  sign,  and  in 
seeking  it  proves  how  far  it  has  wandered  from  the  source 
of  light,  and  become  blinded  in  spiritual  vision.  If  our 
nature  realized  its  divine  ideal,  it  would  discern  God  in  the 
ordinary  and  common  incidents  of  providence,  in  the 
morning  light  and  the  summer  air,  in  dews  that  noiselessly 
alight,  and  zephyrs  that  gently  kiss  the  slumbering  woods, 
in  the  garniture  of  spring,  and  the  carpeting  of  flowers  (Acts 
xiv.  17).  But  the  eyes  of  the  soul  are  blinded,  and  men  do 
not  see  the  traces  of  the  Divine  footprints  across  the  world 
day  by  day.  "Lord,"  said  the  prophet,  "thy  hand  is 
lifted  up,  yet  they  see  not"  (Isa.  xxvi.  n,  R.V.). 

In  default  of  the  faculty  of  detecting  God's  presence  in 
the  noiseless  and  ordinary  providence  of  life,  man  asks  for 
some  startling  phenomena  to  prove  that  God  is  speaking. 
"Bring,"  he  cries  to  the  heaven-sent  messenger,  "cre 
dentials  so  startling  and  extraordinary  that  I  may  know 
without  doubt  that  thou  art  properly  accredited.  The  still, 
small  voice  is  not  enough.  We  must  have  the  hurricane, 


JUttljEtttication.  103 

the  fire,  and  the  bolt  from  the  blue.  Then  we  shall  know 
that  God  speaks  by  thee,  and  that  the  word  from  thy  lips  is 
true." 

Samuel  knew  this,  and  he  perhaps  longed  for  some 
Divine  corroboration  of  his  words.  God's  trusted  servants 
are  content  to  work  through  long  years  amid  persistent 
resistance  and  apathy,  if  only  they  are  assured  that  they  are 
on  the  line  of  the  Divine  purpose.  "  And  it  came  to  pass 
at  the  time  of  the  offering  of  the  evening  sacrifice  that 
Elijah  the  prophet  came  near,  and  said,  Lord  God  of 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  of  Israel,  let  it  be  known  this  day  that 
Thou  art  God  in  Israel,  and  that  I  am  thy  servant,  and  that 
I  have  done  all  these  things  at  thy  word"  Thus,  in  a 
supreme  moment,  one  of  the  noblest  of  his  successors 
appealed  to  God,  and  his  words  expressed  what  was  in 
Samuel's  heart  at  this  great  hour.  He  had  surrendered  his 
prerogatives,  and  introduced  his  successor ;  had  confronted 
his  people  with  their  sins,  and  announced  the  heavy 
penalties  that  must  follow  on  disobedience  ;  now  he  yearned 
that  they  should  hear  another  voice,  asseverating  his  words, 
and  pressing  them  home  on  conscience  and  on  heart. 

It  was  under  the  influence  of  these  thoughts  that  he 
concluded  his  address  and  appeal  with  the  announcement, 
"  Now,  therefore,  stand  still,  and  see  this  great  thing,  which 
the  Lord  will  do  before  your  eyes.  Is  it  not  wheat-harvest 
to-day?  I  will  call  unto  the  Lord,  and  He  shall  send 
thunder  and  rain,  that  ye  may  perceive  and  see  that  your 
wickedness  is  great  which  ye  have  done  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  in  asking  you  a  king." 

During  the  wheat-harvest,  lasting  from  the  middle  of  May 
to  the  middle  of  June,  rain  is  almost  unknown  in  Palestine, 
and  the  occurrence  of  a  thunderstorm,  coming  as  it  did  at 
the  call  of  the  aged  prophet,  was  too  startlingly  unusual  to 
be  viewed  as  other  than  the  Divine  authentication  of  his 
claims. 


104  flot  Ceasing  in 

It  may  be  supposed  that  this  incident  is  altogether  with 
out  parallel,  belonging  to  the  realms  of  Old  Testament 
story ;  but  I  cannot  think  it  to  be  so.  Nature  is  much 
more  sympathetic  with  man  than  we  sometimes  suppose, 
because  her  beauty  or  terror  is  but  the  veil  beneath  which 
the  Almighty  hides  Himself.  How,  save  on  the  sup 
position  that  God  answered  the  appeal  of  his  servants,  can 
we  account  for  the  fact  of  the  terrific  tempest  that  swept  over 
our  shores  when  the  proud  Armada  of  Spain  menaced  the 
liberties  of  Protestant  England  ?  And  how,  save  on  the 
supposition  that  Heaven  itself  protested  against  the  blas 
phemous  pretensions  of  the  Papacy,  can  we  account  for  the 
memorable  fact  that  on  the  afternoon  when  the  dogma  of 
the  Papal  Infallibility  was  announced,  the  Vatican  at  midday 
was  suddenly  invested  with  a  pall  of  blackest  midnight  ? 

But  there  are  other  methods  of  Divine  authentication  on 
which  every  true  servant  of  God  may  rely.  When  Paul  and 
Barnabas  abode  for  a  long  time  in  Iconium,  speaking 
boldly  in  the  Lord,  "  He  gave  testimony  unto  the  word  of 
his  grace  "  ;  and  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews 
generalizes  the  experience  of  the  early  heralds  of  the 
Gospel  when  he  says  that  the  message  of  God's  great 
salvation  was  confirmed  by  them  that  heard  the  word, 
"  God  also  bearing  them  witness,  both  with  signs  and  won 
ders,  and  with  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
according  to  his  own  will "  (Acts  xiv.  3  ;  Heb.  ii.  3,  4). 

We  cannot  be  too  thankful  for  the  witness  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whose  voice  is  to  the  faithful  servant  of  God  all,  and 
more,  than  the  thunder  was  to  Samuel.  It  was  this  that 
armed  the  primitive  saints  with  irresistible  power.  "  We 
are  his  witnesses,"  cried  the  Apostles,  "  and  so  is  also  the 
Holy  Ghost,  whom  God  hath  given  to  them  that  obey 
Him."  "  Our  Gospel,"  wrote  the  greatest  Apostle  of  all, 
"  came  not  unto  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in  power,  and  in 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance"  (i  Thess.  i.  5). 


gearing  (Kit tineas.  105 

May  I  ask  if  my  fellow-servants  realize  this — that  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  in  the  Church  to-day,  that  He  is  prepared  to 
bear  his  witness  to  every  true  word  which  is  spoken  in  the 
name  of  Jesus,  and  that  He  will  convict  of  sin,  righteous 
ness,  and  judgment ;  so  that  the  faith  of  our  hearers  should 
not  stand  in  the  wisdom  of  man,  but  in  the  power  of  God, 
God  bearing  them  witness  and  giving  them  the  Holy  Spirit 
(i  Cor.  ii.  1-4  ;  Acts  xv.  8). 

This  is  the  fatal  lack  of  our  preaching.  We  speak  earn 
estly  and  faithfully,  but  we  do  not  sufficiently  look  for  nor 
rely  on  the  Divine  Co-witness  ;  we  do  not  understand  the 
communion  and  fellowship  of  the  Comforter;  and  our 
hearers  do  not  hear  his  voice  thrilling  their  souls,  as  thunder 
in  the  natural  world,  with  the  conviction  that  the  things 
which  we  speak  are  the  truths  of  God.  Only  let  the  pas 
sionate  longing  of  our  heart  be,  "  Father,  glorify  thy  name," 
and  voices  will  come  as  from  heaven,  saying,  "  I  have  both 
glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again."  Whilst  some  that 
stand  by  may  say  that  "  It  thundered,"  others  will  say, 
"An  angel  spake"  (John  xii.  28,  29). 

Oh,  our  God,  give  us  such  power  in  prayer  that  when  we 
pray  Thou  shalt  answer  "  in  the  secret  place  of  thunder," 
and  send  thunder  and  rain. 

II.  SAMUEL'S  UNCEASING  INTERCESSIONS. — Terrified  by 
the  loud  thunder-peals  and  the  torrents  of  rain,  the  people 
were  urgent  to  secure  Samuel's  intercession  on  their  behalf. 
They  feared  for  their  lives  and  their  property,  and  entreated 
him  to  pray  for  them.  "  Pray  for  thy  servants  unto  the 
Lord  thy  God,"  they  said,  "that  we  die  not";  and  the 
emphasis  they  laid  on  the  word  thy  seemed  to  indicate  that 
they  felt  no  longer  worthy  of  their  ancient  prerogative  as 
the  chosen  people.  Touched  with  their  appeal,  and  confi 
dent  that  Jehovah  only  desired  to  corroborate  his  word, 
the  aged  seer  calmed  their  fears,  urged  them  never  to  turn 


io6  fiat  (Kenshtjj  in  forager. 

aside  to  vain  idols,  which  could  neither  profit  nor  deliver, 
assured  them  that  the  Lord  would  not  forsake  them,  and 
ended  with  the  striking  words  :  "Moreover,  as  for  me,  God 
forbid  that  I  should  sin  against  the  Lord  in  ceasing  to  pray 
for  you." 

Samuel  realized  that  prayer  was  action  in  the  spiritual 
plane.  The  energy  which  we  exert  in  action  in  the  physical 
sphere  becomes  prayer  in  the  spiritual.  It  has  often  been 
said,  Laborare  est  orare  (To  labour  is  to  pray) ;  but  the  con 
verse  is  much  truer,  Orare  est  laborare  (To  pray  is  to 
labour).  "  The  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man,"  says 
James,  "  availeth  much  in  its  working."  Therefore  it  was, 
that  when  the  good  Epaphras  could  no  longer  help  his 
brethren  at  Colosse  by  his  words  and  deeds,  he  betook 
himself  to  prayer,  and  laboured  fervently  for  them  all  in 
prayer  (Col.  iv.  12). 

Work  shall  be  prayer,  if  all  be  wrought 

As  Thou  wouldst  have  it  done  ; 
And  prayer,  by  Thee  inspired  and  taught, 

Itself  with  work  be  one. 

Samuel  could  no  longer  exert  his  energies  for  his  people, 
as  he  had  done.  The  limitations  imposed  by  his  advancing 
years,  and  by  the  substitution  of  the  kingdom  for  his  judge- 
ship,  made  it  impossible  that  he  should  make  his  yearly 
rounds  as  aforetime;  but  he  was  able  to  translate  all  that 
energy  into  another  method  of  helpfulness.  The  light 
became  heat ;  the  water  became  steam.  The  prayers  of 
God's  saints  were  equivalent,  henceforward,  to  battalions  of 
soldiers. 

What  the  telescope  is  to  the  eye,  the  bicycle  to  the  foot, 
the  telephone  to  the  voice,  and  the  steam-driven  machine  to 
the  hand,  in  enlarging  and  increasing  human  power,  prayer 
is  to  the  soul,  because  it  links  us  with  the  mighty  power 
of  God  ;  it  touches  springs  that  unloose  spiritual  forces 
which  are  eternal  in  their  duration  and  universal  in  their 


of  grayer.  107 

scope.  "Mighty  is  he  who  is  mighty  in  prayer;  he  has 
learned  how  to  labour  with  the  energies  of  God."  Why,  O 
soul  of  man,  wilt  thou  not  lay  thy  fingers  on  the  key-board 
of  the  eternal  powers,  which  would  respond  instantly  to  thy 
touch  !  How  great  a  mistake  and  loss  it  is  for  thee  to  be 
satisfied  with  the  lower  key-boards  of  the  natural  and 
intellectual,  when  the  spiritual,  the  highest  and  furthest- 
reaching,  awaits  thee  ! 

Samuel  viewed  prayer  as  a  Divine  instinct.  For  him  to 
thwart  the  promptings  towards  prayer  which  arose  within 
his  soul  would  be  nothing  short  of  sin.  "  God  forbid,"  he 
said,  "  that  I  should  sin  against  Him  in  ceasing  to  pray." 

Let  us  recognise,  we  may  say  with  another,  that,  logic  or 
no  logic,  men  pray,  and  they  want  to  pray.  The  instinct  to 
do  so  seems  to  be  part  of  ourselves.  Probably  it  is  not 
constant,  and  it  is  only  the  saint  who  remains  in  the  spirit 
of  prayer ;  but  some  time  or  other,  and  always  when  the 
spiritual  nature  stirs  within  us,  we  begin  to  pray.  Prayer  is 
therefore  more  than  petition ;  it  is  the  movement  of  the 
spirit  God-ward.  We  recognise  our  own  limitations,  and 
attempt  to  reach  beyond  them  into  the  infinite.  Therefore, 
in  every  true  prayer,  there  is  much  that  cannot  be  put  in 
words.  "  The  spirit  maketh  intercession  with  groanings 
that  cannot  be  uttered." 

To  thwart  this  instinct,  whether  it  prompts  us  to  pray  for 
ourselves,  or  for  others,  is  to  do  violence  to  our  noblest 
nature,  to  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  and  to  sin  against 
the  Divine  order.  Prayerlessness  is  not  only  an  indication 
of  a  besotted  and  demoralized  nature,  but  is  in  itself  a  sin, 
that  requires  confession  and  cleansing  in  the  blood  of  the 
Cross.  And  when,  in  answer  to  our  lowly  supplications,  we 
are  again  brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  we  shall  find 
that  prayer  will  rise  as  naturally  and  freely  in  our  hearts  as 
a  fountain  from  unseen  depths  fed  from  the  everlasting 
hills.  Prayer  is  the  response  of  the  soul  to  God,  the  return 


io8  |X0t  ®eaaitt0  in  grayer. 

tide  from  us  to  Him,  the  sending  back  in  vapour  what  we 
receive  in  showers  of  heavenly  rain. 

Samuel  viewed  prayer  as  a  trusteeship.  He  could  no 
longer  act  as  judge,  but  he  felt  that  the  interests  of  the  nation 
had  been  entrusted  to  his  hands  for  the  highest  ends,  and  it 
would  be  treachery  to  fail  in  conserving  and  extending  them, 
at  least  by  his  intercessions.  Often  must  he  have  gone  aside, 
as  Moses  on  the  Mount,  and  as  our  Lord  on  the  hills  that 
engirdled  the  blue  waters  of  Galilee,  to  pour  out  his  soul 
in  strong  cryings  and  tears  for  his  brethren,  his  kinsmen 
according  to  the  flesh,  who  were  Israelites,  to  whom  per 
tained  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  covenants,  and 
the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  service  of  God,  and  the 
promises.  Often,  like  the  Apostle  Paul,  he  had  great 
heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in  his  heart.  Often,  when 
the  Philistines  overran  the  land,  and  oppressed  the  people 
with  their  tyranny,  it  must  have  seemed  as  though  his  heart 
would  break.  The  failure  of  Saul  to  realize  his  ideal  only 
elicited  the  more  strenuous  appeals  to  God  to  save  both 
king  and  people,  and  the  victory  which  we  must  record 
in  our  next  chapter  must  have  been  due  to  his  eager 
entreaties. 

This  is  a  model  which  we  may  all  copy.  The  one 
question  for  the  Church  in  the  present  day  is  whether  she 
may  reckon  on  a  new  manifestation  of  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  and  this  is  entirely  contingent  on  another 
question,  "  Is  it  possible  to  bring  the  whole  Church  to  her 
knees  ?  "  If  these  words  are  of  weight  with  any,  let  me  ask 
them  to  join  in  one  persevering  and  heaven-moving  appeal 
to  God  that  He  would  awake,  as  in  the  ancient  days,  in  the 
generations  of  old,  and  do  great  things  like  those  of  which 
our  fathers  have  told  us. 


XV. 

Cause  of  haul's  Bctonfall. 

(i  SAMUEL  xiii.  13,  14.) 

"  Bide  thou  thy  time  ! 

Watch  with  meek  eyes  the  race  of  pride  and  crime, 
Sit  in  the  gate,  and  be  the  heathen's  jest, 

Smiling  and  self-possest, 
O  thou  to  whom  is  pledged  a  victor's  sway 
Bide  thou  the  victor's  day." 

N.  H.  J. 


chapter  is  the  story  of  a  great  tragedy,  since  it 
contains  the  history  of  the  incident  which  revealed 
Saul's  unfitness  to  be  the  founder  of  a  line  of  kings. 
Had  he  stood  this  test,  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  would 
have  been,  not  only  the  first  monarch  of  Israel,  but  the 
father  of  a  royal  race,  and  the  whole  after-history  of  the 
chosen  people  might  have  been  different.  But,  as  we  shall 
see  —  though,  at  first,  his  kingdom  augured  prosperity  to  his 
fatherland  —  it  evidently  lacked  the  elements  of  permanence 
and  continuity,  and  of  becoming  Israel's  permanent  bulwark 
against  the  invasions  of  the  enemy  from  without,  and  the 
cancer  of  disintegration  or  corruption  within. 

Let  us  gather  around  this  story,  not  only  because  it  has 
so  much  to  do  with  the  history  of  God's  people,  but  because 
it  is  full  of  instruction  for  ourselves.  Turning  from  Saul  to 
David,  Samuel  said,  "  The  Lord  hath  sought  Him  a  man 
after  his  own  heart."  It  is,  therefore,  clear  that,  in  some 
way,  Saul  had  ceased  to  be  "  a  man  after  God's  own  heart," 
and  it  becomes  us  carefully  to  inquire  the  reason,  that  we 
may  avoid  the  rocks  on  which  this  good  ship  split  and 
foundered. 


no  &JJE  Cause  0f  Anil's  gohmfall. 

You  will  remark  that  the  chapter  which  tells  the  history 
of  this  tragedy — the  overcasting  of  a  bright  morning,  the 
spoiling  of  a  fair  and  beautiful  promise — also  contains  the 
story  of  the  unutterable  distress  to  which  the  chosen  people 
had  been  reduced  by  another  invasion  of  the  Philistines. 
We  are  told,  for  instance,  in  ver.  6,  that  the  people  of  Israel 
were  in  a  strait,  that  they  were  distressed,  that  they  hid 
themselves  in  caves  and  thickets,  in  rocks  and  in  pits  ;  in 
deed,  some  of  them  even  crossed  the  Jordan,  and  forsook 
their  fatherland  in  the  hour  of  its  extremity  ;  while  those 
who  were  yet  associated  with  Saul  and  Jonathan,  as  the 
nucleus  of  the  royal  army,  followed  him  trembling  (ver.  7). 
A  spirit  of  fearfulness  had  settled  down  upon  the  whole 
people  ;  the  old  national  spirit  had  decayed  ;  it  seemed  as 
though  they  could  never  again  be  induced  to  stand  against 
the  Philistines,  any  more  than  a  flock  of  sheep  against  a 
pack  of  wolves. 

We  are  also  informed  of  the  numbers  of  the  vast  host 
of  Philistines,  which  had  been  gathered  from  all  parts,  in 
order  to  crush  out  the  movement  towards  a  national  exist 
ence,  of  which  the  coronation  of  Saul  and  the  exploits  of 
Jonathan  were  symptoms  (ver.  3).  We  can  overhear  the 
tidings  brought  to  Saul  (ver.  5)  by  some  panic-stricken 
messenger,  who,  with  the  exaggeration  of  abject  fear, 
described  the  Philistines  as  the  sand  which  is  on  the  sea 
shore  in  multitude. 

A  further  proof  of  the  hapless  misery  of  the  people  is 
adduced  in  verse  19  :  there  was  no  smith  found  throughout 
the  whole  land  of  Israel,  and  the  Hebrews  had  to  take  their 
implements  of  agriculture  down  to  the  smithies  of  the 
Philistines  in  order  that  they  might  be  sharpened  for  their 
use.  Never  in  the  history  of  the  chosen  people  were  there 
more  dire  calamity,  more  absolute  hopelessness  and  despair, 
than  reigned  around  Saul  and  throughout  the  entire  country 
at  this  hour. 


Haul's  ^jJltatahc.  in 


At  this  juncture  Saul  seems  to  have  withdrawn  his 
troops,  such  as  they  were,  from  Michmash,  and  to  have 
taken  up  his  position  on  the  ancient  site  of  Gilgal,  where 
the  act  of  circumcision  was  performed  after  Israel  had 
crossed  the  Jordan  under  Joshua.  There  upon  the  level 
land,  and  therefore  exposed  to  the  assault  of  the  Philistine 
hosts  at  any  moment,  Saul  seems  to  have  pitched  his 
camps  ;  whilst  his  heroic  son,  Jonathan,  kept  up  a  post  of 
observation  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Philistine  hosts. 

Whilst  Saul  with  his  soldiers  remained  at  Gilgal,  every 
day  marked  the  diminution  of  his  host.  This  man  and  that 
stole  away,  either  across  the  Jordan  as  a  fugitive,  or  to  hide 
in  some  hole  and  corner  of  the  hills. 

It  may  be  asked  why,  at  such  a  time,  Saul  did  not  make 
one  desperate  effort  against  the  Philistines.  Why  did  he 
wait  there  day  after  day,  whilst  his  army  evaporated  before 
his  eyes  ?  Ah  !  thereby  hangs  a  story  —  to  understand  which 
we  must  turn  back  a  page  or  two  in  the  inspired  record.  In 
chap.  x.  8,  in  that  early  morning  interview,  when  Samuel 
designated  Saul  for  the  crown,  he  told  him  that  the  crisis  of 
his  life  would  overtake  him  at  Gilgal  —  a  prophecy  the  fulfil 
ment  of  which  had  now  arrived.  "  Thou  shall  go  down 
before  me  to  Gilgal  ;  and,  behold,  I  will  come  down  unto 
thee,  to  offer  burnt-offerings,  and  to  sacrifice  sacrifices  of 
peace-offerings  :  seven  days  shalt  thou  tarry,  till  I  come 
unto  thee,  and  show  thee  what  thou  shalt  do." 

I.  SAUL'S  MISTAKE.  —  This  command,  uttered  three  years 
before  to  Saul,  as  he  stood  on  the  threshold  of  his  vast 
opportunities,  involved  two  things,  and  each  of  them  consti 
tuted  a  supreme  test. 

First,  whether  he  was  prepared  to  act  as  God's  vice 
gerent  ;  not  as  absolute  monarch  determining  his  own 
policy,  and  acting  on  his  own  initiative,  but  as  God's  ser 
vant,  receiving  the  marching  orders  of  his  life  through  the 


H2  ®ljc  Okutse  of  Haul's  gotonfall. 

prophet's  lips  ;  not  acting  as  an  autocrat,  but  as  one  to 
whom  there  had  been  a  delegation  of  Divine  authority. 

Second,  whether  he  could  control  his  impetuous  nature, 
put  the  curb  upon  his  impulse,  and  hold  himself  well  in 
hand. 

It  was  this  embargo  which  Samuel  had  laid  upon  him  that 
made  him  wait  day  after  day.  Can  you  not  imagine  how 
his  chosen  advisers  and  warriors  would  come  around  him 
and  urge  him  to  do  something?  Might  they  not  have 
pointed  to  the  Philistine  hosts  encamped  at  Michmash, 
gathering  like  a  cloud  of  storm  ?  Might  they  not  have  told 
him  how,  unless  he  acted  quickly,  his  paternal  estate  would 
be  wiped  out  before  the  invasion  ?  Might  they  not  have 
pointed  to  the  dwindling  hosts,  and  said,  Rise  up  and  do 
something  ;  it  were  better  to  die  beneath  the  Philistines' 
hand  than  allow  them  to  pounce  down  on  you,  as  the  bird 
of  prey  on  the  trembling  dove  ! 

But  he  waited  day  after  day.  "  He  tarried  seven  days, 
according  to  the  set  time  that  Samuel  had  appointed ;  but 
Samuel  came  not  to  Gilgal,  and  the  people  were  scattered 
from  him."  Then  it  would  seem  that  within  a  brief  space 
of  the  expiry  of  the  allotted  time  he  could  wait  no  more. 
He  thought  that  Samuel  must  have  forgotten  the  appoint 
ment,  or  had  been  intercepted  in  making  his  way  from 
Ramah  through  the  Philistine  lines.  He  had  waited  till 
within  half  an  hour  (because  to  offer  a  burnt-offering  and  a 
peace-offering  could  not  take  much  longer),  and  then 
spoiled  the  whole,  by  his  inability  to  delay  further  ;  and 
he  said  to  the  priest,  who  still  lingered  by  the  ancient 
site  where  God  had  been  worshipped  and  the  Tabernacle 
posted,  "  Bring  hither  the  burnt  offering  to  me,  and  the 
peace  offerings."  "  And  it  came  to  pass  that  as  soon  as 
hehad  made  an  end  of  offering  the  burnt-offering,  behold, 
Samuel  came." 

Ah,  if  only  some  sentry  standing  on  a  pinnacle  of  rock 


Inner  tJokc.  113 

could  have  looked  over  into  the  adjacent  valley  and  seen 
the  form  of  the  old  man  drawing  nearer  to  the  camp,  he 
might  have  warned  the  king,  crying,  "Samuel  is  coming!" 
But  there  was  no  one  to  arrest  him — nothing  but  the  moni 
tion  and  remonstrance  of  his  own  heart.  It  was  shown 
that  he  could  not  wait  for  God  in  absolute  faith  that  He 
would  not  fail  nor  deceive.  He  was  careful  to  maintain  an 
outward  rite,  but  the  spirit  of  devotion  and  faith  was  alto 
gether  wanting.  As  he  was,  his  successors  would  become, 
to  the  undoing  of  Israel ;  therefore  his  kingdom  could  not 
continue. 

The  one  lesson  that  comes  back  to  us  with  almost  over 
whelming  force  is,  that  the  man  who  is  after  God's  heart 
is  the  man  who  will  obey  God  to  the  letter,  who  will  wait 
for  God  to  the  last  moment,  who  will  dare  to  stand  amid  a 
diminishing  and  dwindling  army,  and  even  see  disaster 
imminent,  but,  because  he  has  not  received  the  marching 
orders  of  God,  will  stand  still,  until  presently  God  sets  him 
free. 

How  many  religious  people  there  are  who,  as  they  review 
their  past  life,  can  recall  moments  when  they  did  not  know 
what  to  do.  An  inner  voice — still,  sweet,  but  commanding 
— bade  them  wait  and  trust ;  but  many  other  voices,  loud 
and  strident,  summoned  them  to  act ;  so  that  the  still, 
small  voice  of  faith,  of  resignation,  of  absolute  obedience, 
was  silenced,  the  one  rash  word  spoken,  the  one  irrevocable 
act  performed,  betraying  the  weakness  of  the  heart,  the 
ineffectiveness  of  the  resolve.  When  all  was  over,  Samuel 
has  come,  and  we  have  reproached  ourselves,  saying,  "  Oh, 
if  I  had  only  thought  that  God  was  so  near,  I  would  not 
have  acted  as  I  did  :  woe  is  me ;  why  could  not  I  wait  ?  " 
Samuel  always  comes  just  at  the  last  moment ;  but  it  is  so 
hard  to  wait  till  he  does  come.  "  Master,  Master,  we 
perish  !  And  He  arose,  and  rebuked  the  storm,  and  said, 
Why  are  ye  fearful,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?  "  God  hath  not 


n4  ®!JE  Cause  of  haul's  gohmfall. 

given  us  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  the  spirit  of  power,  of  love, 
of  self-discipline  and  self-restraint. 

Man  becomes  so  weary  of  waiting,  and  it  seems  as  though 
God  were  so  slow.  God's  mighty  processes  sweep  around  so 
wide  an  orbit.  One  day  is  as  a  thousand  years,  but  He  is 
coming  as  the  morning,  as  the  spring,  as  the  millennium. 
"  His  going  forth  is  sure  as  the  morning,  and  He  shall 
come  unto  us  as  the  rain,  as  the  latter  rain  that  watereth 
the  earth." 

II.  SAUL'S  DISINGENUOUS  PLEA. — Notice  Saul's  explana 
tion  to  Samuel.  He  said  :  "  I  said  to  myself,  the  Philistines 
will  come  down  upon  me  to  Gilgal,  and  I  have  not  intreated 
the  favour  of  the  Lord.  I  forced  myself  therefore,  and 
offered  the  burnt-offering."  That  surely  was  insincere.  He 
laid  the  blame  on  circumstances  ;  he  said  practically :  "  The 
circumstances  of  my  lot  forced  my  hand  ;  I  did  not  want  to 
do  it,  I  was  most  reluctant,  but  I  could  not  help  myself; 
the  Philistines  were  coming.  I  tell  you  the  sceptre  was 
wrested  from  my  grasp,  and  I  had  to  obey  the  imperious 
voice  of  the  misfortunes  that  fell  thick  and  fast  upon  me." 
His  speech  reminds  us  of  Aaron's,  who  stripped  the  people 
naked  before  God  and  their  enemies,  and  sought  to  excuse 
himself  by  saying,  "  They  gave  me  their  earrings  ;  I  cast 
them  into  the  fire,  and  there  came  out  this  calf." 

We  are  all  prone  to  speak  in  the  same  tone.  When  the 
rash  word  has  been  uttered,  and  the  proud  act  done ;  when 
we  have  refused  to  obey,  and  have  seen  the  house  of  our 
life  toppling  down  upon  us,  or  consuming  in  the  flames  of 
our  folly,  we  have  said,  "  Circumstances  compelled  me ;  I 
had  to  do  it,  and  I  did  it :  I  forced  myself;  my  hand  was 
forced." 

O  soul  of  man,  thou  art  greater  than  circumstances ; 
greater  than  things ;  greater  than  the  mob  of  evil  counsellors. 
Thou  art  meant  to  be  God's  crowned  and  enthroned  king  ; 


115 

to  rule  and  not  to  be  ruled  :  to  obey  God  only,  and  to  resist 
all  other  attempts  to  bring  thee  under  the  yoke.  Rouse 
thee,  lest  it  should  be  said  of  thee  also,  that  thy  kingdom 
shall  not  continue. 

III.  MARK  THE  ALTERNATIVE  TO  THIS. — In  answer  to  all 
this,  Samuel,  speaking  in  the  name  of  God,  said  :  "  I  have 
chosen  a  man  after  my  own  heart,  who  shall  perform  all  my 
will."  In  Jesse's  home  the  lad  was  being  prepared  who 
could  believe,  and  not  make  haste.  Listen  to  the  manner 
in  which  this  man  after  God's  own  heart  spake  in  after 
years  :  "  I  waited  patiently  for  the  Lord,  and  He  inclined 
unto  me,  and  heard  my  cry.  He  brought  me  up  also  out 
of  an  horrible  pit,  and  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  set  my  feet 
upon  a  rock  and  established  my  goings"  (Psa.  xl.  i,  2). 

Wait,  wait  thou  thy  Lord's  leisure.  Let  thine  heart  stop 
its  feverish  beating,  and  thy  pulse  register  no  more  its 
tumultuous  waves  of  emotion  !  To  act  now  would  only 
disappoint  the  highest  hopes,  mar  the  Divine  purposes,  and 
set  stones  rolling  that  shall  never  be  stopped.  Wait  for 
God  ;  stand  still,  and  see  his  salvation.  His  servant  is 
coming  up  the  pass  ;  his  steps  may  not  be  quite  so  speedy 
as  we  would  have  them,  but  he  will  arrive  to  the  moment — 
not  a  moment  too  soon,  but  not  a  moment  too  late.  God's 
messenger  is  timed  to  come  when  the  heart  has  almost 
failed,  the  steps  almost  gone,  and  hope  almost  vanished. 
"  The  Lord  is  at  hand  !  "  Oh  wait,  my  soul,  wait,  wait  upon 
God ;  for  God  cannot  be  behind,  as  He  will  not  be  before, 
the  allotted  and  appointed  moment. 

And  when  He  comes,  there  will  be  laughter  for  tears, 
harvest  for  sowing,  blue  skies  for  clouds,  and  long  days  of 
rapturous  bliss,  that  shall  make  thee  forget  the  shame  and 
reproach  of  the  past  ! 


XVI. 

flitting  ton  f  Ijousanft  to 

(i  SAMUEL  xiv. ) 

"  Oh  !  I  have  seen  the  day, 
When,  with  a.  single  word, 
God  helping  me  to  say 

'  My  trust  is  in  the  Lord  ! ' 
My  soul  hath  quelled  n  thousand  foes, 
Fearless  of  all  that  could  oppose." 

COWPER. 

r  UST  two  young  men,  with  the  glow  of  patriotism  in 
their  hearts,  and  trust  in  God  as  their  guiding-star, 
./  what  may  they  not  effect  ? 

Jonathan  was  a  true  knight  of  God,  who  anticipated  some 
of  the  noblest  traits  of  Christian  chivalry.  We  may  almost 
say  of  him  that  he  was  the  Hebrew  Bayard,  a  soldier  with 
out  fear  and  without  reproach.  He  lived  pure,  spoke  true, 
righted  wrong,  was  faithful  to  the  high  claims  of  human 
love,  and  followed  the  Christ,  though  as  yet  he  knew  Him 
not.  His  character  serves  as  a  bright  background  on  which 
that  of  his  father  is  but  a  sorry  contrast. 

From  the  Jordan  bank,  a  noble  valley,  twelve  miles  in 
length,  leads  up  into  the  hill-country  of  Central  Palestine, 
and  so  to  the  sea-board  of  the  Mediterranean.  Two  miles 
from  the  head  of  this  defile,  and  about  eight  miles  due 
north  of  Jerusalem,  the  cliffs  on  either  side  become  very 
precipitous,  and  approach  each  other  almost  to  touching. 

Conceive  of  a  very  narrow  pass,  protected  on  either  side 
by  steep  walls  of  chalky  formation,  on  which  only  the  wild 
goats  could  find  a  footing,  and  almost  unscalable  by  man. 
The  ridge  on  the  north,  which  rises  above  an  almost  per 
pendicular  crag  into  three  knolls,  was  called  Bozez,  or 
"  shining,"  because  it  reflects  all  day  the  full  light  of  the 


JVn  tjcroic  (Episode.  117 

Eastern  sun  ;  whilst  that  on  the  south,  a  few  yards  distant, 
was  known  as  Seneh,  "  the  acacia,"  being  as  constantly  in 
the  shade.  Michmash  crowned  the  former,  and  there  the 
Philistines  were  encamped ;  whilst  the  little  village  of  Geba 
lay  above  the  latter,  and  thither  Saul  had  removed  his  army, 
such  as  it  was,  withdrawing  from  the  plains  of  the  Jordan 
to  watch  the  movements  of  the  hostile  force. 

How  long  the  armies  watched  each  other  we  have  no 
means  of  knowing,  nor  can  we  guess  what  the  result  might 
have  been,  had  it  not  been  for  the  heroic  episode  which  we 
are  to  recount. 

I.  JONATHAN  ENTERED  INTO  THE  DIVINE  PURPOSE.— 
Jonathan  chafed  at  the  inaction  and  the  disgrace  which 
the  whole  situation  attached  to  his  countrymen.  He  was 
animated  also  by  a  profound  faith  in  God,  and  was  prompted 
by  the  Divine  Spirit  to  an  act  which  issued  in  a  glorious 
victory  and  deliverance.  It  seemed  to  him  impossible  to 
suppose  that  God  had  forsaken  the  people  of  his  choice, 
or  withdrawn  from  his  ancient  covenant.  Had  He  promised, 
and  could  He  not  perform  ?  Was  not  Israel  his  chosen 
heritage  ?  Surely  the  purpose  of  the  Almighty  was  in 
conflict  with  the  invasion  of  the  land  by  these  Philistine 
hordes,  and  only  waited  for  some  believing  soul  to  enter 
into  full  communion  with  its  mighty  current,  and  deliver 
ance  would  be  secured. 

Saul,  on  the  other  hand,  had  no  perception  of  these 
things.  The  great  past  failed  to  speak  to  him.  Discour 
aged  by  what  met  his  eye  and  ear  from  morning  to  night, 
he  had  no  power  to  rouse  himself  to  lay  hold  on  the 
Divine  promise  of  deliverance.  The  sentence  of  deposi 
tion,  which  Samuel  had  pronounced,  like  a  stone  on  the 
mouth  of  a  tomb,  seemed  to  shut  him  up  to  despair. 

It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  this  mortal  life,  when 
heart  and  flesh  fail  before  the  giant  wrongs  that  assert 


"8     4<®hm  flitting  ®&n  ^irousattfr  to  Jligljt." 

themselves  against  the  well-being  of  mankind — such  as  the 
drink-traffic,  the  mania  for  betting  and  gambling,  impurity, 
and  the  insensate  absorption  in  pleasure,  which  are  the 
Philistines  of  our  time — to  look  away  to  the  Divine  pur 
pose,  as  disclosed  in  the  redemption  achieved  on  the  Cross 
by  the  blood  of  the  world's  Redeemer.  Surely  that  cannot 
have  been  shed  in  vain.  The  power  and  potency  of  the 
Divine  might  are  pledged  to  realize  and  accomplish  that  full 
deliverance  of  which  the  Cross  was  the  prophecy.  The 
Son  of  Man  has  been  manifested  that  He  might  destroy  the 
works  of  the  devil ;  and  He  will  not  fail  nor  be  discouraged 
until  that  purpose  has  been  realized.  Happy  are  they  who, 
like  Jonathan,  raise  themselves  above  the  depression  of  the 
moment  into  living  fellowship  with  these  eternal  facts,  and 
ally  their  weakness  with  the  march  of  God,  as  He  is  ever 
going  forth  to  establish  righteousness  and  judgment  in  the 
earth,  which  has  been  redeemed  by  precious  blood. 

II.  HE  YIELDED  HIMSELF  AS  AN  INSTRUMENT. — God 
always  works  through  human  means.  He  calls  us  into 
fellowship  with  Himself,  so  that  the  Divine  tides  shall  flow 
through  human  channels.  God  is  ever  on  the  outlook  for 
believing  souls,  who  will  receive  his  power  and  grace  on  the 
one  hand,  and  transmit  them  on  the  other.  He  chooses 
them,  that  by  them  He  should  make  his  mighty  power 
known.  Happy  are  they  who  are  not  insensible  to  the 
Divine  impulse,  nor  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision. 

Jonathan  was  one  of  those  blessed  souls  who  are  as 
sensitive  to  God  as  the  retina  of  the  eye  to  light,  or  the 
healthy  muscle  to  the  nerve ;  and  "  it  fell  upon  a  day  that 
he  said  unto  the  young  man  that  bore  his  armour,  Come, 
let  us  go  over  to  the  Philistines'  garrison,  that  is  on  the 
other  side."  With  a  beautiful  modesty  "he  told  not  his 
father "  ;  and  in  all  probability  the  two  slipped  away  silently 
in  the  grey  dawn  whilst  their  comrades  were  still  wrapped 


$>umttt)crc&  to  (Soft.  119 

in  slumber.  The  intimation  of  a  Divine  purpose  thrilled 
the  ardent  spirit  of  the  young  prince,  of  which  he  gave 
some  clue  in  the  words,  "  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will 
work  for  us,  for  there  is  no  restraint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by 
many  or  by  few." 

Notice  where  Jonathan  laid  the  emphasis.  He  had  the 
smallest  possible  faith  in  himself,  and  the  greatest  faith  in 
God.  His  soul  waited  for  the  Lord ;  in  Him  was  centred 
all  his  hope,  and  from  his  gracious  help  he  expected  great 
things.  All  that  he  aspired  to  was  to  be  the  humble 
vehicle  through  which  the  delivering  grace  of  God  might 
work.  This  is  what  God  wants — not  our  strength,  but  our 
weakness,  which  in  absolute  despair  turns  to  Him  ;  not  our 
armies — but  two  or  three  elect  souls,  who  expect  great 
things  and  dare  them.  It  is  false  to  say  that  the  Almighty 
is  on  the  side  of  great  battalions.  All  history  goes  to  show 
that  the  movements  which  have  transformed  the  face  of  the 
world  have  been  achieved  by  the  going  forth  of  God  through 
individuals,  who  have  not  been  specially  distinguished  by 
out-standing  talents,  but  have  been  led  to  surrender  them 
selves  absolutely  to  the  Divine  impulse.  What  shall  I  more 
say  ? — for  time  would  fail  to  tell  of  Carey,  and  Wilberforce, 
and  Livingstone,  and  George  Miiller,  and  hundreds  more. 

Yield  yourselves  to  God — and  I  specially  appeal  to  the 
young  men  who  may  read  these  words.  There  are  wrongs 
that  God  wants  to  right,  tyrannies  He  is  about  to  break,  foes 
of  human  peace  and  happiness  that  He  wants  to  quell ;  but 
He  must  have  agents  and  instruments,  clean  and  pure,  true 
and  faithful,  delivered  from  the  domination  of  the  flesh, 
and  absolutely  resigned  to  his  disposal.  It  matters  not  if 
they  be  high-born  as  Jonathan,  or  obscure  as  his  armour- 
bearer  ;  through  them  He  will  achieve  a  great  deliverance. 

Saul,  the  chosen  king,  had  no  such  vision  and  no  such 
faith.  He  was  not  sensible  to  the  Divine  voice  speaking  in 
his  soul,  but  had  to  depend  on  the  interposition  of  the 


i2o      "  &fcm  Cutting  fa  ®rjousan6  to 

priest  (vers.  19  and  36) ;  he  spoke  and  acted  as  though  the 
victory  depended  wholly  on  the  efforts  that  he  and  his  men 
might  put  forth ;  and  in  forbidding  the  use  of  such  simple 
refreshment  as  the  wild  honey  of  the  woods  might  yield,  he 
forfeited  the  full  results  of  God's  interposition.  Could  it  be 
supposed  that  God's  deliverance  of  his  people  would  fall 
short  because  they  put  forth  the  ends  of  the  rods  that  might 
be  in  their  hands  to  convey  the  wild  honey  to  their  lips  ? 
Throughout  the  whole  day,  and  especially  in  this  senseless 
adjuration,  which  was  meant  to  save  time,  but  really  hin 
dered  the  full  result,  Saul  showed  himself  oblivious  of  the 
one  thought  that  animated  the  heart  of  his  noble  son — that 
God  was  working  through  human  instruments  to  inflict  his 
own  judgment  on  the  invading  hosts. 

III.  JONATHAN  RECKONED  ON  GOD,  AND  GOD  DID  NOT 
FAIL  HIM. — Faith  is  the  indomitable  power  by  which  we 
call  unto  our  help  a  whole  range  of  laws  and  forces  which 
are  outside  the  lives  of  ordinary  men.  As  we  have  said, 
they  have  two  key-boards  to  their  organ ;  we  have  three. 
They  employ  the  physical  and  intellectual;  whilst  we,  in 
addition,  may  call  -in  the  aid  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal. 
Thus  we  are  able  to  accomplish  the  same  results,  and  better, 
by  the  assictance  of  energies  which  are  as  much  greater  than 
those  ordinarily  employed,  as  electricity  is  greater  than 
horse-power  or  steam.  This  was  the  secret  of  Jonathan's 
success. 

As  they  ascended  the  steep  cliff-side,  the  young  men 
agreed  on  the  sign  which  should  indicate  that  they  were 
indeed  in  the  line  of  the  Divine  will,  and  that  God  would 
not  fail  them.  The  heart  of  man  in  its  first  venture  on  the 
way  of  faith  eagerly  longs  for  some  sign  that  it  is  not 
following  a  will-o'-the-wisp,  or  being  misled  by  wreckers' 
lights.  This  was  graciously  granted  in  the  mocking  voices 
of  the  advanced  outposts,  which  ridiculed  the  idea  that  the 


Ijcafwt-gitrctt 


12  r 


Hebrews  were  to  be  feared  (ver.  n),  even  though  they 
should  succeed  in  scaling  the  crags.  "  Behold,"  they  said, 
"  the  Hebrews  come  forth  out  of  the  holes  where  they  had 
hid  themselves  ;  and  the  men  of  the  garrison  answered 
Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer,  and  said,  Come  up  to  us, 
and  we  will  show  you  a  thing  (or  we  should  like  to  make 
your  acquaintance)." 

This  was  the  heaven-given  sign,  and  conveyed  the  assur 
ance  that  the  Lord  had  already  delivered  them  into  the 
hand  of  Israel  (ver.  10).  By  faith  the  soul  appropriates  the 
Divine  answer.  "  Whatsoever  we  ask,  we  receive  of  Him." 
But  it  is  only  as  we  fulfil  the  one  all-important  condition  of 
successful  prayer,  which  is  so  often  overlooked,  "  All  things 
whatsoever  ye  pray  and  ask  for,  believe  that  ye  have  received 
them,  and  ye  shall  have  them  "  (Mark  xi.  24,  R.V.). 

The  soul  that  reckons  on  God  cannot  be  ashamed.  When 
they  reached  the  top  the  two  young  Benjaminites  used  their 
slings  with  such  precision  that  twenty  men  measured  their 
length  on  the  ground,  and  a  trembling  from  God,  a  heaven 
sent  panic,  spread  from  them  back  on  the  main  army  behind, 
and  to  the  bands  of  spoilers  returning  from  their  night  raids. 
The  Philistines  could  not  know  that  the  two  who  faced  them 
were  absolutely  alone.  It  seemed  as  though  they  were 
precursors  of  a  host  of  resolute  and  desperate  men,  and 
suddenly,  in  the  panic,  each  man  suspected  his  neighbour  of 
being  in  league  against  him;  "every  man's  sword  was 
against  his  fellow,  so  that  there  was  a  very  great  discom 
fiture."  Meanwhile,  the  Hebrews  that  had  been  allied  to 
the  Philistines,  or  silently  acquiescent  in  their  rule,  even 
they  also  turned  against  them  ;  and  all  who  had  hid  them 
selves  in  the  hill-country  of  Ephraim,  when  they  heard  that 
the  Philistines  fled,  followed  hard  after  them  in  battle. 

From  his  outlook  at  Gibeah,  Saul  beheld  the  wild  confu 
sion,  and  how  the  multitude  swayed  to  and  fro,  and  melted 
away.     Without  delay  he  hurled  himself  with  his  soldiers 
Q 


122     "fttoo  futtht0  fen  ftljousanti  to 

on  the  flying  foe,  who  fled,  in  headlong  precipitancy,  down 
the  long  valley,  past  Beth-aven,  past  the  Upper  and  then  the 
Lower  Beth-horon,  in  order  to  gain  the  Philistine  frontier 
by  the  valley  of  Aijalon.  Every  town  through  which  the 
fugitives  passed  rose  in  their  rear,  and  joined  the  pursuit,  so 
that  the  flying  host  was  greatly  reduced,  and  thousands  of 
warriors  dyed  the  highways  of  the  land,  which  they  had  so 
grievously  oppressed,  with  their  hearts'  blood.  Thus  did 
God  deliver  his  people  in  answer  to  Jonathan's  faith. 

The  unwise  prohibition  of  the  king  against  food  had  a 
terrible  sequel ;  first,  in  the  exhaustion  of  the  troops, 
and,  secondly,  in  the  famished  eating  of  the  spoils  of  the 
day,  without  the  proper  separation  of  the  blood.  Still 
worse,  when  the  day  closed  in,  and  Saul  asked  counsel  of 
God,  the  Divine  Oracle  was  dumb.  Some  sin  had  silenced 
it,  and  the  monarch,  already  touched  with  the  dark  sus 
picions  and  fears  in  which  his  soul  became  afterwards  so 
densely  enveloped,  realized  that  some  sin  was  crying  for 
discovery  and  expiation.  He  did  not  look  for  that  sin, 
where  he  would  have  assuredly  found  it,  in  his  own  heart, 
but  in  the  people  that  stood  around  him.  Finally  he  and 
Jonathan  stood  before  the  people  as  the  objects  of  the 
Divine  displeasure,  and  Saul  was  prepared  even  to  sacrifice 
his  son  in  his  moody  wrath. 

But  the  people  saved  him.  They  cried  indignantly, 
"  Shall  Jonathan  die,  who  hath  wrought  this  great  salva 
tion  in  Israel  ?  God  forbid !  As  the  Lord  liveth,  there 
shall  not  one  hair  of  his  head  fall  to  the  ground,  for  he 
hath  wrought  with  God  this  day."  Ah,  the  cause  of  dis 
comfiture  most  surely  lay  between  those  two  men  ;  but  it 
was  not  due  to  aught  in  Jonathan.  Saul  was  alone  to  blame. 
He  had  not  only  missed  the  greatest  opportunity  of  his 
life,  but  he  was  already  enwrapping  himself  in  the  unbelief, 
the  jealousy,  the  moroseness  of  temper,  in  which  his  sun 
was  to  be  enshrouded  while  it  was  yet  day. 


XVII. 

JFaihtru  Slntor  tlj* 

(i  SAMUEL  xv.  26.) 

1 '  Mortal !  if  life  smile  on  thee,  and  thou  find 

All  to  thy  mind, 
Think,  Who  did  once  from  Heaven  to  Hell  descend 

Thee  to  befriend  ! 

So  shall  thou  dare  forego  at  His  dear  call 
Thy  best, — thine  all." 

K.EBLE. 

ON  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,  encrusted  with  salt, 
lie  the  trunks  of  many  noble  trees  which  have 
been  torn  from  their  roots,  and  carried  by  the 
rapid  Jordan  in  its  flow  from  the  uplands  of  Galilee 
towards  the  depression  of  that  remarkable  gorge ;  and  as 
they  line  those  desolate  shores  they  remind  us  of  lives 
which  God  planted  to  bear  fruit  and  give  shade,  which  have 
not  fulfilled  his  original  purpose  in  their  creation,  and 
which  have  been  torn  up  by  the  roots  and  borne  down  to 
the  sea  of  death.  Conspicuous  among  such  failures  is  that 
of  Saul,  the  first  king  of  Israel. 

It  is  impossible  to  turn  to  the  pages  of  his  history  with 
out  lamenting  that  the  bright  promise  of  his  early  life  was 
so  soon  over-cast,  and  that  he,  who  stood  forth  in  the 
morning  of  his  life  amid  the  acclaim  of  his  people  as 
likely  to  do  marvellous  work  for  his  fatherland,  became 
one  of  those  whom  the  sacred  writers  describe  as  having 
failed  of  the  high  purpose  of  their  life,  been  rejected  in 
their  mission,  and  cast  away  as  tools  from  the  hands  of 
the  great  Artificer.  This  chapter  gives  the  story  of  his 
final  rejection,  which  had  indeed  been  threatened  afore 
time,  but  which  now  befel. 


124  ^Failure  Sltttor  trjc  Supreme 

I.  THE  TEST  OF  THE  DIVINE  SUMMONS  AND  COMMAND. 
— "  Go  and  smite  Amalek,  and  utterly  destroy  all  that 
they  have,  and  spare  them  not;  but  slay  both  man  and 
woman,  infant  and  suckling,  ox  and  sheep,  camel  and 
ass." 

This  command  was  given  after  several  years  had  inter 
vened  from  the  incident  narrated  in  the  previous  chapter ; 
and  during  those  years  Saul  had  met  with  marvellous  en 
couragement.  The  handful  of  men  who  had  followed 
him,  trembling,  had  increased  to  a  great  army,  properly 
disciplined  and  armed,  and  led  by  Abner,  his  uncle.  He 
had  also  waged  very  successful  wars  against  Moab  and 
the  children  of  Ammon  on  the  East,  against  Edom  on  the 
South,  and  against  the  kings  of  Zobah  on  the  North.  In 
whatever  direction  he  had  directed  his  arms  he  had  been 
victorious  beyond  his  highest  hopes.  It  is  also  evident 
that  he  had  gathered  around  him  considerable  state,  for  we 
find  the  royal  table  was  reserved  for  himself,  Abner,  and 
Jonathan  ;  that  he  was  surrounded  by  a  bodyguard  of 
runners  ;  and  that  his  will  was  law.  The  kingdom  that 
had  been  inaugurated  amid  such  adverse  circumstances 
was  beginning  to  enforce  respect,  and  Saul  was  able  to  vie, 
both  in  the  magnificence  of  his  state  and  in  his  army, 
with  the  kings  of  the  lands  that  bordered  on  Canaan. 

It  was  at  this  time  that  the  supreme  test  entered  his  life, 
as  it  so  often  comes  to  us  in  days  of  prosperity.  In  the 
warm  summer  days  we  are  most  in  dread  of  corruption  and 
contagion,  and  it  is  in  the  days  of  prosperity  that  the  soul 
is  oftenest  subjected,  not  realizing  the  significance  of  the 
ordeal,  to  its  supreme  test.  If  of  late  you  have  had  im 
munity  from  special  adversity,  if  your  circumstances  have 
been  easy,  if  paths  that  were  once  difficult  have  become 
smooth — be  on  your  guard  ;  for,  at  such  a  time  as  ye  think 
not,  the  Son  of  Man  comes  to  call  you  to  his  bar. 

You  will  notice,  also,  that  this  supreme  test  gave  him  a 


Sln&cr  tbc  gait.  125 

final  chance  of  retrieving  the  past.  At  Gilgal,  years  before, 
God  had  told  him  by  the  lips  of  Samuel  that  his  kingdom 
should  not  continue  ;  but  there  had  been  no  sentence  of 
his  own  deposition  or  rejection,  and  it  seemed  as  though 
this  last  command  was  put  into  his  life  to  give  him  an 
opportunity  of  wiping  out  his  former  failure  and  mistake, 
and  of  retrieving  the  fortunes  that  had  seemed  to  be 
absolutely  sacrificed. 

God  often  comes  to  us  when  we  have  made  some  sad 
and  apparently  irretrievable  mistake.  He  gives  us  yet  another 
opportunity  of  reversing  the  past,  as  when  our  Lord  said  to 
his  disciples  in  the  Garden  of  the  Olive-press  :  "  Sleep  on 
now,  and  take  your  rest " ;  a  moment  afterwards  adding, 
"Arise,  let  us  be  going,"  as  though  a  fresh  opportunity 
would  be  afforded  of  fellowship  in  his  sufferings. 

The  Divine  command  involved  the  absolute  extermina 
tion  of  the  Amalekites  ;  for  the  word  translated  "  utterly 
destroy,"  would  be  better  rendered  devote.  It  is  the  word 
so  often  used  in  the  Book  of  Joshua  for  placing  under  the 
ban  the  sin-infected  cities  of  the  Canaanites.  It  was  under 
stood  that,  in  the  case  of  the  "  devoted  "  city,  man,  woman, 
and  child,  and  the  very  beasts,  must  be  destroyed,  and  only 
the  precious  metals  kept,  after  being  passed  through  the 
fires  of  purification  (Num.  xxxi.  21,  etc.).  With  such 
absolute  devastation  and  destruction  was  the  name  of 
Amalek  to  be  wiped  out  from  under  heaven. 

There  had  been  feud  between  Amalek  and  Israel  from 
the  earliest  days.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  have 
marked  that  which  Amalek  did  to  Israel,  how  he  set  himself 
against  him  in  the  way,  when  he  came  up  out  of  Egypt " 
(ver.  2,  R.V.).  You  will  remember  that  Moses  reared  an 
altar,  and  called  it  Jehovah-nissi — "  the  Lord  my  banner  "  ; 
because  he  said  that  the  Lord  would  have  war  with  Amalek, 
until  He  had  wiped  out  the  reproach  of  his  people  (Ex.  xvii. 
15,  1 6).  Centuries  had  passed,  and  this  ancient  threat  had 


ia6  ^failure  Sinter  tljc  Supreme 

remained  unfulfilled  until  this  hour,  and  now  the  command 
was  given,  "  Go  and  smite  Amalek." 

At  first  it  seems  very  terrible  that  God  demanded  this  act 
of  obedience  from  Saul ;  but  on  the  other  hand  the 
Amalekites,  as  we  are  told  in  ver.  18,  were  sinners  of  a  very 
black  and  aggravated  type.  We  learn  also  from  ver.  33 
that  Agag  with  his  sword  had  often  made  women  childless. 
A  very  cruel  and  rapacious  tribe  of  robbers  were  these 
Amalekites,  who  were  constantly  making  raids  upon  the 
southern  frontier  of  Judah.  It  was  absolutely  necessary, 
therefore,  for  the  safety  of  the  chosen  people,  that  their 
power  to  injure  should  be  permanently  arrested. 

Even  in  this  world  God  sets  up  his  judgment-seat ;  and 
as  our  Saviour  tells  us  in  his  last  wonderful  discourse,  the 
Son  of  Man  sits  upon  the  throne  of  his  glory,  while  the 
nations  are  gathered  before  Him,  and  He  separates  them 
as  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  These  words,  without  doubt, 
portend  some  imposing  event,  which  we  are  to  witness  in 
that  great  day,  when  the  King  of  the  Ages  will  call  to  his 
bar  every  nation  and  kindred,  people  and  tongue,  and  will 
announce  his  awards.  But  we  cannot  suppose,  for  a  single 
moment,  that  the  judgment  of  the  nations  is  to  be  altogether 
relegated  to  that  final  day.  Throughout  the  history  of  the 
world  the  nations  have  been  standing  before  Christ's  bar. 
Nineveh  stood  there,  Babylon  stood  there,  Greece  and 
Rome  stood  there,  and  other  nations  are  standing  there  to 
day.  One  after  another  has  had  the  solemn  award — 
depart ;  and  they  have  passed  into  a  destruction  which  has 
been  absolute  and  irretrievable. 

The  Amalekites  had  stood  before  the  bar  of  God,  had 
been  weighed  in  his  balances,  and  found  wanting.  Their 
sentence  had  been  pronounced,  and  Saul  was  called  upon 
to  inflict  it.  But  remember  that  Saul  was  only  doing  sum 
marily  and  suddenly  that  which  otherwise  would  follow  in 
the  natural  process  of  decay  ;  for  God  has  so  constituted 


©befcietue  hritlj  llEScrbc.  127 

us  that  when  we  sin  against  the  laws  of  truth,  purity,  and 
righteousness,  decay  immediately  sets  in  by  an  inevitable 
law.  If  Amalek  had  never  been  attacked  by  Saul  and  his 
hosts,  the  vices  that  were  already  at  work  in  the  heart  of  the 
people  must  have  led  to  the  utter  undoing  and  consumption 
of  the  nation.  It  is  said  of  families  in  our  great  cities, 
infected  with  the  evils  that  are  rife  among  us,  that  in  five 
generations  they  die  out,  having  lost  the  power  of  self- 
propagation  ;  and  what  is  true  of  a  family  is  equally  so  of  a 
nation.  We  may  infer  that  there  was  therefore  mercy  in 
this  Divine  ordinance.  It  was  infinitely  better  for  Amalek, 
and  for  the  surrounding  peoples  which  would  have  become 
infected  by  her  slow  deterioration,  that  by  one  stroke  of 
the  executioner's  axe  the  existence  of  the  nation  should  be 
brought  to  an  end. 

II.  OBEDIENCE  WITH  RESERVE. — The  story  is  told  us  in 
ver.  9  :  "  But  Saul  and  the  people  spared  Agag."  When  he 
raised  his  standard,  two  hundred  thousand  footmen  from 
Israel,  and  ten  thousand  men  of  Judah,  Benjamin,  and 
Simeon,  gathered  around  it,  at  Telaim,  on  the  southern 
frontier  ;  and  they  came  to  the  chief  city  of  Amalek,  which 
lay,  probably,  a  little  to  the  south  of  Hebron.  After  lying 
in  ambush  in  some  dry  water-course,  or  wady,  and  having 
given  notice  to  the  Kenites — a  peaceful,  friendly  people — to 
depart,  the  attacking  army  carried  the  city  by  assault,  put  to 
the  sword  men,  women,  and  children  ;  pursued  the  fleeing 
remnants  of  the  Amalekites  from  Havilah  even  to  Shur,  the 
great  wall  of  Egypt ;  and  with  the  exception  of  Agag,  and  a 
few  that  may  have  escaped,  and  the  choice  of  the  flocks 
and  herds,  the  whole  country  was  rid  of  its  inhabitants,  and 
reduced  to  the  deathlike  silence  of  an  awful  solitude. 

Saul  returned,  flushed  with  triumph,  reared  a  monument 
of  victory  in  the  oasis  of  Carmel,  near  to  Hebron  ;  and 
then  came  down  to  the  sacred  site  of  Gilgal,  that  he  might 


128  JFailurc  ttttttor  tfrc  Supreme  fet. 

sacrifice  to  the  Lord,  and  perhaps  divide  the  vast  plunder 
of  sheep  and  goats,  of  oxen  and  camels,  which  had  fallen 
into  his  hands,  and  which  he  and  the  people  had  been  loth 
to  destroy.  "  Saul  and  the  people  spared  Agag,  and  the 
best  of  the  sheep  and  of  the  oxen,  and  of  the  failings,  and 
the  lambs,  and  all  that  was  good,  and  would  not  utterly 
destroy  them  ;  but  everything  that  was  vile  and  refuse,  they 
destroyed  utterly." 

Whether  this  reserve  was  due,  so  far  as  Saul  was  concerned, 
to  greed,  as  appears  most  likely,  or  because,  as  he  says  in 
ver.  24,  he  feared  to  thwart  the  people,  obeying  their  voice 
rather  than  the  voice  of  God,  we  cannot  decide ;  but  con 
siderable  light  is  thrown  on  the  incident  by  the  startling 
expression  used  by  Samuel  in  ver.  19,  when  he  says,  "Why 
didst  thou  fly  upon  the  spoil  ? "  employing  the  same  ex 
pression  as  in  chapter  xiv.  32,  where  we  are  told  that  the 
people,  in  their  ravenous  hunger,  flew  upon  the  spoil,  and 
ate  even  with  the  blood.  The  same  passionate  vehemence 
seems  to  have  characterised  Saul  and  the  men  of  Israel. 
Surely  rapacity  and  greed  were  at  work,  and  before  their 
boiling  currents  all  the  bulwarks  of  principle  and  conscience 
were  swept  away. 

There  is  great  significance  in  this  for  us  all.  We  are 
prepared  to  obey  the  Divine  commands  up  to  a  certain 
point,  and  there  we  stay.  Just  as  soon  as  "  the  best  and 
choicest "  begin  to  be  touched,  we  draw  the  line  and  refuse 
further  compliance.  We  listen  to  soft  voices  that  bid  us 
stay  our  hand  when  our  Isaac  is  on  the  altar.  We  are 
quite  prepared  to  give  up  that  which  costs  us  nothing — our 
money,  but  not  our  children,  to  the  missionary  cause  ;  the 
things  which  are  clearly  and  disgracefully  wrong,  but  not  the 
self-indulgences  which  are  peculiarly  fascinating  to  our  tem 
perament.  Skin  for  skin;  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath  will  he 
give  for  his  life — only  spare  him  that,  and  he  will  cheer 
fully  renounce  his  claim  to  all  else.  There  is  always  a 


j$ummnrir  tfcngeattCE.  129 

tendency  with  the  best  of  us  to  make  a  bargain  with  God, 
and  sacrifice  all  to  his  will,  if  only  He  will  permit  us  to 
spare  Agag  and  the  best  of  the  spoil. 

But  an  even  deeper  reading  of  this  story  is  permissible. 
Throughout  the  Bible,  Amalek  stands  for  the  flesh ;  having 
sprung  from  the  stock  of  Esau,  who,  for  a  morsel  of  meat, 
steaming  fragrantly  in  the  air,  sold  his  birthright.  To  spare 
the  best  of  Amalek  is  surely  equivalent  to  sparing  some  root 
of  evil,  some  plausible  indulgence,  some  favourite  sin.  For 
us,  Agag  must  stand  for  that  evil  propensity,  which  exists  in 
all  of  us,  for  self-gratification ;  and  to  spare  Agag  is  to  be 
merciful  to  ourselves,  to  exonerate  and  palliate  our  failures, 
and  to  condone  our  besetting  sin. 

Is  this  your  case?  You  are  willing  to  give  Christ  the  key 
of  every  cupboard  in  your  heart,  save  one ;  but  that  con 
tains  your  most  cherished  sin,  for  which  you  find  manifold 
excuses,  and  to  retain  which  you  are  prepared  to  sacrifice 
everything  else.  Thus  Ananias  and  Sapphira  kept  back 
part  of  the  price,  and  were  cut  off. 

It  is  startling  to  learn  that  Saul  perished,  on  the  field  of 
Gilboa,  by  the  hand  of  an  Amalekite  (2  Sam.  i.  i-io). 
What  a  remarkable  fact !  The  least  instructed  can  decipher 
the  lesson.  He  who  runs  may  read.  If  we  spare  ourselves, 
forbearing  to  cut  off  the  right  hand  or  foot,  which  may  be 
causing  us  to  offend,  we  shall  certainly  perish  by  the  hand 
of  that  which  we  refused  to  part  with.  Our  cherished  in 
dulgences  will  bring  about  our  undoing.  The  love  of  God, 
foreseeing  the  risk  we  are  incurring,  pleads  with  us  to 
destroy  without  mercy  the  enemies  of  our  own  peace  ;  but 
Agag  comes  to  us  delicately ;  we  forbear  to  inflict  the 
Divine  sentence,  and  presently  we  are  stricken  down  by  the 
assassin,  dye  the  green  sward  with  our  life-blood,  and  are 
despoiled  of  our  crown,  which  is  transferred  to  another. 


XVIII. 


(i  SAMUEL  xv.  12-35.) 

"  Thy  choice  was  earth  !     Thou  didst  attest 
'Twas  fitter  spirit  should  subserve 
The  flesh,  than  flesh  refuse  to  nerve 
Beneath  the  spirit's  play  !     Thou  art  shut 
Out  of  the  Heaven  of  Spirit  !     Glut 
Thy  sense  upon  the  world  :  'tis  thine 
For  ever ! — take  it !  " 

R.  B. 

AN  intimation  of  Saul's  lapsed  obedience  was  made  in 
the  secret  ear  of  Samuel  in  the  dead  of  night,  when 
God  came  near  to  him  and  said,  "  It  repenteth  Me 
that  I  have  set  up  Saul  to  be  king,  for  he  hath  turned  back 
from  following  Me,  and  hath  not  performed  my  command 
ments." 

God  requires  literal  obedience ;  and  when  that  fails  the 
results  are  as  though  He  had  changed  his  purpose  or 
repented — but  this  is  in  appearance  only.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  God  cannot  repent  or  change  his  purpose.  Man  may 
frustrate  the  working  out  of  his  plan,  but  the  Almighty 
Workman  will  achieve  it  by  some  other  method.  The  wind 
may  be  blowing  steadily  in  the  same  direction,  and  as  long 
as  we  yield  to  it,  it  will  waft  us  to  the  desired  haven ;  but  it 
is  always  possible  for  us  to  reverse  our  course  and  go  against 
it,  and  then  our  life  is  so  powerfully  affected  that  it  would 
seem  as  though  God  had  changed  his  purpose — the  change 
being  due  to  ourselves,  because,  whereas  formerly  we  moved 
with  his  purpose,  now,  by  disobedience  or  unbelief,  we  are 
steadily  resisting  it. 

Does  God  ever  come  to  you  at  night,  or  when  the  world 


lufcignntton.  I31 

is  quiet,  and  tell  you  his  secrets  ?  Happy  are  they  whom 
God  can  trust  with  his  own  profound  sorrow  over  the 
failure  of  his  chosen  servants,  honouring  them  with  his 
confidence,  and  appealing  to  them  to  watch  with  Him. 
"  Shall  I  hide  from  Abraham  that  which  I  do  ?  " 

The  faithful  soul  of  Samuel  was  deeply  moved.  We  are 
told  he  was  "  angry  " — a  righteous  indignation  that  one 
who  had  been  appointed  with  such  solemn  sanctions, 
and  had  bidden  fair  to  achieve  such  glorious  deliverances 
for  his  people,  had  so  seriously  missed  his  mark.  Those 
who  are  true  to  God  cannot  but  feel  indignant  when  his 
purposes  are  frustrated  and  his  grace  outraged;  when  the 
door  of  usefulness  which  He  had  set  wide  in  front  of  a 
chosen  servant  is  shut  and  barred  by  some  act  of  careless  or 
wilful  disobedience.  "  He  cried  unto  the  Lord  all  night." 
Ah,  how  much  we  owe  to  the  Divine  Friend,  and  to  human 
friends,  who,  when  they  see  deterioration  at  work  within  us, 
take  no  rest  and  give  God  no  rest.  This  is  the  most  price 
less  service  that  one  soul  can  afford  another.  There  is 
hope  so  long  as  lover  and  friend  bear  up  our  case  before 
God,  and  plead  that  rather  they  should  be  accursed  than 
that  we  should  perish.  How  many  a  son  now  leading  a 
reckless  and  profligate  life,  in  his  still  hours,  or  when  his 
evil  courses  have  cast  him  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  and 
debarred  him  from  the  active  pursuits  of  life,  comforts  him 
self  with  the  thought,  that  in  some  lone  cottage  his  mother 
does  not  cease  to  pray  for  him,  and  he  secretly  hopes  that 
her  prayers  may  avail  against  the  vehemence  of  the  fiery 
passions  by  which  his  soul  is  driven. 

Samuel  travelled  some  fifteen  miles  to  find  Saul,  following 
him  from  Carmel,  where,  as  we  have  seen,  Saul  set  up  a 
monument,  which  was  either  shaped  in  the  form  of  a  hand, 
or  on  which  the  figure  of  a  hand  was  graved  (R.V.,  marg.), 
to  Gilgal,  the  site  of  the  ancient  shrine,  where,  as  one  of 
the  versions  informs  us,  the  king  was  engaged  in  offering 


i32  JV  Itcmarhabk 

sacrifices  to  Jehovah ;  and  there  this  most  remarkable 
colloquy  took  place. 

SAUL. — It  was  commenced  by  the  king,  who,  seeing  the 
prophet  coming  towards  him,  advanced  to  meet  him  with 
an  unctuous  phrase  upon  his  lips,  "  Blessed  be  thou  of  the 
Lord "  ;  and,  with  great  complacency  in  his  demeanour, 
added,  "  I  have  performed  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord."  Whether  Saul  was  blinded  and  did  not  really 
know  how  far  he  had  deteriorated — for  it  is  certain  that  dis 
obedience  puts  out  our  eyes,  as  Hubert  did  young  Arthur's* 
blinding  us  to  the  enormity  of  our  sin — or  whether  he 
desired  to  gloss  over  his  failure,  and  to  appear  as  a  truly 
obedient  son,  so  as  to  deceive  the  prophet,  we  cannot  tell ; 
but  that  "  Blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord,"  from  his  lips,  and 
at  such  a  moment,  has  an  ugly  sound.  It  reminds  one  of 
certain  who  interlard  their  business  life  with  references  to 
religion,  which  are  intended  to  put  the  unwary  off  their 
guard,  and  enable  their  user  to  take  a  mean  advantage, 
under  the  appearance  of  a  high  code  of  morals.  Nothing 
is  more  damnable  than  this.  It  is  the  sin  of  Judas,  who 
betrayed  his  Master  with  a  kiss.  Better  the  open  foe  than 
the  secret  assassin.  Better,  a  dozen  times,  the  arrow  that 
flieth  by  day  than  the  pestilence  that  walketh  in  darkness. 

SAMUEL.— At  that  moment  the  sheep  began  to  bleat  and 
the  oxen  to  low.  A  breath  of  wind,  laden  with  the  un 
mistakable  indication  of  the  near  presence  of  a  great  multi 
tude  of  flocks  and  herds,  was  wafted  to  the  prophet's  ear. 
It  is  an  unfortunate  occurrence  when,  just  as  a  man  is 
becoming  loud  in  his  protestations  of  goodness,  some  such 
untoward  incident  suddenly  takes  place,  so  that  the  lowing 
of  the  oxen  and  the  bleating  of  the  sheep  belie  his  words. 
I  remember  once  a  professor  of  religion  who  desired  to 
impress  me  with  his  entire  sanctification,  and  deliverance 
from  every  kind  of  idol,  giving  unmistakable  evidence,  by 
the  taint  of  tobacco  on  his  breath  whilst  he  spoke,  that  he 


31  Retrospect.  *33 

had  been  smoking  a  rather  rank  kind  of  tobacco.  I  had 
not  said  a  single  word  about  smoking.  I  have  never  felt 
it  my  business  to  denounce  indulgences  concerning  which 
God  may  not  convict  men  universally.  It  is  our  business, 
on  matters  not  clearly  forbidden,  and  concerning  which 
Christian  people  are  not  agreed,  to  lay  down  general  prin 
ciples,  and  to  leave  our  hearers  to  apply  them  for  them 
selves.  But  when  this  man  went  out  of  his  way  to  assert 
his  entire  deliverance,  I  naturally  was  more  on  the  alert, 
and  in  the  taint  on  his  breath  I  detected  the  presence  of 
the  choice  oxen  and  sheep  which  had  been  reserved.  With 
sad  irony  the  prophet  said,  "  What  meaneth  this  bleating 
of  sheep  in  mine  ears,  and  the  lowing  of  oxen  which  I 
hear  ?  " 

SAUL. — The  king  excused  himself  by  laying  emphasis 
on  the  word  they — "  They  have  brought  them  from  the 
Amalekites;  for  the  people  spared  the  best  of  the  sheep  and 
of  the  oxen,  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  thy  God."  Notice 
the  subtle  effort  to  conciliate  the  prophet  by  the  emphasis 
laid  upon  the  word  thy — "  thy  God  ;  and  the  rest  we  have 
utterly  destroyed."  It  was  unroyal  and  contemptible  to  lay 
the  blame  upon  the  people,  and  it  was  an  excuse  which 
could  not  be  allowed. 

SAMUEL. — The  royal  backslider  would  probably  have 
gone  on  speaking,  but  Samuel  interrupted  him,  saying, 
"Stay,  and  I  will  tell  thee  what  the  Lord  hath  said  to 
me  this  night."  Then  the  faithful  old  prophet  went  back  to 
the  past.  He  reminded  Saul  how  insignificant  had  been  his 
origin,  and  how  he  had  shrunk  from  undertaking  the  great 
responsibility  of  the  station  to  which  God  had  summoned 
him.  He  reminded  him  how  he  had  been  raised  up  to  the 
throne,  and  how  the  Almighty  King  of  Israel  had  delegated 
to  him  his  authority,  requiring  that  he  should  act  as  his 
designated  vicegerent.  He  reminded  him  also  that  a  dis 
tinct  charge  had  been  given  him,  and  that  the  responsibility 


134  3V  -Remarkable 

of  determining  his  line  of  action  had  been  transferred 
from  himself,  as  the  agent,  to  the  Divine  Being,  who  had 
issued  his  mandate  of  destruction.  In  spite  of  all,  Saul 
had  allowed  his  greed  to  hurry  him  into  an  act  of  dis 
obedience.  He  had  flown  upon  the  spoil  as  a  hungry 
lion  upon  his  prey,  and  had  done  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord. 

SAUL. — The  king  reiterated  his  poor  excuse  :  "  Yea,  I 
have  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  have  gone  the  way 
that  the  Lord  sent  me,  and  have  brought  Agag,  the  king  of 
Amalek,  and  have  utterly  destroyed  the  Amalekites.  But 
the  people  took  of  the  spoil,  sheep  and  oxen,  the  chief  of 
the  devoted  things,  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
Gilgal."  It  was  as  though  he  had  said,  "  You  have  judged 
me  wrongfully.  If  you  would  wait  for  a  little  while,  you 
would  see  the  issue  of  my  act  of  apparent  disobedience." 
He  may  even  have  cajoled  himself  into  thinking  that  he 
meant  to  sacrifice  these  spoils  now  that  he  had  reached 
Gilgal ;  or  he  might  have  mentally  resolved  there  and  then 
that  he  would  sacrifice  them,  and  so  relieve  himself  of 
the  complicated  position  into  which  he  found  himself 
drifting. 

SAMUEL. — In  answer  to  this  last  remark,  God's  messenger 
uttered  one  of  the  greatest  sentences  in  the  earlier  books 
of  the  Bible,  a  sentence  which  is  the  seed-germ  of  much 
to  the  same  purpose  in  the  prophets,  which  in  subsequent 
centuries  was  repeated  in  different  forms,  and  to  which  our 
blessed  Lord  gave  his  assent — "  Hath  the  Lord  as  great 
delight  in  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices,  as  in  obeying  the 
voice  of  the  Lord  ?  Behold,  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice, 
and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."  Whatever  Saul  might 
be  wishful  for  him  to  infer,  as  to  his  intention  to  offer  'the 
sacrifice,  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  up  to  that  moment, 
at  least,  he  had  disobeyed  God's  positive  command  ;  and, 
unmistakably,  the  whole  attitude  of  his  soul  was  towards 


£  orb  Ijatlj  tlqectefc  irjee ! "  135 

disobedience  and  rebellion,  which,  in  fact,  were  the  assertion 
of  his  own  will  and  way  against  God's. 

Then,  tearing  the  veil  aside,  the  old  man  showed  the 
enormity  of  the  sin  which  had  been  committed  by  saying  : 
"  Rebellion  is  equally  vile  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft,  and 
stubbornness  is  as  idolatry  and  the  teraphim."  These  sins 
were  universally  reprobated  and  held  up  to  the  contempt  of 
good  men ;  but  in  God's  sight  there  was  nothing  to  choose 
between  them  and  the  sin  of  -which  the  king  had  been 
guilty.  Then,  facing  the  monarch,  and  looking  at  him  with 
his  searching  eyes,  the  prophet,  in  the  majesty  of  his 
authority  as  God's  representative,  pronounced  the  final 
sentence  of  deposition,  saying,  "  Because  thou  hast  rejected 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  He  hath  also  rejected  thee  from  being 
king." 

SAUL. — In  a  moment  the  king  realized  the  brink  of  the 
precipice  on  which  he  stood ;  and  with  the  cry  not  of  a 
penitent,  but  of  a  fugitive  from  justice ;  not  hating  his  sin, 
but  dreading  its  result  ;  eager  at  any  cost  to  keep  the 
crown  on  his  brow  and  the  empire  in  his  hand ;  afraid  of 
the  consequences  which  might  ensue  if  his  leading  men 
detected  any  break  or  coolness  between  himself  and  the 
prophet — he  cringed  before  Samuel,  saying,  "  I  have  sinned  ; 
for  I  have  transgressed  the  commandment  of  Jehovah,  and 
thy  words  :  because  I  feared  the  people,  and  obeyed  their 
voice.  Now  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  pardon  my  sin,  and 
turn  again  with  me,  that  I  may  worship  the  Lord." 

There  is  a  great  difference  in  the  accent  with  which  men 
utter  those  words,  "  /  have  sinned."  The  prodigal  said 
them  with  a  faltering  voice — not  because  he  feared  the  con 
sequences  of  sin,  but  that  he  saw  its  heinousness  in  the 
expression  of  his  father's  face,  and  the  tears  that  stood  in 
the  beloved  eyes.  Saul,  however,  feared  the  consequences 
rather  than  the  sin ;  and  that  he  might  avert  the  sentence, 
he  said,  as  though  Samuel  had  the  power  of  the  keys  to 


i36  JV-  Hemarhaljle 

open   and   unloose,    to   pardon    or   to   refuse   forgiveness, 
"  Pardon  my  sin." 

SAMUEL. — The  prophet  saw  through  the  subterfuge.  He 
knew  that  his  penitence  was  not  genuine,  but  that  the  king 
was  deceiving  him  with  his  words,  and  he  turned  about  to 
go  away.  Then  Saul,  in  the  extremity  of  his  anguish,  in 
fear  that  in  losing  him  he  might  lose  at  once  his  best  friend 
and  the  respect  of  the  nation,  seems  to  have  sprung  forward 
and  seized  the  skirt  of  Samuel's  cloak,  and  as  he  did  so 
with  a  strong  masterful  grasp,  as  if  to  restrain  and  draw  back 
to  himself  the  retreating  figure  of  the  prophet,  it  rent. 
When  Samuel  felt  and  heard  the  tear,  he  said,  "  The  Lord 
hath  rent  the  kingdom  of  Israel  from  thee  this  day,  and 
hath  given  it  to  a  neighbour  of  thine  that  is  better  than 
thou."  And  then,  referring  to  Saul's  effort  to  turn  him 
back,  as  though  he  would  reverse  the  sentence  which  he  had 
pronounced,  he  said,  "Remember  that  the  strength  of  Israel 
will  not  lie  nor  repent ;  his  sentence  is  irrevocable.  The 
word  is  gone  out  of  his  lips  and  cannot  be  called  back. 
There  is  no  opportunity  of  changing  his  mind,  though  thou 
shalt  seek  it  bitterly  and  with  tears." 

Even  at  that  moment  had  Saul  thrown  himself  at  God's 
feet  and  asked  for  pardon,  he  would  have  been  accepted 
and  forgiven.  Even  though  as  a  monarch  his  kingdom 
might  have  passed  from  him,  as  a  man  he  would  have 
received  pardon.  But  there  are  moments  in  our  lives, 
irrevocable  moments,  when  we  take  steps  that  cannot  be 
retraced ;  when  we  assume  positions  from  which  we  cannot 
retreat ;  when  results  are  settled,  never  to  be  reversed. 

SAUL. — Again  the  king  repeated  the  sentence,  "  I  have 
sinned";  but  his  real  meaning  was  disclosed  in  the  following 
words:  "Yet  honour  me  now  before  the  elders  of  my 
people,  and  before  Israel,  and  turn  again  with  me,  that  I 
may  worship  Jehovah  thy  God."  His  inner  thought  was 
still  to  stand  well  with  the  people,  and  he  was  prepared  to 


137 

make  any  confession  of  wrong-doing  as  a  price  of  Samuel's 
apparent  friendship. 

Finally  Samuel  stayed  with  him,  that  the  elders  might 
not  become  disaffected,  and  that  the  people  generally  might 
have  no  idea  of  the  deposition  of  the  king,  lest  the  kingdom 
itself  might  totter  to  its  fall  before  his  successor  was  pre 
pared  to  take  his  place.  He  stayed  therefore.  The  two 
knelt  side  by  side  before  God  ;  but  what  a  contrast !  Here 
was  darkest  night ;  there  the  brightness  of  the  day.  Here 
was  the  rejected  ;  there  the  chosen  faithful  servant. 

At  last  the  old  man  summoned  Agag,  the  king  of  the 
Amalekites,  to  his  presence,  and  Agag  came  to  him  "cheer 
fully,"  hoping  without  doubt  that  he  would  be  spared  ;  and 
saying,  as  he  advanced,  "  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is 
passed — there  is  no  reason  for  me  to  fear  it."  Then 
Samuel,  strengthened  with  some  paroxysm  of  righteous 
indignation,  seized  a  sword  that  lay  within  his  reach,  and 
hewed  Agag  in  pieces  before  the  Lord — emblem  this  of 
of  the  holy  zeal  that  will  give  no  quarter  to  the  flesh ; 
and  we  are  reminded  of  the  words  of  the  Apostle,  "  Make 
not  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof."  To 
Amalek  we  must  give  no  quarter. 

May  God  help  us  to  read  deeply  into  this  tragic  story. 
Whensoever  God  our  Father  puts  a  supreme  test  into  our 
lives,  let  us  at  any  cost  obey  Him.  Everything  hinges  upon 
absolute  obedience.  If  you  cannot  obey,  you  cannot  com 
mand.  If  you  do  not  obey,  you  are  not  fit  to  be  an  instru 
ment  in  God's  hand.  If  the  chisel  is  not  true,  the 
sculptor  dare  not  keep  it  still  in  use.  Let  us  walk 
circumspectly  and  wisely,  redeeming  each  opportunity,  that 
God  may  make  the  most  possible  of  us,  and  that,  above 
all,  we  may  not  become  castaways. 


XIX. 

44  &n  CM  Spirit  from  tfc  «0r&." 

(i  SAMUEL  xvi.  13,  14.) 

' '  Canst  thou  not  minister  to  a  mind  diseas'd, 
Pluck  from  the  memory  a  rooted  sorrow, 
Raze  out  the  written  troubles  of  the  brain, 
And  with  some  sweet  oblivious  antidote 
Cleanse  the  stuff 'd  bosom  of  that  perilous  stuff 
Which  weighs  upon  the  heart  ?  " 

SHAKESPEARE. 

ALL  great  painters  and  poets  whose  works  are  of  the 
first  order  have  availed  themselves  of  the  force  of 
contrast — that  there  should  be  a  dark  background 
to  set  forth  some  beautiful  and  radiant  object.  The  Bible 
excels  in  its  use  of  this  striking  method  of  laying  emphasis. 
In  the  very  first  chapter  the  world  is  described  as  without 
form,  and  void,  whilst  darkness  was  over  the  face  of  the 
deep ;  and  against  that,  as  the  background,  is  the  creation 
of  light,  leaping  across  the  void  ;  and  upon  the  background 
of  chaos  arises  the  cosmos  of  order  and  beauty.  Also,  at 
the  end  of  this  great  Book,  great  even  as  a  literary  pro 
duction,  we  have  again  the  force  of  contrast,  as,  from  all 
the  storm  and  tumult  of  the  world,  we  are  borne  upwards 
to  those  heavenly  spaces  where  a  white-robed  multitude, 
with  crowns  on  their  brows  and  palms  of  victory  in  their 
hands,  in  perfect  peace  chant  the  everlasting  song.  In 
contrast  with  the  apostate  Church  of  Babylon,  there  is  the 
Bride  of  the  Lamb,  Jerusalem  from  above,  prepared  as  for 
her  marriage.  All  through  the  Bible  you  are  constantly 
brought  face  to  face  with  the  greatest  possible  contrasts,  and 
much  of  its  interest  may  be  attributed  to  this  source. 

The  same  feature  is  stamped  on  this  division  of  the  Book. 


of  Contrast.  139 

In  the  opening  chapters,  against  the  wild  licence  and 
unbridled  indulgence  of  the  Book  of  the  Judges,  and 
especially  against  the  dissolute  and  abominable  behaviour 
of  Eli's  sons  as  the  background,  is  the  kneeling  figure  of  the 
young  Samuel,  with  clasped  hands,  engaged  in  prayer 
beneath  the  open  sky.  The  beauty  of  the  child's  piety  is 
the  more  exquisite  because  of  the  dark  wildness,  licence, 
and  passion,  amid  which  it  unfolds.  And  here,  at  the  end 
of  the  Book,  where  it  is  evident  that  Saul  is  drifting  as  a 
wreck  to  the  rocks,  whilst  from  the  lurid  sky  the  thunder 
bolts  fall  and  the  lightning  flashes  on  the  earth,  the  curtain 
is  uplifted  from  God's  own  king — the  man  after  his  own 
heart — the  young  and  beautiful  boy  called  from  following 
the  sheep  to  be  the  shepherd  of  Israel.  Against  the  con 
trast  of  Eli's  sons  you  have  Samuel,  and  against  the  contrast 
of  Saul's  rejection  you  have  David's  anointing.  This  law 
of  contrast  pervades  this  Book — great  from  the  artistic 
and  human  standpoint — altogether  apart  from  its  lofty,  its 
transcendent,  its  Divine,  origin. 

We  will  notice  the  dawn  of  fair  promise ;  the  darkened 
afternoon  ;  and,  finally,  the  lurid  gleams  of  a  false  zeal. 

I.  THE  DAWN  OF  A  FAIR  PROMISE. — "Samuel  cried 
unto  the  Lord"  for  Saul,  if  haply  he  might  arrest  the 
terrible  and  imminent  consequences  of  his  sin.  But  he  was 
made  aware  that  prayer  would  not  avail.  It  seemed  as 
though  Saul  had  already  made  the  fatal  choice,  and  had 
committed  the  sin  which  is  unto  death,  and  concerning 
which  we  have  no  encouragement  to  pray.  The  summons 
of  the  hour  was,  therefore,  not  to  prayer,  but  to  action.  The 
Spirit  of  God  bade  Samuel  go  to  Bethlehem,  and  among  the 
sons  of  Jesse  discover  and  anoint  the  new  king.  Samuel 
was  stunned  by  the  request,  and  suggested  that  if  Saul 
heard  a  whisper  of  such  a  proceeding,  he  would  at  once 
take  measures  to  avenge  himself  by  inflicting  the  death 


140  "  ^Vn  (Biril  Spirit  from  tlje 

penalty.  But  the  Spirit  of  God  bade  him  go,  taking  his 
long  horn  of  oil  in  one  hand,  and  leading  a  heifer  with  the 
other.  Thus  he  made  his  way  across  the  broken  hill- 
country  of  Judea,  until  he  came  to  the  village  of  Bethlehem 
lying  along  the  slope  of  the  hill,  at  the  foot  of  which,  not 
long  before,  Boaz  had  courted  Ruth.  The  halo  of  the 
immortal  story  of  their  love  was  still  fresh  as  dew. 

When  he  entered  the  little  town  the  elders  were  filled 
with  consternation ;  it  was  so  unusual  to  see  the  great 
prophet  visiting  them  without  previous  announcement. 
They  asked  if  he  had  come  peaceably.  "Peaceably!" 
was  the  laconic  reply.  A  sacrificial  feast  was  at  once 
prepared — the  victim  offered  ;  but  as  some  time  must  elapse 
between  the  offering  of  the  sacrifice  and  the  preparation  of 
the  food,  Samuel  adjourned  to  spend  the  interim  in  the 
house  of  the  village  chieftain,  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite,  a 
mighty  man  of  valour  and  of  wealth ;  and  thus,  in  the 
privacy  of  the  home,  in  a  manner  unlikely  to  attract  the 
notice  of  the  Court,  David's  career  as  king  began. 

One  after  another  the  stalwart  sons  of  Jesse  passed  before 
the  prophet,  and  as  he  looked  upon  them  in  their  towering 
stature  and  manly  frame,  he  supposed  that  any  one  of  them 
might  be  God's  designated  monarch.  But  his  Almighty 
Counsellor  told  him  that  outward  appearance  was  not  this 
time  to  weigh  in  the  scales  of  choice,  but  that  the  royal  quali 
ties  of  the  heart  were  alone  to  determine  his  selection.  And 
so  son  after  son  passed ;  all  had  come  but  one,  and  he  was 
with  the  sheep.  Samuel  felt  that  probably,  because  he  was 
the  youngest  and  the  least,  he  might  be  God's  accepted 
king.  He  could  not  proceed  with  the  holy  exercises  until 
the  boy  was  summoned ;  and,  anon,  coming  quickly  from 
the  hills,  the  colour  mounting  to  his  ruddy  cheeks,  his  hair 
waving  in  the  wind,  his  beautiful  blue  eyes  flashing  with 
purity  and  truth,  David  stood  before  the  old  man,  the  dawn 
of  a  new  age,  the  inauguration  of  a  better  time,  the  keystone 


I41 

of  the  great  fabric  of  Hebrew  monarchy — above  all,  the  man 
whom  God  loved.  As  his  brethren  stood  around,  the  old 
man  took  the  horn  of  oil,  broke  the  capsule,  poured  it  on 
the  bright  young  locks,  drenching  them  with  the  holy 
unction,  as  the  boy  bent  beneath.  As  he  anointed  him,  it 
seemed  as  though  God  Almighty  accompanied  the  outward 
sign  and  seal  by  the  inward  grace,  for  we  are  told  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  came  upon  that  young  life  from  that  day 
forward,  bathing  it,  permeating  and  filling  it,  so  that  he 
went  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  meet  his  great  life- 
work,  to  be  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  the  shepherd  of  God's 
people,  and  the  inaugurator  of  Solomon's  temple. 

You  may  have  nothing  in  the  outward  semblance,  nothing 
in  your  surroundings  or  circumstances  to  indicate  the  true 
royalt)  within  ;  but  if  you  bare  your  heart  to  God,  you  shall 
stand  revealed  as  his  son,  as  a  priest  and  king  unto 
Himself.  Oh,  that  at  this  moment  the  Holy  Ghost  might 
descend  upon  you  !  Would  that  you  might  seek  and  receive 
an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  Himself!  Oh,  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God,  who  is  the  true  anointing  oil  of  the  soul, 
might  be  shed  upon  you,  so  that  you  might  go  forth,  saying, 
"The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  me,  and  He  hath 
anointed  me." 

II.  AN  OVERCAST  AFTERNOON. — We  have  morning  with 
David ;  afternoon  with  Saul.  Here  youth  ;  there  manhood, 
which  has  passed  into  prime.  Here  the  promise ;  and 
there  the  overcast  meridian  of  a  wrecked  life. 

You  will  notice  that,  whereas  it  is  said  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  descended  upon  David,  we  are  told  that  "  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  had  departed  from  Saul."  That  does  not 
necessarily  mean  that  all  the  religious  life  of  Saul  had 
become  extinct,  but  that  the  special  faculty  and  power  by 
which  he  had  been  prepared  for  his  kingly  work  was  with 
drawn  from  him.  It  is  abundantly  sure  that  the  work  which 


142  "  &n  (Biril  Spirit  from  trje  |?0r&." 

a  man  does  in  this  world  is  not  wrought  only  by  the  force 
of  his  genius,  the  brilliance  of  his  intellect,  or  by  those 
natural  gifts  with  which  God  may  have  endowed  him,  but 
by  a  something  beyond  and  behind  all  these — a  spiritual 
endowment  which  is  communicated  by  the  Spirit  of  God  for 
special  office,  and  which  is  retained  so  long  as  the  character 
is  maintained  :  but  when  the  character  begins  to  deteriorate 
and  decline;  when  there  is  a  divorce  between  religion  and 
morality ;  when  a  soul  turns  definitely  from  the  will  and  way 
of  God  to  the  paths  of  disobedience — then  that  mystic 
power,  which  our  forefathers  called  unction,  and  which  the 
Bible  calls  the  Spirit  of  God,  seems  to  be  dissipated,  and  to 
pass  away  as  the  aroma  when  scent  has  been  long  exposed 
to  common  air.  So  Saul  lost  the  special  enduement  of 
power  which  had  enabled  him  to  subdue  his  enemies  and 
to  order  his  kingdom. 

Secondly,  we  have  the  mysterious  power  of  opening  our 
nature  to  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  who  is  the  medium  of 
communicating  all  the  virtue,  the  energy,  and  the  life  of 
God  ;  filling  spirit,  soul,  and  body  ;  quickening  the  mind, 
warming  the  heart,  elevating  and  purifying  the  whole  moral 
life.  We  have  also  the  awful  alternative  power  of  yielding 
ourselves  to  the  evil  spirits,  or  demon  spirits,  of  which  the 
spiritual  sphere  is  full.  When  we  are  first  born  into  the 
world,  the  inner  shrine  of  our  being  is  not,  as  yet,  occupied — 
it  is  a  holy  of  holies  not  yet  tenanted ;  but  as  years  go  on  it 
is  left  for  each  to  choose  by  which  spirit  he  will  be  inhabited. 
Some,  by  the  grace  of  God,  are  led  to  open  their  natures  to 
receive  the  most  blessed  gift  that  God  can  bestow,  since  it 
is  Himself;  whilst  others  resemble  Judas,  of  whom  it  is 
affirmed  "  Satan  entered  into  him  " ;  or  Saul,  of  whom  it  is 
said  :  "  Then  the  Spirit  of  God  departed  from  him,  and  an 
evil  spirit  troubled  him."  In  many  cases  men  appear  to  be 
tenanted,  occupied,  and  filled  by  the  spirit  of  evil ;  and 
possibly  even  some  of  the  worse  forms  of  drunkenness,  of 


143 

lustful  passion,  and  of  jealous  temper,  are  to  be  attributed  to 
possession  by  some  demon  spirit.  In  the  treatment  of  the 
insane,  it  would  be  wise  perhaps  to  bear  this  in  mind,  and 
to  deal  with  the  tormented  nature  as  our  Lord  did,  as 
palaces  occupied  by  legions  of  unclean  tenants,  whom  He 
commanded  to  go  forth. 

It  is  affirmed  that  "  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  "  troubled 
Saul.  To  interpret  this  aright  we  must  remember  that,  in 
the  strong,  terse  Hebrew  speech,  the  Almighty  is  sometimes 
said  to  do  what  He  permits  to  be  done.  And  surely  such 
is  the  interpretation  here.  God  cannot  be  tempted  of  evil, 
neither  tempteth  He  any  man,  but  He  allows  us  to  be 
tempted  of  Satan  (Job  i.  6-12  ;  Luke  xxii.  31).  Our  Lord 
was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness,  to  be  tempted  of 
the  devil ;  and  He  taught  us  to  ask  that  we  should  not  be 
led  along  that  dreaded  path,  but  that  the  necessary 
discipline  of  life  should  come  in  some  other  way. 

When,  therefore,  we  read  that  an  evil  spirit  "  from  the 
Lord  "  troubled  Saul,  we  must  believe  that,  as  Saul  had 
refused  the  good  and  gracious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  definitely  chosen  the  path  of  disobedience,  there  was 
nothing  for  it  but  to  leave  him  to  the  working  of  his  own 
evil  heart.  The  guard  of  spiritual  help  was  removed,  and 
there  was  nothing  to  prevent  Satan  entering  him,  as  in  after 
days  he  entered  Judas.  In  the  solemn  words,  thrice 
repeated  in  the  first  chapter  of  Romans,  God  "  gave  him 
up"  to  a  reprobate  mind  (Rom.  i.  24,  26,  28). 

III.  THE  LURID  GLEAMS  OF  AN  OVERCAST  SKY. — In 
2  Sam.  xxi.  2,  you  have  this  :  "  The  king  " — that  is,  David 
— "  called  the  Gibeonites — (now  the  Gibeonites  were  not  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  but  of  the  remnant  of  the  Amorites ; 
and  the  children  of  Israel  had  sworn  unto  them  :  and  Saul 
sought  to  slay  them  in  his  zeal  to  the  children  of  Israel  and 
Judah)."  Saul  was  smarting  under  Samuel's  words,  writhing 


144  "  ^.n  (Biril  Spirit  from  tlje 

under  the  sentence  of  deposition,  and  his  soul  was  stirred  to 
neutralize,  if  possible,  the  divine  verdict,  so  as  to  still  keep 
the  favour  of  God.  It  was  true,  and  Saul  knew  it  well,  that 
he  had  failed  in  one  distinct  call  to  obedience  ;  he  had  kept 
the  choice  of  the  spoil  for  himself — but  why  should  he  not, 
by  excessive  zeal  in  other  directions,  win  back  his  lost 
inheritance  ?  Allowing  that  he  had  failed  in  what  God  told 
him  to  do,  why  should  he  not  succeed  in  something  that 
God  had  not  told  him  to  do  ?  Why  should  he  not  resus 
citate  some  old  command,  and  give  it  unexpected 
obedience  ? 

Now  there  were  two  such  commandments  which  seem  to 
have  occurred  to  him.  The  one  enacted  that  when  the 
children  of  Israel  entered  the  Land  of  Promise,  they  should 
destroy  all  the  people  of  the  land.  The  Gibeonites,  how 
ever,  succeeded  in  securing  that  they  should  be  excepted, 
because  they  had  made  a  covenant  with  Joshua,  and  Joshua 
had  sworn  to  them  (Josh.  ix.).  The  Gibeonites,  therefore, 
had  lived  amongst  the  children  of  Israel  for  many  centuries, 
and  had  become  almost  an  integral  part  of  the  nation.  But 
in  his  false  zeal  for  God  Saul  seems  to  have  laid  ruthless 
hands  upon  these  peaceable  people  ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  old 
covenant  which  bound  Israel  to  respect  their  liberty  and 
life,  he  exterminated  them — an  act  that  brought  righteous 
retribution  in  after  days  on  his  house,  for  you  remember 
how,  as  a  set-off  to  this  ruthless  act,  Rizpah's  sons,  and  his 
own  five  grandsons,  were  hanged  upon  a  tree,  and  left  there 
until  the  rain  rotted  them  (2  Sam.  xxi.  8).  Secondly,  there 
was  on  the  statute-book  a  very  drastic  law  against  necro 
mancers  and  witches,  and  it  was  commanded  that  these 
should  be  exterminated  from  the  land  (Ex.  xxii.  18). 
Therefore  Saul  turned  his  hand  against  them.  In  his  heart 
he  still  believed  in  them — for  at  the  end  of  his  life,  when  a 
man  generally  casts  aside  his  pretences  and  appears  as  he  is, 
Saul  sought  out  one  of  these  very  women,  and  availed 


31  Jalse  Ztd.  MS 

himself  of  her  help.  In  order,  however,  to  show  his  zeal  for 
God,  and  to  extort  the  reversal  of  his  sentence,  he  began  to 
exterminate  them. 

But  as  his  edicts  went  forth,  there  was  rottenness  in  his 
heart.  His  royal  state  was  greatly  increased ;  he  wore  from 
this  time  a  gorgeous  turban,  like  other  kings,  which  was 
brought  from  the  field  of  Gilboa  to  David.  There  was  a 
great  increase  of  luxury  in  his  court,  for  he  arrayed  the 
daughters  of  Israel  in  scarlet  and  gold  (2  Sam.  i.  24).  A 
subtle  admixture  of  Baal  worship  with  the  recognition  of 
Jehovah  appears  from  his  naming  his  sons,  partly  from  the 
name  of  Jehovah,  and  partly  by  the  name  of  Baal.  He 
took  to  himself  concubines  in  imitation  of  his  neighbours. 
While  on  the  one  hand,  therefore,  there  was  this  outburst  of 
lurid  zeal  for  God,  his  own  heart  was  becoming  more  and 
more  enervated  and  evil. 

Saul's  is  not  an  isolated  case.  Take,  for  instance,  two 
examples  from  the  New  Testament,  which  are  almost 
parallel.  The  one  in  which  the  Apostle  says,  of  Israel,  that 
"  they  have  a  zeal  for  God,  but  not  according  to  knowledge. 
For  being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  seeking  to 
establish  their  own,  they  did  not  subject  themselves  to  the 
righteousness  of  God."  And  the  other,  the  case  of  that  still 
more  famous  Benjaminite,  Saul's  namesake,  who  tells  us  that, 
while  he  was  kicking  against  the  pricks,  he  had  a  zeal  for 
God  in  the  persecution  of  the  Church  (Rom.  x.  2,  3  ; 
Acts  xxii.  3,  4). 

Do  not  we  know  this  in  our  own  experience  ?  When  one 
has  fallen  under  the  condemnation  of  conscience,  the  heart 
has  endeavoured  to  whisper  comfort  to  itself  by  saying, "  I 
will  endeavour  to  redeem  my  cause  by  an  extravagance  of 
zeal."  We  have  plunged  into  some  compensating  work  to 
neutralize  the  result  of  failure.  It  is  zeal,  but  it  is  false ;  it 
is  zeal,  but  it  is  strange  fire ;  it  is  zeal,  but  it  is  self-origin 
ated  ;  it  is  zeal,  but  it  is  only  for  self  and  not  for  God;  it  is 
T 


146  "  &n  (Ehil  Spirit  from  tfce  forir." 

zeal,  but  it  is  zeal  for  the  letter,  for  the  tradition,  for  the 
external  form — it  is  not  the  zeal  of  the  man  who  is  eaten  up 
and  devoured  by  a  passionate  love  for  the  Son  of  God,  and 
for  the  souls  He  has  made. 

This  is  the  story  of  ourselves.  No  man  can  get  away 
from  it  Here  is  the  mirror  in  which  we  behold  our  own 
faces.  The  Bible  is  the  Book  of  God,  because  it  is  the 
Book  of  man ;  it  is  the  timeless  Book  ;  it  is  the  Book  that 
is  the  mirror  of  the  soul,  because  man  is  always  seeing 
himself  in  the  experience  of  those  that  have  preceded 
him. 

Let  us  turn  from  Saul  for  a  moment  to  that  dear  face  that 
bends  over  us  to-day ;  to  that  heart  that  yearns  over  us ;  to 
the  Christ  of  God  that  loves  us.  We,  too,  have  disobeyed; 
have  come  short;  have  failed  to  fulfil  his  commands;  but 
there  is  forgiveness  in  those  flowing  wounds  :  there  is  pardon 
in  that  loving  heart.  Seek  it !  Ask  Him  to  blot  out  the 
past.  Let  the  dead  bury  its  dead.  And  may  the  Holy 
Ghost  kindle  upon  our  heart-altars  a  fire  of  zeal  which  shall 
never  be  put  out,  and  which  shall  always  burn  for  his  glory, 
purifying  our  nature,  and  making  us  living  sacrifices  unto 
Him. 


bringing  fortlj 

(i  SAMUEL  xviii.  12.) 

' '  We  scatter  seeds  with  careless  hand, 
And  dream  we  ne'er  shall  see  them  more  ; 
But  for  a  thousand  years  their  fruit  appears 
In  weeds  that  mar  the  land,  or  healthful  store." 

KEBLK. 

NEVER  has  there  been  a  truer  illustration  of  the 
words  in  which  the  Apostle  James  describes  the 
genealogy  of  sin  and  her  fateful  family  than  that 
furnished  by  the  life-history  of  Saul.  No  sooner  are  we 
told  that  he  had  begun  to  yield  to  the  spirit  of  evil,  than  the 
historian  hastens  to  tell  us  of  the  successive  steps  by  which 
its  early  suggestions  grew  into  a  headlong  passion,  hurrying 
the  monarch  to  one  breach  after  another  of  the  Divine  law. 
How  true  it  is  that  they  who  offend  in  one  point  are  finally 
guilty  in  all  !  The  first  sin  is  like  the  letting  in  of  water, 
which  gradually  eats  away  the  embankment,  so  that  pre 
sently  the  entire  flood  of  waters  inundates  the  land. 

It  befel  thus.  About  this  time,  while  Saul  was  smarting 
under  Samuel's  sentence  of  deposition,  David  for  the  first 
time  crossed  his  path.  Two  accounts  are  given  of  the  intro 
duction  of  the  young  shepherd  to  the  God-forsaken  and 
moody  monarch,  but  they  are  not  mutually  inconsistent. 
The  one  tells  of  his  entering  the  royal  palace  as  a  minstrel ; 
the  other  of  his  prowess  in  war,  which  rendered  his  presence 
an  indispensable  adjunct  to  the  court. 

The  attacks  of  Saul's  depression  and  despondency 
become  more  frequent  and  severe ;  and  at  last  it  was 
suggested  by  his  servants — tradition  says,  by  Doeg  the 
Edomite — that  the  effect  of  music  should  be  tried  on  the 


148  "J5>in  bringing  fortlj 

poor  diseased  brain.  "  Behold  now,"  they  said,  "  an  evil 
spirit  from  God  troubleth  thee  ;  let  our  lord  now  command 
thy  servants,  which  are  before  thee,  to  seek  out  a  man  who 
is  a  cunning  player  on  the  harp;  and  it  shall  come  to  pass, 
when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  is  upon  thee,  that  he  shall 
play  with  his  hand,  and  thou  shalt  be  well." 

Instantly  the  king  fell  in  with  the  suggestion ;  and 
presently  David's  name  was  mentioned  by  one  of  the  young 
men,  who  had,  perhaps,  come  from  the  same  part  of  the 
country,  and  had  often  met  the  son  of  Jesse  in  their  native 
village — may  even  have  sat  with  him  at  the  feet  of  the  same 
Rabbi.  The  young  shepherd  was  possessed  of  the  very 
qualities  which  were  most  captivating  for  the  king.  He  was 
skilful  in  playing.  Already  he  had  come  to  be  known  as  a 
man  of  valour,  in  the  border-skirmishes  which  he  main 
tained  with  robbers  for  the  integrity  of  his  father's  flock. 
He  was  skilful  in  judgment,  and  eloquent  in  speech.  Manly 
beauty  characterized  his  countenance  and  port.  It  seems 
as  though  that  had  happened  to  David  which  happens 
in  measure  to  all  God's  servants — the  unction  and  abiding 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  had  brought  out  into  fair  and  living 
prominence  his  natural  traits,  as  when  a  spark  is  taken  from 
common  air  and  plunged  into  a  jar  of  oxygen  gas,  or  as 
though  an  island  which  had  long  lain  under  the  spell  of 
Arctic  winter  could  be  loosed  from  its  moorings,  and  drifted 
down  to  southern  seas,  and,  beneath  the  genial  touch  of 
the  tropic  summer,  all  the  buried  seeds  should  burst  forth 
into  a  rich  and  luxuriant  growth. 

The  description  given  to  him  greatly  pleased  the  king, 
who  was  always  on  the  outlook  for  promising  youths;  and  in 
the  exercise  of  that  unquestioned  autocracy  which  marked 
his  reign,  like  that  of  other  Eastern  monarchs,  he  despatched 
a  summons  to  Jesse  to  send  him  David,  his  son,  who 
was  with  the  sheep.  Such  a  summons  could  not  be 
disregarded,  and  making  up  a  present  of  the  produce  of 


gairifc's  floutfr.  149 

his  farm,  the  old  man  despatched  his  Benjamin  to  begin  to 
tread  the  difficult  and  intricate  paths  of  royal  favour. 
"  And  David  came  to  Saul,  and  stood  before  him,  and  he 
loved  him  greatly."  And  whenever  Saul  was  overtaken  by 
one  of  his  fits  of  melancholy,  when  the  sky  was  overcast 
with  the  heavy  clouds  of  God-forsakenness  and  despair, 
"  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  was  upon  him,"  David, 
then  probably  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  took  the  harp 
and  played  with  his  hand,  so  that  Saul  was  refreshed,  and 
the  evil  spirit  departed  from  him,  and  he  was  well. 

Robert  Browning  has  depicted  for  us,  with  a  wonderful 
luxuriance  of  imagination,  the  scene  when  the  minstrel 
strove  with  all  the  spell  of  his  art  to  tame  and  exorcise  the 
depression  that  mantled  the  royal  brow  :  how  he  sang  of  the 
scenes  in  the  valleys  where  the  sheep  were  being  gathered 
beside  the  brimming  waters  of  the  wells  ;  and  again  of  the 
pasture  lands  over  which  they  were  scattered,  browsing  on 
the  tender  grass.  At  one  moment  there  was  a  strain  of 
martial  music,  summoning  the  clans  to  repel  a  border 
foray  ;  at  another  it  seemed  as  though  the  voices  of  maidens 
were  welcoming  back  from  the  fight  their  lovers,  crowned 
with  victory.  Again,  the  music  told  of  the  rising  storm, 
the  rattle  of  the  thunder,  the  pelt  of  the  hail,  until  you 
became  aware  that  the  fury  of  the  elements  had  spent  itself, 
and  was  dying  down  into  the  cadences  of  a  summer  land 
scape  bathed  in  peace.  Now  you  could  have  heard  the 
sough  of  the  wind  through  the  trees,  or  sweeping  over  the 
meadows,  and  anon  the  music  of  the  spheres,  as  the 
heavens  declared  the  glory  of  God  and  the  firmament  told 
of  his  handiwork.  Sometimes  the  young  poet  would 
rehearse  the  joy  of  drinking  the  pure  nectar  of  young  life  : 

Oh,  the  wild  joys  of  living  !  the  leaping  from  rock  up  to  rock  ; 
The  strong  rending  of  boughs  from  the  fir-tree  ;  the  cool  silver  shock 
Of  the  plunge  in  a  pool's  living  water — the  hunt  of  the  bear, 
And  the  sultriness  showing  the  lion  is  couched  in  his  lair. 


15°  "  ^in  bringing  foritj 

And  the  meal — the  rich  dates  yellowed  over  with  gold-dust  divine, 
And  the  locusts'  flesh  steeped  in  the  pitcher !  the  full  draught  of  wine, 
And  the  sheep  in  the  dried  river-channel  where  bulrushes  tell 
That  the  water  was  wont  to  go  warbling  so  softly  and  well. 

How  good  is  man's  life,  the  mere  living  !  how  fit  to  employ 
All  the  heart,  and  the  soul,  and  the  senses  for  ever  in  joy. 

It  is  probable  that  the  spell  of  music  with  which  David 
sought  to  relieve  the  king's  dark  moods  was  greatly 
successful,  as  afterwards  in  the  case  of  Philip  V.  of  Spain, 
who  was  cured  of  a  fixed  melancholy  by  the  music  of  a 
famous  player.  His  fits  of  insanity  became  less  and  less 
frequent ;  the  need  for  David's  attendance  at  court  was 
greatly  relaxed  ;  and  the  king  may  almost  have  ceased  to 
think  of  him,  amid  the  many  suitors  for  his  royal  favour. 
Perhaps  this  very  fickleness  was  part  of  the  disease.  It  was 
due  probably  to  the  disordered  condition  of  the  king's 
brain  that  he  well-nigh  forgot  the  stripling  whom  he  had 
greatly  loved,  and  who  had  become  alike  his  armour-bearer 
and  his  physician  (xvi.  22). 

How  long  a  period  elapsed  in  this  way  we  cannot  tell,  but 
another  series  of  events  brought  Saul  and  David  into  closer 
and  more  tragical  contact.  The  Philistines  had  never 
forgiven  the  Hebrews  for  having  discarded  the  yoke,  which 
for  so  long  they  had  meekly  borne  ;  and  at  last,  after  a  series 
of  forays  and  raids  on  the  southern  borders  of  Canaan,  the 
tide  of  invasion  could  no  longer  be  restrained.  It  rolled 
across  the  frontiers,  and  poured  through  the  valleys,  till  the 
Philistine  hosts  were  gathered  together  in  the  valley  of  the 
Terebinth,  which  belonged  to  Judah,  and  pitched  their 
camp  at  Ephes-dammim,  "  the  Boundary  of  Blood,"  so 
called,  probably,  from  the  dark  and  bloody  encounters 
which  had  taken  place  there.  The  valley,  or  wady,  is  broad 
and  open,  and  about  three  miles  long.  It  is  divided  in  the 
centre  by  a  remarkable  ravine,  or  trench,  formed  by  a 
mountain  torrent,  which  is  full  of  foaming  water  in  the 


fini)  JFaitlj.  151 

winter,  though  dry  in  summer.  It  was  the  presence  of  this 
gorge  or  channel,  some  twenty  feet  wide,  with  steep  vertical 
sides,  and  with  a  depth  of  ten  or  twelve  feet,  that  protracted 
the  issue  for  so  long,  so  that  the  two  hosts  lay  watching 
each  other  for  forty  days,  neither  of  them  daring  to  face  the 
hazard  involved  in  crossing  the  valley  and  its  ravine,  in  the 
face  of  the  other. 

The  full  story  of  the  combat  with  Goliath  belongs  to  the 
Life  of  David  ;  we  only  touch  on  it  here  as  it  concerns  the 
ill-fated  and  hapless  Saul. 

When  the  gigantic  Philistine  champion  strode  forth,  and 
even  dared  to  come  near  the  lines  of  the  Hebrew  troops, 
clothed  in  helmet,  jerkin,  and  greaves  of  bright  copper  mail, 
handling  a  mighty  spear,  and  with  a  sword  girt  at  his  side ; 
and  when  he  boldly  challenged  the  armies  of  Israel  to  pro 
duce  a  man  worthy  to  take  up  the  gage  of  battle,  Saul  was  as 
dismayed  and  panic-stricken  as  any  of  his  soldiers.  It  is  said 
that  he  was  "greatly  afraid"  (xvii.  n).  Though  he  was 
God's  chosen  king,  and  in  his  earlier  life  had  stood  in  the 
might  of  a  simple  faith,  his  disobedience  had  severed  the 
sinews  of  his  power,  and  he  had  become  as  weak  as  any  other. 
Obedience  and  faith  are  two  aspects  of  the  same  posture  of 
the  soul :  as  you  obey,  you  are  able  to  believe ;  as  you 
believe,  you  can  obey.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the 
fourth  chapter,  the  words  are  perpetually  interchanged. 
Let  a  man  but  have  faith  in  God,  he  waxes  valiant  in  the 
fight,  and  turns  to  flight  armies  of  aliens.  One  can  chase  a 
thousand,  and  two  put  thousands  to  flight.  Oh  !  beware  of 
disobedience  which  introduces  trembling  and  faintness  into 
the  heart,  so  that  the  sound  of  a  driven  leaf  chases  the 
fugitive  !  All  that  Saul  could  do,  in  the  face  of  the  braggart 
blasphemy  of  Goliath,  was  to  hold  out  the  most  lavish 
promises  of  what  he  would  do  for  the  hero  who  would 
take  up  the  challenge,  and  make  the  proud  Gittite  bite  the 
dust. 


i52  "  J^itt  bringing  fortrj  g 

When,  finally,  David  was  brought  into  his  presence,  his 
soul  glowing  with  an  heroic  faith,  and  avowing  his  determi 
nation  to  go  alone  to  fight  the  Philistine,  Saul  endeavoured 
to  dissuade  him.  "  Thou  art  not  able  to  go  against  this 
Philistine  to  fight  with  him."  He  had  no  idea  of  power 
other  than  that  which  came  of  long  usage  (xvii.  33),  or  of 
helmets  and  coats  of  mail  (xvii.  38,  39).  The  point  of 
David's  narrative  of  his  successful  conflicts  with  the  lion 
and  bear  was  entirely  lost  on  him.  Saul  looked  on  them 
as  the  result  of  superior  agility  and  sinewy  strength ;  he  did 
not  fathom  David's  meaning  as  he  spoke  of  the  great 
deliverances  which  Jehovah  had  wrought  (xvii.  37).  Already 
the  young  psalmist  was  saying  to  himself: — 

The  Lord  is  my  light  and  my  salvation, 
Whom  shall  I  fear  ? 
The  Lord  is  the  strength  of  my  life, 
Of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ? 

But  such  boasts  of  the  believer  in  God  were  an  enigma 
to  the  king.  The  eyes  of  his  heart  were  blinded,  and  he 
could  not  see.  He  had  no  idea  that  faith  opens  altogether 
new  sources  of  power,  touches  stops  in  the  great  organ  of 
nature  which  elude  other  hands,  and  avails  itself  of  those 
Divine  prerogatives  which,  like  legions  of  angels,  wait  in 
harnessed  squadrons  around  the  beset  believer. 

As  David  went  forth  to  meet  the  Philistine,  Saul  said  to 
Abner,  the  trusted  captain  of  his  army,  "  Whose  son  is  the 
youth  ?  Inquire  whose  son  the  stripling  is."  And  when 
presently  the  young  champion  returned  with  the  head  of  the 
Philistine  in  his  hand,  the  one  question  the  king  put  to  him 
was,  "  Whose  son  art  thou,  thou  young  man  ?  "  It  was  as 
though  Saul  thought  to  account  for  his  success  on  the  ground 
of  heredity.  "  Surely,"  thought  he,  "  this  youth  comes  of  a 
great  line  of  ancestry ;  the  blood  of  Caleb  or  Joshua  must 
be  in  his  veins ;  the  best  of  Hebrew  stock  must  have  yielded 
this  scion."  It  is  thus  that  the  man  of  this  world  tries  to 


gart  of  icnlousii.  153 

compute  and  reckon  up  the  child  of  faith.  He  is  always 
analyzing  the  elements  of  his  success  and  trying  to  account 
for  him.  He  has  no  conception  of  what  God  can  be  or  do 
for  the  soul  that  wholly  trusts  Him. 

On  the  ground  of  expediency,  after  his  return  to  Gibeah, 
Saul  set  David  over  the  men  of  war.  The  harp  was  ex 
changed,  for  the  most  part,  for  the  sword  ;  and  as  he  went 
forth  on  his  expeditions  against  the  hereditary  foes  of 
Israel,  he  became  more  and  more  necessary  to  the  stability 
of  the  throne,  as  he  became  increasingly  the  darling  of  the 
nation.  "  Whithersoever  Saul  sent  him,  he  behaved  him 
self  wisely."  Out  of  this  popularity  originated  the  great 
sin  of  Saul's  life. 

On  one  occasion,  as  Saul  and  David  were  returning  from 
some  final  and  decisive  victory  over  the  Philistines  (ver.  6, 
see  tnarg.},  the  people  crowded  to  meet  them  and  the 
troops ;  and  the  women,  dressed  in  gay  attire,  danced 
around  and  before  the  advancing  columns,  singing  to  the 
music  of  their  tambourines  and  three-stringed  instruments. 
As  they  performed  the  usual  sacred  dance  they  sang  re- 
sponsively,  "answering  one  to  another,"  an  ode.  of  victory, 
of  which  this  was  the  refrain  : 

Saul  hath  slain  his  thousands, 
And  David  his  ten  thousands. 

Instantly  the  king  was  smitten  with  the  dart  of  jealousy. 
All  his  soul  was  set  on  fire  with  the  thought  that  not 
improbably  David  was  the  neighbour  of  whom  Samuel  had 
spoken  as  being  the  divinely  designated  successor  to  the 
kingdom,  which  was  even  now  passing  from  his  hand. 
What  if  this  bright  young  soldier,  with  the  light  of  God  on 
his  life,  and  the  love  of  the  people  already  gathered  to  his 
person,  was  to  dispossess  him  !  "  And  Saul  was  very  wroth, 
and  the  saying  displeased  him  ;  and  he  said  :  What  can  he 
have  more  than  the  kingdom  ?  " 

11  And  Saul  eyed  David  from  that  day  and  forward."  All 
u 


fortlj 

the  love  and  admiration  that  he  had  entertained  towards 
him  turned  to  gall  and  bitterness.  The  milk  of  human 
kindness  turned  sour.  His  old  malady,  which  had  been 
charmed  away  from  him,  came  back  with  more  than  its 
wonted  force  ;  and  on  the  day  after  the  incident,  brooding 
over  his  fancied  wrongs,  it  seemed  as  though  his  whole 
nature  were  suddenly  thrown  open  to  an  evil  spirit,  which 
possessed  him  and  swept  him  on  to  do  a  deed  of  murderous 
hatred.  Raving  in  a  mad  fit  of  frenzy,  he  caught  up  the  spear 
that  stood  beside  him  as  the  emblem  of  his  royal  state,  and 
hurled  it  at  David  who  was  sitting  before  him,  endeavouring 
to  charm  away  his  malady.  Not  once,  but  twice,  the  mur 
derous  weapon  quivered  through  the  air ;  but  David  "  avoided 
out  of  his  presence  twice,"  no  doubt  imputing  the  attempt 
on  his  life  to  the  king's  illness,  and  having  no  idea  of  the 
jealousy  that  was  burning  in  his  soul  like  fire. 

Let  us  take  care  of  the  first  beginnings  of  sin,  when  the 
least  suggestion  begins  to  float  in  the  air  around  us,  like  a 
microbe  or  germ  of  malignant  and  deadly  disease.  Then  is 
the  time  to  turn  to  Christ  with  it  for  deliverance,  securing 
his  gracious  interposition,  as  you  exercise  faith  in  the  grace 
of  his  salvation.  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  pre 
sumptuous  sins  ;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me ;  then 
shall  I  be  upright,  and  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great 
transgression." 


XXI. 

i\\  of 

(i  SAMUKL  xviii.) 

"  All  selfish  souls,  whate'er  they  feign, 

Have  still  a  slavish  lot ; 
They  boast  of  Liberty — in  vain — 

Of  Love — and  feel  it  not ! 
He  whose  bosom  glows  with  Thee — 
He,  and  he  alone,  is  free." 

COWPER. 

AIONG  the  most  terrible  of  human  sins  is  jealousy — 
the  parent  of  the  blackest  crimes  that  have  dis 
graced   the  annals  of  our  race.     And  of  all  the 
delineations  of  it,  which  are  frescoed  on  the  walls  of  history, 
none  is  more  absolutely  true  to  life,  and  terrible  in  its  graphic 
colouring,  than  this  portraiture  of  the  first  king  of  Israel. 

I.  JEALOUSY  OPENS  THE  DOOR  TO  THE  DEVIL. — In 
Saul's  case  the  interval  was  the  briefest  possible.  On  the 
morrow,  after  the  song  of  the  women,  which  first  aroused 
in  his  heart  the  feeling  of  jealousy  towards  David,  we  learn 
that  "  an  evil  spirit "  came  mightily  upon  the  ill-fated 
monarch. 

There  is  an  impenetrable  wall,  as  we  believe,  built  by  the 
Providence  of  God  between  human  souls  and  the  evil 
spirits  which  tenant  the  atmosphere  around  us,  and  are 
therefore  called  "the  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness  in  the 
heavenly  places"  (Eph.  vi.  12,  R.V.),  whilst  their  leader  is 
known  as  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  (Eph.  ii.  2). 

This  evil  spirit,  in  Saul's  case,  is  said  to  have  been  "  from 
God " — a  phrase  which  can  only  be  interpreted  on  the 
hypothesis  that  God  permitted  it  to  come,  and  that  this 


156  ®!JE  j^ht  of 

tragic  result  transpired  in  direct  pursuance  of  the  immutable 
fixtures  of  the  universe.  If  a  man  tampers  with  his  soul, 
God  cannot  save  him  from  the  inevitable  results.  Obey  the 
law  of  fire,  and  it  will  obey  you  like  a  dutiful  slave — this  is 
God's  will  and  appointment ;  but  it  is  also  his  will  and 
appointment  that,  if  you  disobey  it,  it  will  devour  your 
towers,  palaces,  treasures,  and  homes,  with  merciless  fury. 
When  men  rebel  and  vex  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  turns  to  be 
their  enemy  and  fights  against  them.  "  God,"  says  one, 
"  must  be  something  to  us  ;  what  He  shall  be,  depends  on 
what  we  are  to  Him."  Go  with  the  wind,  and  it  beneficently 
wafts  you  forward  ;  go  against  it,  and  your  progress  becomes 
ruinous  in  its  deadly  cost. 

With  the  merciful,  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  merciful ; 
With  the  perfect  man,  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  perfect ; 
With  the  pure,  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  pure  ; 
And  with  the  froward,  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  froward. 

II.  JEALOUSY  DEFEATS  ITS  OWN  GOOD. — With  almost  a 
single  bound,  David  had  leapt  into  the  throne  of  universal 
homage  and  affection.  "  All  Israel  and  Judah  loved 
David"  (ver.  16).  In  this  common  affection  for  one  who 
was  so  accessible  to  them  all,  the  people  forgot  their  ancient 
feuds.  Not  only  they,  but  the  court  was  enamoured  of  him. 
He  was  set  over  the  men  of  war,  and  went  out  with  them 
whithersoever  Saul  sent  him,  and  his  promotion  was  good 
not  only  "  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people,"  but  also  "  in  the 
sight  of  Saul's  servants";  while  Jonathan  loved  him  with  a 
love  passing  the  love  of  women;  and  Michal,  Saul's 
daughter,  was  tenderly  attached  to  him.  There  must  have 
been  something  of  a  spell  in  the  influence  of  that  pure  bright 
soul  over  all  who  came  into  contact  with  it. 

Besides  this,  the  Lord  was  evidently  with  him.  Note 
how  constantly  the  sacred  chronicle  touches  that  note  : — 
"  Saul  was  afraid  of  David,  because  the  Lord  zvas  with  him  " 


31  ^eatroging  |Jaasiott.  157 

(ver.  12);  "David  behaved  himself  wisely  in  all  his  ways, 
and  the  Lord  was  with  him  "  (ver.  14) ;  "  And  Saul  saw  and 
knew  that  the  Lord  was  with  David"  (ver.  28).  Moreover, 
he  behaved  himself  wisely,  or  prospered  (ver.  5) ;  wisely  in 
all  his  ways  (ver.  14);  very  wisely,  so  much  so  that  Saul 
stood  in  awe  of  him  (ver.  15) ;  more  wisely  than  all  the  ser 
vants  of  Saul,  so  that  his  name  was  much  set  by  (ver.  30). 

Under  these  circumstances,  how  judicious  it  would  have 
been  for  Saul  to  bind  the  son  of  Jesse  to  himself!  Admit 
ting  frankly  that  he  was  his  designated  successor,  and  that 
he  was  enjoying  the  special  favour  of  Jehovah,  the  king 
might  have  used  David  for  the  rehabilitation  of  his  waning 
fortunes.  It  was  evidently  impossible  to  reverse  the  Divine 
choice,  but  he  might  have  postponed  the  infliction  of  the 
inevitable  sentence.  Nothing  could  have  made  the  king 
himself  more  popular  than  to  have  identified  his  fortunes 
and  those  of  his  family  with  one  who  could  have  rendered 
conspicuous  and  inestimable  service  to  court  and  king 
dom.  Nothing  could  have  been  easier,  nothing  more 
politic.  But  instead  of  this,  Saul  allowed  his  mad  passion 
to  smoulder  and  sometimes  burst  into  a  flame,  until  it  broke 
out  in  irresistible  fury,  and  consumed  the  house  of  his  life. 

In  the  case  of  the  higher  passions  of  the  soul,  it  is  often 
easy  to  curb  and  restrain  them  by  the  introduction  of 
considerations  of  self-interest  and  personal  prestige ;  but  it 
is  not  so  with  jealousy.  At  the  shrine  of  this  passion,  the 
jealous  soul  is  prepared  to  repeat  the  act  of  Palissy  the 
potter,  who  tore  up  the  very  boards  of  his  home,  after 
having  destroyed  every  atom  of  furniture,  in  order  to 
prosecute  the  design  by  which  he  was  consumed.  The 
peace  of  the  home  ;  the  success  of  some  great  enterprise ; 
the  happiness  and  prosperity  of  some  loved  one  who  has 
been  the  unwitting  cause  of  jealousy ;  the  service  of  God  ; 
the  prospect  of  long,  happy  years  of  high  respect  if  only  the 
passion  is  resisted  and  extinguished — I  have  seen  these,  and 


nt  of 

more  than  these,  sacrificed  because  jealousy  has  demanded 
its  revenge. 

III.  JEALOUSY  is  VERY  INVENTIVE  OF  METHODS  OF 
EXECUTING  ITS  FELL  PURPOSE. — Its  shape  is  protean. 
Sometimes  it  uses  the  stiletto,  whose  edge  is  so  fine  that 
you  do  not  know  you  have  been  struck  till  afterwards  ; 
and  sometimes  the  bludgeon,  that  fells  to  the  ground  with 
one  murderous  blow.  The  poison  cup,  or  the  fine  meshes 
of  a  subtle  stratagem,  which  leads  the  victim  to  inflict  his  own 
doom — such  are  the  methods  which  jealousy  employs. 

Trace  this  in  the  history  before  us.  First  Saul,  under  the 
excuse  of  his  malady,  attempts  to  take  David's  life  with  his 
own  hand.  He  knew  that  the  murderous  deed  would  be 
imputed  to  the  deranged  condition  of  his  mind,  and  there 
fore,  with  impunity,  twice  launched  the  javelin  at  the 
minstrel  who  sought  to  charm  away  his  malady. 

Then  he  sought  to  throw  him  into  positions  of  extreme 
peril,  by  inciting  him  to  valiant  deeds  on  the  field  of  battle, 
and  in  border  warfare.  For  a  bribe  he  promised  him  his 
elder  daughter,  Merab,  and  to  this  was  added  the  appeal  of 
religion,  than  which  no  motive  could  be  more  potent  with 
this  devout  and  chivalrous  soul.  "  And  Saul  said  to  David, 
Behold,  my  elder  daughter  Merab  ;  her  will  I  give  thee  to 
wife  :  only  be  thou  valiant  for  me,  and  fight  the  Lord's 
battles."  And  then,  with  unsparing  hand,  the  sacred  writer 
draws  aside  the  veil,  and  recites  to  us  the  secret  thoughts 
that  were  passing  in  that  dark  and  evil-haunted  nature — 
"  for  Saul  said,  Let  not  mine  hand  be  upon  him,  but  let 
the  hand  of  the  Philistines  be  upon  him." 

The  stratagem  had  failed,  but  it  seemed  too  insidious, 
and  too  likely  to  realize  the  royal  purpose,  to  be  abandoned 
without  being  put  to  one  further  proof;  and  Michal,  Saul's 
younger  daughter,  who  really  loved  David,  at  this  time,  at 
least,  was  made  the  guerdon  or  prize  to  allure  the  young 


trjat  JPnileiJ.  159 

unsuspecting  warrior  to  fresh  encounters  with  the  Philistines. 
The  sure  evidence  that  a  hundred  of  these  doughty  foes  had 
fallen  by  David's  hand  was  the  only  stipulated  dowry  which 
was  required ;  and  the  honour  of  becoming  the  king's  son- 
in-law  was  the  theme  of  many  a  hint,  suggestion,  and  open 
conversation  between  the  courtiers  and  the  young  soul  on 
whose  career  so  much  attention  was  being  concentrated. 
To  his  servants,  Saul  must  have  seemed  to  be  sincerely 
attached  to  David,  and  to  desire,  with  genuine  earnestness, 
to  enrol  him  in  his  family.  Clearly,  he  was  playing  a  game 
of  unusual  adroitness.  On  the  one  hand,  his  servants  really 
believed  that  the  king  delighted  in  David,  and  wanted  the 
alliance  ;  on  the  other,  "Saul  thought  to  make  David  fall  by 
the  hand  of  the  Philistines." 

It  was  only  after  the  plot  had  failed,  and  it  seemed  as 
though,  through  the  providence  of  God,  David  was  possessed 
of  a  charmed  life,  that  Saul  spoke  to  Jonathan  his  son, 
and  to  all  his  servants,  that  they  should  slay  David  ;  again 
hurled  his  javelin  at  him  with  such  force  that  it  stood 
quivering  in  the  palace  wall ;  and  afterwards  pursued  him, 
first  to  his  own  home,  and  finally  to  Samuel's  home  in 
Naioth  (see  chap.  xix.). 

Not  otherwise  is  it  with  jealousy.  When  a  wife  is  jealous 
of  another  woman,  who  may  be  absolutely  guiltless  of  any 
attempt  to  influence  the  husband's  affections ;  when  an  elder 
minister  becomes  jealous  of  his  assistant,  or  of  a  neighbour ; 
when  a  person  becomes  jealous  of  the  influence  which 
another  is  obtaining  over  his  friend — it  becomes  almost 
impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  unkind  suggestions,  all  the 
insinuations,  all  the  wrong  constructions  on  conduct,  all  the 
perversion  of  words,  actions,  and  looks,  through  which  the 
soul  will  vent  its  spleen. 

IV.  JEALOUSY  OF  THE  INNOCENT  is  UNABLE  TO  AVAIL 
AGAINST  GOD. — It  was  remarkably  so  with  David.  Saul  was 


160  ®JJE  j^itt  cf 


bent  on  alluring  him  to  his  ruin.  Through  God's  interpo 
sition,  however,  each  murderous  intent  was  foiled,  and  became 
the  cause  of  the  still  greater  popularity  to  his  rival.  If  he  is 
set  over  the  men  of  war,  he  prospers  wherever  he  is  sent  ;  if 
he  is  separated  from  the  immediate  proximity  of  the  king, 
and  permitted  to  go  in  and  out  before  the  people,  the  whole 
nation  loves  him  (xviii.  13,  15).  If  he  is  sent  to  fight  the 
Philistines,  he  slays  not  one  hundred  but  two,  so  that  his 
name  is  much  set  by  (ver.  30).  If  Saul  urges  Jonathan  to 
slay  him,  he  drives  his  own  son  to  a  closer  friendship,  and 
forces  him  to  plead  the  cause  of  the  twin  soul  with  which  his 
own  was  knit.  Everything  that  is  meant  for  ill  turns  out  for 
good.  The  weapons  that  are  hurled  on  the  young  life  are 
boomerangs  which  return  on  the  hand  that  launched  them. 
The  curses  came  home  to  roost.  Saul  digs  privily  a  pit, 
into  which  he  falls  himself. 

If  only  jealous  people  would  ponder  such  a  story  as  this, 
surely  they  would  see  the  uselessness  of  their  malignant 
attempts  to  injure  those  who  may  seem  destined  to  take 
their  place.  It  is  not  thus  that  the  peril  can  be  met. 

There  is  a  Nemesis  in  life  which  will  certainly  return  on 
the  evil-doer.  The  Lord  will  not  leave  his  Davids  to  the 
cruel  mercies  of  a  Saul.  He  will  raise  up  Jonathans  to 
warn  them  of  their  peril,  will  cause  Michals  to  ward  off  the 
molesting  blow,  will  overpower  with  the  mysterious  spell 
of  spiritual  influences  the  murderous  bands,  and  will  still  the 
enemy  and  avenger. 

God  is  a  righteous  judge, 

If  a  man  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword  ; 

He  had  bent  his  bow  and  made  it  ready, 

He  hath  also  prepared  for  him  the  instruments  of  death. 

His  mischief  shall  return  upon  his  own  head, 

And  his  violence  shall  come  down  upon  his  own  pate. 

(PsA.  vii,  11-13,  16,  R.V.) 


XXII. 

"Cn»l  as  tljt  <Bnrf»." 

(i  SAMUEL  xx,  27.) 

"  'Tis  greatly  wise  to  talk  with  our  past  hours  ; 
And  ask  them  what  report  they  bore  to  heaven  ; 
And  how  they  might  have  borne  more  welcome  news. 
Their  answers  form  what  men  Experience  call ; 
The  Spirit  walks  of  every  day  deceased, 
And  smiles  an  Angel,  or  a  Fury  frowns." 

YOUNG. 

yEALOUSY  has  no  scruples ',  and  will  not  Jiesitate  to 
violate  the  most  revered  sanctities.  Her  foot  is  ruthless ; 
it  will  trample  upon  the  relationship  of  home,  the 
bonds  of  friendship  and  kinship,  and  the  reverence  which 
attaches  itself  to  the  house  and  worship  of  God.  When 
once  this  passion  has  kindled,  there  is  nothing  on  which  it 
will  forbear  to  feed — nothing  is  too  sacred  to  be  fuel  for  its 
flame.  Not  that  it  often,  under  the  restraint  of  Christian 
civilization  at  least,  proceeds  to  murder ;  rather,  by 
whispered  suspicions,  by  the  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  the 
movement  of  the  finger,  the  furtive  look,  the  suggestive 
question,  it  may  destroy  the  peace  which  one  has  in 
husband,  wife,  child,  or  friend. 

The  home  is  one  of  the  most  sacred  institutions  of  our 
human  life.  Originated  by  the  knitting  of  spirit  with 
spirit,  the  twain  become  one ;  and  from  that  union  springs 
the  dower  of  blessed  children,  sowing  the  world  with  flowers, 
and  making  the  race  perennially  young.  Such  a  home, 
in  David's  case,  was  due,  under  God,  to  Saul's  own 
arrangement.  Michal,  his  daughter,  loved  David;  they 
told  Saul,  and  it  pleased  him,  and  he  gave  her  to  David 

to   wife.      It   was  the  burst  as  of  a  new   spring-tide  to 
x 


1 62  "dtel  as  tlje  (Brabe." 

those  two  young  lives — happy  in  each  other's  affection, 
though  afterwards  to  be  sadly  alienated.  Yet  when  David 
had  evaded  his  javelin,  and  fled  to  the  security  of  his  home, 
saying  to  himself,  At  least  my  father-in-law  will  respect  the 
sanctity  of  his  daughter's  love,  the  madly-jealous  monarch 
sent  messengers  thither  to  watch  him,  and  slay  him  in  the 
morning,  eliciting  from  the  imprisoned  singer  the  plaintive 
strains  preserved  in  one  of  his  Psalms  (lix.  R.V.). 

Deliver  me  from  mine  enemies,  O  my  God ; 

Set  me  on  high  from  them  that  rise  up  against  me. 

Deliver  me  from  the  workers  of  iniquity, 

And  save  me  from  the  bloodthirsty  men. 

For,  lo,  they  lie  in  wait  for  my  soul ; 

The  mighty  gather  themselves  together  against  me  ; 

Not  for  my  transgression,  nor  for  my  sin,  O  Lord. 

Michal  knew  her  father  too  well  to  trust  his  clemency ; 
she  warned  her  husband  of  the  imminence  of  death,  and 
with  woman-wit  (and  what  will  not  women  do  for  those 
they  love  !)  aided  him  to  escape,  with  her  own  hands  letting 
him  down  from  the  window.  It  was  due  to  her  that  the 
newly-formed  home  was  not  rendered  desolate,  and  the 
light  of  its  hearth  quenched. 

The  sanctuary  of  religious  worship  is  next  in  importance 
to  the  home,  if  not  superior.  They  stand  or  fall  together. 
The  one  is  generally  the  guarantee  of  the  stability  of  the 
other.  From  the  home  as  its  forecourt,  we  pass  into  the 
house  of  God  as  our  abiding-place.  "In  my  Father's  house," 
said  our  Lord,  "  are  many  mansions "  ;  and  may  we  not 
suppose  that  human  homes  are  included  amongst  them  ? 

But  the  case  of  Saul  shows  that  jealousy  will  break  down 
the  precincts  of  the  sanctuary  as  ruthlessly  as  of  the  home. 
David  hastened  to  tell  Samuel  of  the  turn  that  things  were 
taking,  and  of  the  grave  suspicion  which  was  forcing  itself 
on  his  soul,  that  Saul's  attempts  on  his  life  were  not  the  result 


163 

of  a  disordered  brain,  but  of  a  wicked  and  murderous  will. 
For  greater  security  Samuel  led  him  to  a  cluster  of  booths, 
perhaps  woven  of  osiers  (called  Naioth),  where  a  number  of 
young  men  were  being  trained  for  the  prophetic  office,  and 
were  living  in  the  fullest  manifestation  of  spiritual  power  in  an 
atmosphere  which  seemed  charged  with  spiritual  electricity. 

Into  this  sacred  assembly  Saul  forced  three  successive 
bands  of  messengers  to  arrest  David  ;  and  finally,  in  hot 
wrath  at  their  failure  to  return,  came  himself.  In  after  days 
it  was  distinctly  remembered,  how  he  came  to  the  great 
well,  or  cistern,  in  Sechu,  and  asked  with  peremptory  vehem 
ence  for  Samuel  and  David.  When  one  told  him  he  went 
off  to  Naioth,  but  was  stricken  down  before  ever  he  reached 
the  place  ;  and,  divested  of  his  royal  robes  for  a  second 
time  in  his  life,  lay  on  the  ground  in  a  kind  of  trance, 
which  lasted  all  that  day  and  all  that  night. 

We  cannot  read  of  this  singular  incident  without  being 
reminded  of  scenes  in  the  life  of  John  Wesley,  of  whom  it 
is  said,  "While  preaching  on  the  common  at  Bristol  a  young 
woman  sank  down  in  violent  agony,  as  did  five  or  six  per 
sons  at  another  meeting  in  the  evening.  One  was  a  young 
lady,  whose  mother  was  irritated  at  the  scandal,  as  she  called 
it,  of  her  daughter's  conduct ;  but  the  mother  was  the  next 
who  dropped  down  and  lost  her  senses  in  a  moment,  yet 
went  home  with  her  daughter,  full  of  joy.  Bold  blasphem 
ers  were  instantly  sei/.ed  with  agony,  and  cried  aloud  for 
the  Divine  mercy,  and  scores  were  sometimes  strewed  on 
the  ground  at  once,  insensible  as  dead  men.  A  Quaker 
who  was  admonishing  the  bystanders  against  these  strange 
scenes  as  affectation  and  hypocrisy,  was  himself  struck 
down  as  by  an  unseen  hand,  while  the  words  of  reproach 
were  yet  upon  his  lips."  The  difference,  of  course, 
between  these  two  phenomena  lay  in  the  result.  In  the 
case  of  the  sunken  down  under  Wesley  and  Jonathan 
Edwards,  the  outcome  was  a  change  of  heart  and  life, 


164  "  Cruel  as  tlje  (Brnhe." 

together  with  a  very  blessed  and  exalted  religious  experi 
ence.  In  the  case  of  Saul,  the  experience  was  as  the 
early  cloud  and  the  morning  dew,  which  goeth  away. 
Whatever  the  nature  of  the  experience,  whether  physical, 
mental,  or  spiritual — and  probably  it  was  the  latter — it 
was  transient  and  evanescent,  and  left  him  really  worse 
than  it  found  him ;  for  his  jealousy  next  threatened  the 
life  of  his  noble  son  Jonathan. 

The  very  fountains  of  a  father's  love  and  pride  dry  up 
before  the  volcanic  fares  of  jealousy,  and  become  the  cause 
of  even  deeper  and  wider  contortions.  Jonathan  was  one 
of  the  noblest  types  of  manhood.  A  truly  princely  soul  was 
his.  In  any  age,  even  of  the  most  romantic  age  of  chivalry, 
he  would  have  stood  easily,  and  by  a  universally  acknow 
ledged  right,  in  the  foremost  rank.  Whether  in  the  court 
or  on  the  battlefield,  he  shone  as  a  star  of  the  first 
magnitude.  Grace  and  beauty  must  have  adorned  his 
person,  whilst  intrepid  daring  and  courage  characterized  his 
behaviour.  The  darling  of  the  people  who  once  saved 
his  life  from  his  father,  the  chosen  ideal  of  the  maidens  and 
youth  of  his  time,  wise  in  statesmanship,  true  in  friendship, 
strong  in  resolution,  there  was  everything  to  bind  his  father 
to  him,  for  reasons  of  policy  as  well  as  of  paternal  pride.  But 
these  considerations  had  no  weight  with  Saul,  whilst  jealousy 
of  David  laid  heavy  in  the  other  scale.  He  might  be,  as  his 
friend  eloquently  expressed  it  in  his  funeral  elegy,  "lovely  and 
pleasant,"  swifter  than  an  eagle,  stronger  than  a  lion ;  but 
Saul  was  prepared  to  sacrifice  it  all  to  the  spirit  of  revenge. 

It  was  on  the  monthly  festival  that  this  new  vent  of  the 
volcano,  which  raged  within  Saul's  heart,  revealed  itself.  It 
was  the  second  day,  and  as  on  the  previous  one,  David's 
seat  was  empty.  Speaking  of  him  derisively  as  "  the  son  of 
Jesse,"  as  though  accentuating  his  lowly  birth,  and  ignoring 
the  relationship  that  bound  him  to  the  royal  family,  the  king 
asked  Jonathan  the  reason  of  his  absence;  and  when  he 


Slttf0utttie&  Suspicions.  165 

received  the  answer  on  which  the  two  friends  had  previously 
agreed,  he  fell  into  a  grievous  rage,  abused  Jonathan  with  the 
vilest  epithets  that  an  Eastern  can  use, — who  to-day  vents  his 
scorn  on  the  mother  of  the  object  of  his  hate — insisted  on 
David's  immediate  arrest  and  execution,  and  ended  by 
hurling  his  javelin  at  his  noble  son,  who  had  interfered  to 
mollify  his  wrath. 

But  jealousy  is  also  responsive  to  the  worst  possible  sugges 
tions.  Of  this  there  is  an  illustration  in  the  following  chap 
ter  (xxi.).  The  fugitive  fled  this  time  to  Nob,  where  Ahim- 
elech,  the  high  priest,  presided  over  the  relics  of  the 
ancient  sanctuary.  The  suspicions  excited  in  Ahimelech's 
mind  by  the  unescorted  and  hasty  advent  of  the  king's  son-in- 
law  were  removed  by  an  evasive  reply,  and  David  was  received 
with  deference,  supplied  with  bread,  with  the  sword  of 
Goliath,  and  such  spiritual  counsel  as  the  ephod  could  afford. 

The  incident  was  reported  to  Saul,  some  months  after 
wards,  as  he  was  encamped  "on  the  height"  (R.V.,  marg.} 
above  Gibeah,  waiting  for  tidings  of  his  hated  rival,  that  he 
might  at  once  march  with  his  household  troops,  composed 
of  trusted  Benjamites,  men  of  his  own  tribe,  to  capture  and 
slay  him.  It  seemed  as  though  all  the  demands  of  the 
public  service  were  set  aside  and  accounted  as  dust  in  the 
balance  so  long  as  the  vengeance  of  his  soul  was  unappeased. 
The  promulgation  and  execution  of  law,  the  hearing  of  suits, 
the  defences  of  the  kingdom — all  were  of  no  account  in  his 
estimation  until  this  one  purpose  was  fulfilled. 

In  the  heat  of  his  spirit  he  gave  vent  to  the  complaint 
(and  jealousy  so  often  takes  on  the  tone  of  injured  inno 
cence),  that  all  his  servants  were  in  conspiracy  against  him, 
that  no  one  cared  for  him,  that  Jonathan  was  at  the  bottom 
of  David's  conspiracy,  and  that  each  was  cherishing  the 
hope  of  his  speedy  downfall  in  order  to  receive  possessions 
and  promotions  as  the  price  of  treachery  from  the  hand  of 
the  son  of  Jesse.  It  was  an  unjust  and  injurious  taunt. 


1 66  "  Cruel  as  tljc 

Well  might  the  Apostle  James  affirm  that  the  tongue  is 
often  "  set  on  fire  of  hell."  It  was  so  here.  Mad  jealousy 
runs  amuck,  striking  here  and  there,  with  absolute  disregard 
of  all  that  is  most  precious  and  true  in  human  loyalty  and 
love.  Amid  the  silence  that  followed  these  undeserved 
reproaches,  Doeg  narrated  what  he  had  seen  on  that  fateful 
day  when  he  had  happened  to  be  detained  at  the  Taber 
nacle  for  some  ceremonial  ablution  or  other  rite,  and  had 
witnessed  Ahimelech's  attentions  to  the  king's  son-in-law. 

Doeg's  malicious  statement  at  once  diverted  the  king's 
suspicions  from  his  courtiers  to  the  priests ;  Nob  was  not 
far  distant  from  Gibeah  ;  and  a  peremptory  summons,  after 
a  brief  interval,  brought  Ahimelech  and  all  his  father's 
house — i.e.,  all  the  males  of  the  high  priest  of  the  house  of 
Eli — into  the  presence  of  the  king.  In  unmeasured  terms 
Saul  accused  the  whole  of  them  of  connivance  with  David 
for  the  overthrow  of  his  throne  and  dynasty,  and  would  give 
no  heed  to  Ahimelech's  mild  expostulations.  The  high 
priest  pleaded  that  though  he  had  done  what  the  king 
accused  him  of,  he  had  done  it  quite  innocently.  He  had 
always  accounted  David  as  one  of  the  most  faithful  of 
Saul's  servants,  had  looked  on  him  as  being  constantly 
entrusted  with  secret  commissions,  and  had  frequently  made 
similar  inquiries  of  God  on  his  behalf,  believing  that  in  this 
he  was  serving  the  royal  will.  But  he  might  as  well  have 
tried  to  stem  the  swelling  of  Jordan.  The  king's  mind  was 
made  up  before  he  began  his  defence.  Yielding  to  an 
unholy  impulse,  which  surely  must  have  come  to  him  from 
some  malign  and  evil  spirit,  and  to  which  his  disordered 
nature  was  as  susceptible  as  it  had  been  to  the  spiritual 
afflatus  of  Naioth,  he  said,  "  Thou  shalt  surely  die,  Ahim 
elech — thou  and  all  thy  father's  house." 

The  royal  bodyguard  shrank  from  executing  the  awful 
sentence;  but  Doeg,  the  Edomite,  a  foreigner,  with  his 
herdsmen,  had  no  such  compunctions,  but  forthwith  fell  on 


31  gastrtrfclg  gecft.  167 

the  unresisting  priests,  who  were  butchered  one  after  another, 
until  their  mangled  corpses  were  piled  in  heaps,  and  their 
white  robes  were  saturated  with  their  hearts'  blood. 

It  was  a  cowardly  and  dastardly  deed,  the  tidings  of 
which  must  have  staggered  the  whole  nation  with  dumb- 
foundering  horror.  All  good  men  must  have  felt  that  the 
foundations  of  society  were  loosed,  and  that  neither  life  nor 
liberty  was  safe  while  such  frenzy  was  enthroned  in  their 
monarch's  breast. 

What  a  warning  is  here  that  we  should  not  yield  to  the 
first  intrusion  of  evil,  lest  the  thought  should  lead  to  the 
act,  and  repeated  acts  to  the  habit,  and  habits  congeal  to 
character,  and  character  become  set  in  destiny  ! 

Jealousy  is,  however,  subject  to  strong  remorse.  These 
scourges  are  the  remonstrances  of  that  blessed  Spirit,  who 
allows  no  soul  to  drift  unwarned  to  the  bottomless  pit. 
Saul  was  very  subject  to  these  powerful  eddies  in  the  hurry 
ing  current. 

When,  in  an  earlier  stage,  Jonathan  reminded  his  father 
of  the  priceless  services  that  David  had  rendered,  he 
hearkened  attentively,  relented,  and  pledged  his  royal  oath 
that  he  should  not  be  put  to  death  (xix.  1-7). 

When  David  spared  his  life  in  the  cave,  near  the  Fountain 
of  the  Wild  Goat,  amid  the  wild  ravines  that  border  on 
the  western  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,  refusing  to  put 
forth  his  hand  against  the  Lord's  anointed,  and  restraining 
his  surprised  and  eager  followers — touched  by  a  generosity 
which  was  wholly  unexampled  in  those  rude  days,  Saul 
lifted  up  his  voice  and  wept,  and  poured  out  the  pent-up 
generosity  which  had  been  natural  to  him  in  earlier  days, 
but  had  for  long  been  restrained.  "  If  a  man  find  his 
enemy,"  he  said,  "  will  he  let  him  go  well  away  ?  Where 
fore  the  Lord  reward  thee  good  for  that  thou  hast  done  unto 
me  this  day  "  (xxiv.  16-22). 

And,  when  again  he  came  in  search  of  David  and  pitched 


168  "  Cruel  as  tire  (Srabe." 

his  camp  on  the  ridge  of  Hachilah,  on  the  southern  hills, 
and  again,  through  David's  clemency,  his  life  was  spared 
from  the  fatal  plunge  of  the  spear,  which  would  not  have 
needed  a  second  thrust,  Saul  went  so  far  as  to  say  before 
all  his  camp :  "  I  have  sinned ;  return,  my  son  David,  for 
I  will  no  more  do  thee  harm.  I  have  played  the  fool,  and 
have  erred  exceedingly  "  (xxvi.  21). 

But,  alas,  in  every  case,  his  remorse  was  of  brief  duration, 
and  failed  to  produce  any  permanent  change  in  heart  or 
purpose.  The  fire  still  smouldered  in  his  soul,  awaiting  the 
least  breath  of  air  to  rekindle  its  flames.  He  might  exclaim, 
"Blessed  be  thou,  my  son  David;  thou  shalt  both  do  mightily 
and  shalt  surely  prevail."  But  David  not  daring  to  trust 
him,  "  said  in  his  heart :  There  is  nothing  better  for  me  than 
that  I  should  escape  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines " 
(i  Sam.  xxvi.  25,  xxvii.  i,  R.V.). 

But  the  cure  of  jealousy  is  clearly  set  forth  in  these  terrible 
chapters.  Without  doubt,  Saul's  surmises  were  well  known 
to  all  the  members  of  his  family,  and  especially  to  Jonathan. 
Before  ever  Saul  had  blurted  out  his  threat  that  Jonathan's 
kingdom  would  not  be  established,  so  long  as  the  son  of 
Jesse  lived  upon  the  ground,  the  heir-apparent  had  assured 
his  friend  that  he  knew  the  time  would  come  when  the  Lord 
would  cut  off  the  enemies  of  David,  every  one  from  the 
earth  (xx.  14,  15,  30,  31).  And  later,  while  Saul  was 
seeking  David's  life  amid  the  ravines  of  Ziph,  urged  on  in 
his  madness  by  the  treacherous  Ziphites,  Jonathan  came  to 
him,  and  strengthened  his  hand  in  God,  and  said  :  "  Fear 
not,  for  the  hand  of  Saul,  my  father,  shall  not  find  thee, 
and  thou  shalt  be  king  over  Israel,  and  I  shall  be  next  unto 
thee  ;  and  that  also  Saul  my  father  knoweth." 

Jonathan,  then,  was  even  more  affected  by  the  choice  of 
David  than  his  father  was.  It  was  certain  that  he  would 
never  succeed  to  the  throne.  Respected  and  loved  he 
might  be,  but  enthroned  never.  But  not  a  cloud  of 


ftfoe  Cure  of  Jfcalonsj.  169 

jealousy  ever  darkened  the  pure  heaven  of  his  love,  or  cast 
its  shadow  on  the  crystal  lake  of  his  peace.  Perfect  love 
had  cast  out  hate  ;  we  are  told  that  "  he  loved  David  as  his 
own  soul." 

If  you  are  tempted  to  jealousy  do  not  brood  over  the  fell 
passion,  or  allow  it  to  grow  from  less  to  more,  but  arise  to 
deal  with  it  at  once,  and  with  all  the  energy  of  your  soul. 
Insist  on  loving  the  one  of  whom  you  have  felt  the  unholy 
passion.  You  may  reply  that  that  is  the  very  difficulty  which 
confronts  you — you  cannot  love.  You  complain  that  to  bid 
you  love,  is  like  bidding  a  lame  man  walk.  Granted ;  but 
you  must  distinguish  between  love  and  the  emotion  of  love. 
It  may  be  impossible  for  you  to  command  the  latter,  but 
quite  possible  to  practise  the  former,  since  love  consists 
primarily,  not  in  the  feeling,  but  in  the  doing;  not  in  emo 
tions,  but  in  strong  acts  of  self-denial  and  service. 

Find  out  the  individual  concerning  whom  you  were 
beginning  to  feel  jealous.  Be  on  the  alert  to  do  kind  acts, 
and  speak  kind  words.  Whenever  you  are  tempted  to  utter 
a  depreciating  remark,  arrest  the  words  before  they  cross 
your  lips,  and  utter  some  kindly  ones  instead.  Whenever 
you  find  yourself  on  the  point  of  speaking  contemptuously 
or  judging  harshly,  go  out  of  your  way  to  do  some  generous 
deed.  Overcome  evil  with  good,  hatred  with  love.  Do 
not  wait  to  feel  kindly,  but  act  promptly  and  heartily.  Go 
out  of  your  way  to  confer  a  kindness.  Above  all,  avoid 
aloofness.  Throw  yourself  in  that  other's  company  ;  try 
to  enter  into  the  anxieties,  trials,  and  temptations  by 
which  that  life  is  torn  and  rent ;  cultivate  a  near  and  close 
friendship,  and  always  offer  and  present  yourself  to  God 
as  a  living  sacrifice.  Believe  also  that  God  does  hear  you, 
that  his  Holy  Spirit  takes  part  with  you  against  the  enemy 
of  your  peace,  and  that  He  who  has  led  you  to  desire  per 
fect  deliverance  is  prepared  to  work  in  you  to  will  and  do 
of  his  good  pleasure. 


XXIII. 

Jlmtsst 

(i  SAMUEL  x.\v.  i.) 

' '  Life  is  only  bright  when  it  proceedeth 
Towards  a  truer,  deeper  Life  above  ; 
Human  Love  is  sweetest  when  it  leadeth 
To  a  more  divine  and  perfect  Love." 

A.  A.  PROCTER. 

AT  length  Samuel  came  to  his  end,  so  far  as  this 
world,  at  least,  was  concerned ;  and  was  borne  to 
his  grave,  as  a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe.  Though 
he  had  spent  the  last  years  in  retirement,  partly  because  of 
his  great  age,  and  partly  because  of  the  breach  between 
the  king  and  himself,  he  had  never  lost  the  love  and  respect 
of  his  people  ;  and  when,  finally,  the  tidings  sped  through 
the  country  that  he  had  fallen  upon  that  blessed  sleep 
which  God  giveth  to  his  beloved,  the  event  was  felt  to  be  a 
national  calamity,  so  that  from  Dan  in  the  far  north  to 
Beersheba  on  the  southern  frontier,  "all  Israel  gathered 
themselves  together,  and  lamented  him,  and  buried  him." 

Josephus  adds  this  significant  paragraph  to  the  record  of 
Scripture  :  "  His  moral  excellence,  and  the  esteem  with 
which  he  was  regarded,  were  proved  by  the  continued 
mourning  that  was  made  for  him,  and  the  concern  that  was 
universally  shown  to  conduct  the  funeral  rites  with  becoming 
splendour  and  solemnity.  He  was  buried  in  his  own  native 
place,  and  they  wept  for  him  many  days,  not  regarding  it  as 
the  death  of  another  man  or  a  stranger,  but  as  that  in  which 
each  individual  was  concerned.  He  was  a  righteous  man,  and 
of  a  kindly  nature,  and  on  that  account  very  dear  to  God." 
The  impression  made  on  his  contemporaries  lingered,  as 


3V  £tan  of  ^rager.  171 

an  afterglow,  long  after  his  sun-down.     Again  and  again  he 
is  referred  to  in  the  sacred  record. 

i  Chron.  ix.  22  suggests  that  he  laid  the  foundations  of 
that  elaborate  organization  of  Levites  for  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary  which  was  perfected  by  David  and  Solomon. 

1  Chron.  xxvi.  27,  28,  asserts  that  he  began  to  accumulate 
the  treasures  by  which  the  House  of  the  Lord  was  ultimately 
erected  in  the  reign  of  David's  mighty  son. 

2  Chron.  xxxv.  18  contains  a  passing  reference  to  some 
memorable  Passover  Feast,  which  he  instituted. 

Psa.  xcix.  6,  and  Jer.  xv.  i,  commemorate  the  fragrance  of 
his  perpetual  intercessions. 

Acts  iii.  24,  and  xiii.  20,  indicate  what  a  conspicuous 
landmark  was  furnished  by  his  life  and  work  in  the  history 
of  his  people. 

Heb.  xi.  32,  33  places  him  in  the  long  gallery  of  time,  the 
niches  in  the  walls  of  which  have  been  filled  one  by  one  by 
the  statues  of  those  who  have  lived  and  wrought  in 
the  power  of  faith.  "  The  time  would  fail  me  to  tell 
...  of  Samuel  .  .  .  who  through  faith  .  .  .  wrought 
righteousness  .  .  ." 

I.  THE  BLESSEDNESS  OF  HIS  LIFE. — Though  Samuel's 
career  was  an  arduous  one,  it  must  have  been  fraught  with 
the  elements  of  true  blessedness. 

He  was  pre-eminently  a  man  of  prayer.  This  was  his 
perpetual  resort.  Whether  for  his  people  or  his  king ;  for 
the  overthrow  of  the  Philistines  or  the  recovery  of  Saul 
from  his  evil  courses — he  never  ceased  to  pray ;  he  would 
have  counted  it  a  sin  if  he  had.  "God  forbid,"  he 
exclaimed  on  one  memorable  occasion,  "  that  I  should 
sin  against  the  Lord  in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you."  Many  a 
sleepless  night  did  he  spend  in  tears  and  prayers  for  the 
king  whom  he  had  set  up,  and  to  whose  hands  he  had 
committed  the  national  interests  as  a  precious  charge. 


T72  &  toat 

It  has  yet  to  be  seen,  and  probably  we  shall  never  know 
until  the  veil  of  eternity  is  lifted,  whether  the  world  has 
benefited  most  by  our  prayers  or  labours.  It  is  more  than 
likely  that  the  men  and  women  who  have  poured  out  per 
petual  supplications  and  intercessions  have,  like  Epaphras, 
wrought  most  effectively.  These  have  resembled  mighty 
mountains,  commercing  with  the  skies,  down  whose  slopes  the 
perennial  streams  have  poured,  wreathed  in  rainbow  vapour, 
and  carrying  the  quality  of  the  mountain  soil  into  the  plains. 

All  books,  says  an  eloquent  writer,  are  dry  and  tame 
compared  with  the  great  unwritten  book  prayed  in  the 
closet.  The  prayers  of  exiles  !  The  prayers  of  martyrs  ! 
The  prayers  of  missionaries  !  The  prayers  of  the  Waldenses  ! 
The  prayers  of  the  Covenanters  !  The  sighs,  the  groans, 
the  inarticulate  cries  of  suffering  men,  whom  tyrants  have 
buried  alive  in  dungeons,  whom  the  world  may  forget,  but 
God  never !  If  some  angel,  catching  them  as  they  were 
uttered,  should  drop  them  down  from  heaven,  what  a 
liturgy  they  would  make  !  Can  any  epic  equal  those  un 
written  words  which  pour  into  the  ear  of  God  out  of  the 
heart's  fulness  ?  But  these  prayers  have  been  deeds.  In 
the  words  of  James  v.  16,  R.V.,  they  have  availed  much 
in  their  working.  An  energy  passes  from  the  holy  soul, 
striving  mightily  in  prayer,  which  becomes  a  working  force 
in  the  universe,  an  indestructible  unit  of  power,  not  apart 
from  God,  but  in  union  with  his  own  mighty  energies,  of 
whom,  and  through  whom,  and  to  whom  are  all  things. 

Let  us  pray  more,  especially  as  life  advances.  Let  us 
seek  to  be  enrolled  among  those  who  call  upon  his  name. 
Let  us  so  live  that  men  may  shelter  themselves  in  the  thought 
of  our  intercessions,  as  Saul  in  those  of  Samuel.  "  More 
things  are  wrought  by  prayer  than  this  world  dreams  of." 

Samuel  was  also  characterized  by  great  singleness  of 
purpose.  He  could  court  without  flinching  the  most 
searching  scrutiny  (i  Sam.  xii.  3).  From  those  early  days 


Samuel's  Ifumiliig.  J73 


when,  as  a  child,  the  vision  of  his  childlike  purity,  contrasted 
with  the  evil  of  Eli's  house,  struck  on  the  imagination  of 
Israel,  his  had  been  a  career  of  stainless  and  irreproachable 
honour.  The  interests  of  his  people  had  been  his  all- 
absorbing  concern.  For  these  he  had  spent  himself  with 
ungrudging  devotion  ;  and  to  find  that  he  must  withdraw 
from  them  in  favour  of  another  was  the  sorest  grief  of  his 
life.  The  troubles  which  had  befallen  his  land  had  only 
led  him  nearer  God,  and  bound  him  more  tightly  to  his 
fellow-countrymen  ;  but  when  he  discovered  that  they 
desired  him  to  give  up  his  position,  it  required  all  the  gifts 
of  God's  grace,  and  all  the  qualities  of  a  naturally  noble 
nature,  to  sustain  the  shock  with  equanimity.  But  again  his 
unselfishness,  which  had  become  the  inner  law  of  his  life* 
conquered;  he  set  himself  to  secure  the  best  successor 
which  the  age  could  afford,  and  humbly  stepped  down  from 
the  supreme  place  of  power. 

It  was  this  beautiful  humility  and  singleness  of  purpose 
that  arrested  the  reverence  of  his  people,  and  attracted  their 
veneration.  And  it  was  to  this  trait  of  his  character  that 
we  must  attribute  his  perception  of  the  divine  purpose. 
The  eye  must  be  single  in  its  intention  if  the  whole  body  is 
to  be  full  of  light.  Sir  Percivale  missed,  but  Sir  Galahad 
beheld,  the  golden  vision  of  the  Holy  Grail,  because  the  one 
failed  in  what  the  other  possessed. 

O  son,  them  hast  not  true  humility, 
The  highest  virtue,  mother  of  them  all  ; 

Thou  thoughtest  of  thy  prowess  and  thy  sins  ? 
Thou  hast  not  lost  thyself  to  save  thyself, 
As  Galahad. 

Oh,  to  be  so  absorbed  in  a  consuming  passion  for  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  salvation  of  others,  that  we  may  be 
oblivious  of  ourselves,  willing  to  take  the  second  place,  to  be 
reckoned  as  of  no  account,  to  retire  from  the  blaze  of  light 


i?4  3V  (Breat  Sunset. 

that  falls  on  the  stage  to  the  retirement  and  twilight  of  the 
cloister,  where  the  progress  of  the  days  is  marked  by  the 
clock-chimes,  and  the  incidence  of  the  shadows  indicates 
the  progress  of  the  sun  from  solstice  to  solstice  ! 

Samuel  was  also  careful  to  construct.  When  the  whole 
land  was  disorganized,  he  began  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a 
new  State.  The  time  and  care  he  expended  on  the  schools 
of  the  prophets,  his  administration  of  justice  in  his  itineraries, 
his  appeals  to  the  people  in  their  convocations,  formed  a  great 
policy  which  resulted  in  a  consolidated  and  united  people. 

Do  something  in  your  life.  Don't  waste  the  precious 
time  in  criticising  others,  but  put  a  piece  of  solid  work  into 
the  great  fabric  which  is  rising  around  us,  and  on  which  the 
new  Jerusalem  will  one  day  be  established.  To  criticise 
others  is  a  less  efficient  way  of  setting  them  right  than  to  do 
the  same  thing  as  they  are  doing,  so  much  more  quickly 
and  deftly,  that  they  are  led  to  follow  our  example.  I  like 
the  story  of  the  man  who,  instead  of  criticising  the  garden 
plots  of  his  neighbours,  made  his  own  so  beautiful  that 
those  on  his  right  and  left  to  the  extreme  ends  were  led 
one  by  one  to  do  the  same. 

We  will  not  cease  from  mental  strife, 
Nor  shall  our  sword  sleep  in  our  hand, 

Till  we  have  built  Jerusalem 

In  this  our  green  and  pleasant  land. 

As  first  of  the  prophets,  as  the  connecting  link  between 
the  first  days  of  the  settlement  in  Palestine  and  the 
splendour  of  Solomon's  reign,  by  his  unblemished  character, 
by  his  sympathy  and  strength,  by  his  evident  fellowship 
with  the  God  of  Israel  from  his  boyish  days  to  his  old  age, 
Samuel  won  from  his  people  the  most  profound  veneration  ; 
and  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  one  of  them — who 
owed  everything  to  him,  though  he  was  unable  to  appreciate 
the  majesty  of  his  personality — in  the  supreme  hour  of  his 
desperate  need,  when  all  beside  had  deserted  him,  turned 


"  Crossing  trjc  |! or."  175 

for  help  to  the  great  prophet,  though  he  had  been  withdrawn 
for  a  considerable  time  from  earthly  scenes,  and  cried, 
"  Bring  me  up  Samuel." 

II.  His  BLESSED  DEATH. — Death  is  not  a  state,  but  a 
step  ;  not  a  chamber,  but  a  passage  ;  not  an  abiding-place, 
but  a  bridge  over  a  gulf.  None  are  dead.  We  should 
speak  of  the  departed  as  those  who,  for  a  moment,  passed 
through  the  shadow  of  the  tunnel,  but  are  living  in  the 
intensity  of  a  vivid  existence  on  the  other  side.  "  God  is 
not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living,  for  all  live  unto 
Him."  None  are  dead,  in  the  sense  of  remaining  in  a 
condition  of  deadness.  Those  whom  we  call  dead  are  those 
who  died,  and  passed  through  death  into  the  other  life. 
They  put  off  their  earthly  tabernacle,  but  the  spirit  has  passed 
into  other  scenes  and  activities  for  weal  or  woe,  from  which 
it  would  be  an  effort  to  tear  itself,  if  summoned  to  return  to 
the  cares  and  responsibilities  of  this  mortal  existence  :  "Why 
hast  thou  disquieted  me,  to  bring  me  up  ?  " 

Remember  how  the  Apostle  Paul  describes  death.  He 
speaks  of  his  departure  (2  Tim.  iv.  6).  His  word  is  a 
nautical  term,  and  signifies  the  loosing  of  a  ship  from  its 
moorings,  not  that  it  may  reach  harbour,  but  that  it  may  go 
out  from  the  harbour  on  to  the  broad  bosom  of  the  ocean. 
This  is  the  exact  thought  caught  by  Tennyson,  when  he 

sings  : 

Sunset  and  evening  star, 

And  one  clear  call  for  me ; 
And  may  there  be  no  moaning  of  the  bar 

When  I  put  out  to  sea. 

For  though  from  out  our  bourne  of  time  and  place 

The  Hood  may  bear  me  far, 
I  hope  to  see  my  Pilot  face  to  face 

When  I  have  crossed  the  bar. 

To  recall  this  sonnet  is  to  be  irresistibly  reminded  of 
another  of  the  noble  conceptions  of  death  given  by  this 


1 76  jt  dmat  J$mtsEt. 

great  Christian  poet  so  exactly  in  keeping  with  the  Apostle's 
thought — in  describing  the  passing  of  Arthur  : — 

"So  said  he,  and  the  barge  with  oar  and  sail 
Moved  from  the  brink,  like  some  full-breasted  swan, 
That,  fluting  a  wild  carol  ere  her  death, 
Ruffles  her  pure  cold  plume,  and  takes  the  flood 
With  swarthy  webs." 

This  is  death.  It  is  a  moving  out  of  the  soul  from  the 
stagnant  waters  and  containing  walls  of  the  harbour,  on  to 
the  great  bosom  of  the  ocean  of  eternity,  where  there  is 
width  and  space,  opportunity  to  explore  to  the  furthest 
coast-lines  of  thought,  and  to  attain  to  the  golden  shores  of 
the  blessed  isles. 

Speaking  of  the  deaths  of  two  men,  whom  we  both  knew 
and  loved,  a  friend  of  mine  has  quoted  a  poem  of  Bret  Harte, 
which  is  exceedingly  beautiful  and  apposite,  because  it  so 
exactly  expresses  the  desire  of  the  man  who  is  in  a  strait 
betwixt  two,  knowing  that  the  blessedness  of  this  mortal  life 
is  far  less  than  that  of  departing  to  be  with  Christ : — 

But  lo,  in  the  distance  the  clouds  break  away  ! 

The  gates'  glowing  portals  I  see  ; 
And  I  hear  from  the  outgoing  ship  in  the  bay 

The  song  of  the  sailors  in  glee. 
So  I  think  of  the  luminous  footprints  that  bore 

His  comfort  o'er  dark  Galilee, 
And  wait  for  the  signal  to  go  to  the  shore, 

To  the  ship  that  is  waiting  for  me. 

Remember  how  the  Apostle  Peter  describes  death.  Speak 
ing  of  his  death,  he  uses  the  very  word  which  had  been 
employed  in  the  conversation  on  the  Mount  of  Transfigura 
tion,  when  Moses  and  Elijah  spake  with  the  Master  of  the 
decease  which  He  was  to  accomplish  at  Jerusalem.  "After 
my  decease"  (Luke  ix.  31 ;  2  Peter  i.  15).  The  Greek  word 
is  exodos.  There  is  only  one  other  place  in  which  that  word 
occurs  in  the  whole  New  Testament,  when  the  reference  is 
to  the  going  out  of  the  people  from  Egypt  (Heb.  xi.  22). 

Death,  under  this  conception,  is  a  going  out,  not  a  coming 


Conception  of  geatlj.  J77 

in.  It  begins.  If  it  ends,  it  ends  the  life  of  slavery  and 
pain,  and  opens  the  way  into  a  world  where  the  development 
of  the  soul  will  be  unrestrained. 

Let  us  not  dread  to  die.  With  most  the  soul  is  probably 
as  unconscious  of  the  act  of  death  as  of  that  of  birth.  It 
needs  but  the  cracking  of  the  frail  shell,  the  withdrawing  of 
the  thin  curtain,  the  slackening  of  the  golden  cord  of  life.  In 
all  probability  we  shall  be  surprised  to  find  that  heaven  has 
been  lying  all  around  us,  throughout  the  day  of  our  mortal 
pilgrimage,  and  that  we  had  come  (long  before  we  died)  into 
the  midst  of  Mount  Sion,  had  been  walking  the  streets  of  the 
New  Jerusalem,  had  been  mingling  with  the  innumerable 
hosts  of  angels  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect. 

The  Lord  justly  claims  the  title,  "  the  Resurrection  and 
the  Life."  He  has  abolished  death,  and  brought  life  and 
immortality  to  light  through  His  Gospel.  We  are  not  now 
left  to  the  dim  light  of  a  surmise,  of  supposition,  or  of 
hesitating  guess-work.  We  knmv  that  there  is  a  life  beyond 
death,  because  men  saw  Him  after  He  was  risen.  "  We 
are  witnesses,"  says  one  of  them,  "of  all  things  which  He 
did  both  in  the  country  of  the  Jews,  and  in  Jerusalem,  whom 
also  they  slew,  hanging  Him  on  a  tree.  Him  God  raised  up 
the  third  day,  and  gave  Him  to  be  made  manifest,  not  to  all 
the  people,  but  unto  witnesses  that  were  chosen  before  of 
God,  even  to  us,  who  did  eat  and  drink  with  Him  after  He 
rose  from  the  dead." 

Yes,  He  lives ;  and  because  He  lives  we  shall  live  also. 
He  has  gone  to  prepare  mansions  for  us  in  the  Father's 
house.  In  that  world  we  shall  see  his  face ;  and,  in 
company  with  kindred  spirits,  we  shall  do  his  command 
ments.  Even  now  I  suppose  Moses  and  Aaron  are  among 
his  priests,  and  Samuel  among  them  that  call  upon  his 
Name,  "  in  the  solemn  troops,  and  sweet  societies "  of 
eternity. 


XXIV. 

anb 

(i  SAMUEL  xxviii.  ;    i  CHRON.    x.    13). 

"  Earth  fades  !  Heaven  breaks  on  me  :  I 

shall  stand  next 

Before  God's  throne  :  the  moment 's  close  at  hand 
When  man  the  first,  last  time,  has 

leave  to  lay 
His  whole  heart  bare  before  his  Maker.  ..." 

R.  B. 

YEARS  had  passed  since  David's  sling  had  brought 
Goliath  to  the  ground,  and  the  Philistines  had  fled 
headlong  at  Ephes-dammim  before  the  onset  of  the 
men  of  Israel.  A  new  invasion  was  now  planned  to  revenge 
that  disgrace,  and  re-establish  the  Philistine  supremacy  over 
the  plain  of  Esdraelon,  which  was  the  necessary  link  between 
the  wealthy  cities  of  the  Euphrates  Valley  and  the  vast 
market  for  their  wares  and  produce,  furnished  by  the  cities 
of  the  Nile  Valley.  To  hold  that  great  trade-route  in 
volved  the  right  to  impose  very  valuable  taxation  on  the 
merchandise  transported  to  and  fro — hence  the  desire  to 
hold  its  keys.  The  tides  of  Philistine  invasion,  therefore, 
poured  up  by  the  sea-coast  route,  which  was  favourable  for 
the  evolutions  of  the  Philistine  chariots  and  cavalry,  and  a 
strongly-fortified  camp  was  formed  at  Shunem,  about  three 
and  a  half  miles  north  of  Jezreel,  and  celebrated  in  after 
time  as  the  abode  of  the  rich  woman  who  so  hospitably 
entertained  the  prophet  Elisha. 

Hastily  gathering  what  forces  he  could  collect,  Saul 
marched  northwards,  and  pitched  his  camp  on  the  slopes 
of  Mount  Gilboa,  four  miles  distant  from  the  invading 


's  Despair.  179 

army,  and  on  the  south  of  the  Great  Plain.  "Green  plains 
rising  from  the  level  of  the  Kishon  lead  to  the  slopes  of 
Gilboa,  swelling  after  a  time  into  low  heights,  which  rise 
bare  and  stony.  Behind  these,  the  many  summits  of  the 
hills  shoot  up  abruptly  some  five  hundred  or  six  hundred 
feet — bleak,  white,  and  barren — their  only  growths,  spots 
of  scrub  oak  and  mountain  thorns  and  flowers,  which,  in 
spring  at  least,  are  never  wanting  in  Palestine." 

The  sight  of  the  great  force  which  was  arrayed  against 
him  seems  to  have  completely  paralyzed  Saul's  courage. 
He  contrasted  the  complete  accoutrements  of  the  Philis 
tines  with  the  spears  and  slings  of  Israel,  and  "his  heart 
trembled  greatly."  The  heroic  courage  which  faith  might 
have  brought  him,  was  not  now  possible,  since  the  sense  of 
God's  presence  was  withdrawn.  There  was  no  rift  in  the 
black  canopy  of  despair  that  overshadowed  his  terror- 
stricken  soul.  He  could  say  with  another,  "Behold  I  go 
forward,  but  He  is  not  there  ;  and  backward,  but  I  cannot 
perceive  Him  ;  on  the  left  hand,  where  He  doth  work,  but 
I  cannot  behold  Him  ;  He  hideth  Himself  on  the  right 
hand,  that  I  cannot  see  Him  "  (Job  xxiii.  8).  It  was  to 
this  that  the  terrible  series  of  tragedies,  which  we  are  now 
about  to  narrate,  must  be  attributed.  The  restraining  grace 
of  God,  which  he  had  so  long  despised  and  resisted,  no 
longer  strove  with  him,  and  he  was  left  to  follow  the 
promptings  of  those  evil  spirits — "  the  rulers  of  the  dark 
ness  of  this  world" — who,  for  mysterious  purposes,  are 
permitted  to  assail  the  sons  of  men.  It  is  true  that  he 
inquired  of  the  Lord,  for  probably  the  first  time,  after  the 
lapse  of  many  years  ;  but  there  was  no  repentance  or  con 
fession  of  sin,  no  submission  of  will,  no  patient  waiting  for 
his  direction — only  abject  terror  and  frantic  despair.  It  is 
hardly  surprising  to  read  that  "  the  Lord  answered  him  not, 
neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  by  prophets."  "If  I 
regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me." 


i8o  (Bn£)0r  antr  (Bilboa. 

I.  ENDOR. — At  some  previous  period,  as  we  have  seen, 
"  Saul  had  put  away  those  that  had  familiar  spirits,  and  the 
wizards,  out  of  the  land."  He  may  have  done  this  in 
one  of  those  strange  lucid  moments,  when  he  became 
conscious  of  the  strivings  of  God's  good  Spirit,  or  as  a  set- 
off  to  the  wild  strivings  of  passion  of  which  he  was  guiltily 
conscious — so  often  men  seek  to  atone  for  the  sins  into 
which  they  have  been  betrayed,  by  some  strong  outward  act, 
intended  as  a  make-weight  in  the  other  scale,  or  a  sop  to  an 
uneasy  conscience.  It  became  clear,  however,  that  he  had 
no  heartfelt  abhorrence  of  the  crimes  he  thus  punished, 
seeing  that  in  his  own  dire  extremity  he  had  recourse  to 
the  very  arts  he  had  striven  to  abolish,  and  sought  from  the 
mouth  of  hell  the  help  for  which  he  had  appealed  to  heaven 
in  vain  ! 

About  two  miles  north  from  Shunem — in  the  rear,  there 
fore,  of  the  Philistine  army—  lay  the  little  village  of  Endor. 
It  was  one  of  those  spots  from  which  Manasseh  had  failed 
to  expel  the  old  population ;  and  amongst  these,  the  de 
scendants  of  the  ancient  Canaanites,  was  an  old  woman  who 
professed  to  be  able  to  bring  up  the  souls  of  the  dead.  It 
is  likely  enough  that  her  claims  were  baseless.  By  ventrilo 
quism  and  sleight  of  hand  she  no  doubt  simulated  the 
voice  and  appearance  of  those  who  seemed  to  come  from 
the  other  world  at  her  bidding.  If  there  was  more  than 
that,  we  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm  our  belief  that  in  all 
ages  demons  have  been  in  collusion  with  necromancers 
and  spiritualists,  and  have  answered  to  their  call.  This 
is  at  the  root  and  heart  of  the  phenomena  of  modern 
spiritualism. 

Heavily  cloaked  and  disguised,  accompanied  by  two 
trusty  companions  whom  tradition  has  identified  as  Abner 
and  Amasa,  Saul  set  forth  in  the  early  hours  of  the  night, 
crossed  the  plain,  made  a  detour  round  the  eastern  shoulder 
of  Little  Hermon,  and  arrived  safely  at  the  witch's  dwelling. 


"  |5rin0  me  up  Samuel."  181 

The  door  opened  to  admit  them  to  the  house,  and  amid  the 
dark  weirdness  of  the  interior,  revealed  by  the  glimmering 
light  of  a  brazier,  choked  with  smoke,  the  woman  was  quite 
unable  to  recognise  the  features  of  the  haggard  man  who 
accosted  her  with  the  request  that  she  should  bring  up 
whomsoever  he  should  name. 

At  first  she  hesitated,  reminding  him  how  perilous  her 
profession  was,  and  suggesting  that  to  give  him  satisfaction 
might  cost  her  life  :  "  Behold,  thou  knowest  what  Saul  hath 
done,  how  he  hath  cut  off  those  that  have  familiar  spirits 
and  wizards  out  of  the  land ;  wherefore  then  layest  thou  a 
snare  for  my  life,  to  cause  me  to  die  ?  " 

With  an  oath,  which  strangely  implicated  the  God  whom 
he  was  at  that  moment  denying,  and  with  a  touch  of  his 
kingly  prerogative,  the  king  assured  her  that  no  punishment 
should  befall  her  for  doing  what  he  requested.  "  As  the 
Lord  liveth,  there  shall  no  punishment  happen  to  thee  for 
this  thing." 

Thus  reassured,  the  woman  asked  whom  she  should  bring 
up  ;  but  she  must  have  been  not  a  little  startled,  when  in  a 
hoarse  whisper,  as  of  one  paralyzed  and  awestruck  by  his 
weird  surroundings,  the  king  said,  "  Bring  me  up  Samuel." 

Retiring  from  him  to  a  distance,  the  wretched  woman 
began  her  incantations,  perhaps  dropping  a  powder  on  the 
coals  of  the  brazier,  muttering  incantations  in  a  low  voice, 
making  passes  and  adjurations.  But  before  she  had 
completed  her  preparations,  the  Almighty  seems  to  have 
interfered,  sending  back  his  faithful  servant  from  the  world 
beyond  the  article  of  death,  so  that  the  witch  might  not 
even  appear  to  have  the  credit  of  securing  so  wonderful  a 
visitation.  "  The  woman  saw  Samuel." 

At  the  same  moment  that  she  recognised  Samuel,  she 
seems  to  have  recognised  Saul  also.  Startled  and  frightened 
for  her  life,  she  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  spake  unto 
Saul,  saying,  "Why  hast  thou  deceived  me?"  Perhaps  in 


182  (Ettfcor  attfc 

her  excited  condition  of  soul,  she  was  endowed  with  that 
supernatural  insight  which  we  call  clah-voyance ;  or  perhaps 
there  was  something  in  Samuel's  appearance  so  startlingly 
vivid  and  real,  that  she  was  led  in  that  dread  hour  to 
connect  prophet  and  king  as  in  years  gone  by  ;  or  perhaps 
the  king  in  his  eagerness  had  drawn  near,  and  had  dropped 
the  mantle  which  veiled  his  face  and  figure.  But  however 
it  befel,  she  saw  through  his  disguise,  and  in  horror-stricken 
tones  cried,  "  Thou  art  Saul !  " 

Again  he  reassured  her,  and  asked  her  what  she  had 
seen. 

"A  majestic  being,  august  and  God-like,"  she  replied, 
"  arising  as  if  from  out  of  the  earth." 

Pressed  by  Saul  to  describe  his  appearance  more 
minutely,  for  she  was  beholding  a  mysterious  form,  which, 
though  present  in  the  same  chamber  as  himself,  was  veiled 
from  him,  she  said,  "  He  resembles  an  old  man  covered 
with  a  robe."  "And  Saul  perceived  it  was  Samuel,  and  he 
bowed  his  face  to  the  ground,  and  made  obeisance." 

Very  touching  and  thrilling  was  the  conversation  that 
followed.  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  it  was  held  without 
the  medium  of  the  witch,  and  that  God  permitted  the 
prophet  to  speak  with  Saul,  as  afterwards  Moses  and  Elijah 
to  speak  with  our  Lord  of  the  decease  to  be  presently 
accomplished  at  Jerusalem.  It  is  likely  that  these  sentences 
were  actually  interchanged  between  the  king  and  his  former 
friend  and  confidant,  to  whom  he  turned  remorsefully  in  his 
awful  agony.  Do  you  not  think  that  if,  even  then,  Saul  had 
turned  to  Jehovah  with  tears  of  confession  and  the  simplicity 
of  faith,  he  would  have  been  answered  according  to  the 
multitude  of  the  Divine  compassions  ?  Assuredly  he  would  ; 
but  there  was  no  sign  of  such  a  change  of  temper. 

Samuel  did  not  wait  to  be  questioned,  but  sadly  told  the 
awestruck  king  that  even  in  the  other  life  his  misdoings 
had  filled  his  spirit  with  unrest,  so  much  so  that  he  could 


183 

not  forbear  returning  to  speak  to  him  once  more.  "  Why 
hast  thou  disquieted  me  to  bring  me  up  ?  " 

Saul's  answer  was  that  of  despair.  "  I  am  sore  distressed ; 
for  the  Philistines  make  war  against  me,  and  God  is  departed 
from  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more,  neither  by  prophets, 
nor  by  dreams  ;  therefore  I  have  called  thee,  that  thou 
mayest  make  known  unto  me  what  I  shall  do." 

But  from  the  lips  of  the  prophet  came  no  words  of 
comfort  or  hope.  It  was  useless  to  ask  of  the  servant  the 
help  which  was  denied  by  the  Master.  There  was  no  gain 
in  evading  the  fact  that  God  Himself  was  on  the  side  of 
David,  and  against  the  king,  whose  reign  had  begun  with 
such  fair  promise.  The  multiplied  misfortunes  which  had 
befallen  him  and  his  realm  were  due  to  his  disobedience  to 
the  direct  instructions  issued  with  respect  to  Amalek.  The 
sin  which  he  had  now  perpetrated  had  put  the  last  touch  on 
all  his  transgressions.  Nothing,  at  this  hour,  could  stay  or 
avert  the  descending  avalanche.  As  he  had  sown,  he  must 
reap  ;  as  he  had  fallen,  so  he  must  lie.  It  was,  therefore, 
revealed  that  the  Lord  would  deliver  Israel  also  with  him 
into  the  hand  of  the  Philistines,  and  on  the  morrow  Saul 
and  his  sons  should  have  also  passed  into  the  world  of 
spirits ;  the  Hebrew  host  would  be  annihilated,  the  camp 
sacked,  and  the  land  left  to  the  fate  which  the  conquered  of 
those  days  knew  well  to  expect. 

Little  wonder  was  it  that  the  king  fell  straightway  his  full 
length  upon  the  earth,  and  was  sore  afraid.  He  was  already 
weak  with  watching  and  fasting  through  the  previous  day ; 
the  events  of  the  night  had  completely  unnerved  him  ;  and 
his  nervous  system  collapsed  under  the  terrible  strain. 
Even  the  callous  nature  of  the  witch  was  smitten  with 
compunction  and  pity.  Her  woman's  nature  was  thoroughly 
aroused  by  the  awful  horror  that  lay  on  the  king's  soul. 
She  besought  him  to  eat.  By  the  trust  she  had  reposed  in 
him  she  pleaded  that  she  had  some  claim  on  his  mercy,  to 


184  (Bn&or  an&  (Silboa. 

be  expended  not  for  her,  but  for  him.  "  Let  me  set  a 
morsel  of  bread,"  she  pleaded,  "  before  thee ;  and  eat, 
that  thou  mayest  have  strength  when  thou  goest  on  thy 
way." 

At  first  he  refused.  It  seemed  as  though  he  would  never 
rise  again  from  the  mud-floor  on  which  all  the  glory  of  his 
manhood  lay  stretched.  "  But  his  servants,  together  with 
the  woman,  constrained  him  ;  and  he  hearkened  unto  their 
voice.  So  he  arose  from  the  earth,  and  sat  upon  the  bed." 
What  memories  must  have  passed  before  his  mind,  as  he  sat 
on  that  divan,  whilst  the  woman  hasted  to  prepare  the 
meal !  Did  he  not  remember  the  first  happy  days  of  his 
reign ;  Jabesh-gilead  ;  the  overthrow  of  the  Philistines,  not 
once  or  twice ;  and  the  love  of  his  people  ?  But,  step  by 
step,  he  saw  how  he  had  gone  down  from  the  sun-lit  summits 
to  the  dark  valley,  where  the  black  torrent  ran  and  the  over 
hanging  rocks  met  overhead.  As  with  a  drowning  man,  the 
whole  of  his  previous  career  passes  before  him  in  a  moment 
of  time,  so  the  whole  panorama  of  his  past  must  have 
stood  in  clear  outline  before  the  mental  vision  of  the  king. 
Then,  after  hastily  partaking  of  the  calf  and  the  unleavened 
cakes,  the  three  figures  stole  through  the  darkness,  back  to 
the  camp. 

II.  GILBOA.— On  the  morrow  there  was  some  slight 
alteration  in  the  disposition  of  the  respective  hosts.  The 
Philistines  moved  towards  Aphek,  a  little  to  the  west  of 
their  camp  ;  while  the  Israelites  descended  from  the  heights 
of  Gilboa,  and  took  up  a  position  near  the  spring  or  fountain 
of  Jezreel  (xxix.  i). 

Presently  the  battle  was  joined.  In  spite  of  the  most 
desperate  efforts  to  withstand  the  onset  of  the  heavily- 
mailed  troops  that  were  opposed  to  them,  the  Hebrews  were 
routed,  and  fled  from  before  the  Philistines.  It  is  expressly 
noted  by  the  historian  that  the  lower  slopes  of  Gilboa  were 


tljc  geatlj  of  &aul.  185 

covered  by  the  wounded,  whose  hearts'  blood  bedewed  the 
mountain  pastures  (xxxi.  i,  R.V.,  marg.}. 

Saul  and  Jonathan  made  the  most  desperate  efforts  to 
retrieve  the  day  : — 

From  the  blood  of  the  slain,  from  the  fat  of  the  mighty, 
The  bow  of  Jonathan  turned  not  back, 
And  the  sword  of  Saul  returned  not  empty. 

But  it  was  in  vain.  "  The  battle  went  sore  against  Saul." 
<(  The  Philistines  slew  Jonathan  and  Abinadab,  and  Melchi- 
shua,  the  sons  of  Saul."  The  flower  of  his  army  lay  strewn 
around  him ;  the  chivalry  of  Israel  was  quenched  in  rivers 
of  blood.  Then,  leaving  all  others,  the  Philistines  concen 
trated  their  attack  on  that  lordly  figure  which  towered  amid 
the  fugitives — the  royal  crown  on  his  helmet,  the  royal 
bracelet  flashing  on  his  arm.  "The  Philistines  followed 
hard  upon  Saul,  ....  and  the  archers  overtook  him, 
and  he  was  greatly  distressed  by  reason  of  the  archers."  He 
knew  what  fate  awaited  him  if  he  was  captured  whilst  his  life 
was  yet  in  him.  Exposed  to  ignominy,  tortured  to  death, 
it  seemed  to  him  that  immediate  death  were  far  preferable 
to  such  a  fate.  "  Then  said-  Saul  to  his  armour-bearer : 
Draw  thy  sword  and  thrust  me  through  therewith ;  lest 
these  uncircumcised  come  and  thrust  me  through  and  make 
a  mock  of  me." 

The  armour-bearer  dared  not  lift  up  his  hand  against  the 
sacred  person  of  his  king ;  so  Saul,  placing  his  sword-hilt 
firmly  in  the  earth,  fell  upon  the  point,  which  pierced  his 
heart. 

The  narrative  which  the  Amalekite  gave  afterwards  to 
David  suggests  that  the  effort  to  take  his  life  was  not  at 
once  successful ;  and  he  seems  to  have  asked  this  child  of 
a  race  which  he  was  once  bidden  utterly  to  destroy,  to 
give  him  the  last  finishing  stroke.  "  He  said  unto  me  : 
Stand,  I  pray  thee,  over  me,  and  slay  me  ;  for  anguish  hath 

A  A 


1 86  (Bnttor  sn& 

taken  hold  of  me ;  because  my  life  is  yet  whole  in  me."  It 
may  be,  however,  that  all  this  was  a  fabrication  intended  to 
win  David's  favour  ;  for  we  are  told  that  when  the  armour- 
bearer  saw  that  Saul  was  dead,  he  likewise  fell  upon  his 
sword,  and  died  with  him. 

The  day  of  Gilboa  was  a  veritable  Chevy  Chase.  "  Saul 
died,  and  his  three  sons,  and  his  armour-bearer,  and  all  his 
men,  that  same  day  together."  The  next  day  the  Philistines 
set  to  work  to  strip  the  dead,  and  finding  the  bodies  of  Saul 
and  his  sons,  they  despatched  their  heads,  armour,  and 
decapitated  corpses,  to  be  carried  in  triumph  through  the 
streets  of  their  principal  cities,  and  finally  to  be  affixed  to 
the  walls  of  Beth-shan.  As  the  tidings  spread,  the  people 
left  the  towns  and  villages  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  fled 
across  the  Jordan.  Roving  bands  followed  up  the  victory, 
and  carried  fire  and  sword  into  all  parts  of  the  land.  It 
was  the  tidings  of  their  approach  to  Gibeah  that  caused  the 
accident  to  Mephibosheth  which  crippled  him  for  life. 
"  He  was  five  years  old  when  the  tidings  came  of  Saul  and 
Jonathan  out  of  Jezreel,  and  his  nurse  took  him  up  and 
fled;  and  it  came  to  pass,  as  she  made  haste  to  flee,  that 
he  fell,  and  he  became  lame  "  (2  Sam.  iv.  4). 

One  brave  deed  relieved  the  sombre  hues  of  that  terrible 
catastrophe.  The  men  of  Jabesh-gilead  could  not  forget 
how  nobly  Saul  had  come  to  their  aid  in  the  early  days  of 
his  reign;  and  they  resolved,  at  least,  to  retrieve  the  royal 
body  from  the  ignominy  to  which  Philistine  malice  had 
exposed  it.  The  valiant  men  therefore  arose,  and  went  all 
night,  took  down  the  body  of  Saul,  and  the  bodies  of  his 
sons  from  the  temple  walls,  bore  them  reverently  back  to 
Jabesh,  burnt  them  to  conceal  the  hideous  mutilation  to 
which  they  had  been  subjected,  buried  them  under  "the 
tamarisk  tree  in  Jabesh,"  and  lamented  with  unfeigned  grief 
this  tragic  close  to  a  reign  which  had  been  once  as  a 
morning  without  clouds. 


^  tSKori  of  M  anting.  187 

It  is  an  awful  thing  when  a  man  persists,  as  Saul  and  as 
Judas,  to  the  end  striving  against  God.  We  feel  that  it  was 
a  dreadful  thing  to  do  as  he  did ;  we  are  horrified  at  his 
temerity ;  we  marvel  at  his  infatuation ;  yet  we  may  fall 
into  his  wicked  ways,  and  be  overcome  of  evil  as  he  was. 
We,  too,  may  have  resort  to  things,  habits,  and  people 
which  we  had  once  religiously  tabooed.  We  too,  are  liable 
to  step  back  to  our  undoing.  If  a  man,  having  felt  the 
evil  of  covetousness,  and  set  himself  against  the  love  of 
money,  after  awhile  allows  it  to  again  invade  his  soul ;  if  a 
man  has  been  a  slave  of  his  appetites,  and  having  realized 
their  degrading  tendencies,  has  acted,  for  awhile,  on  a  vow 
of  temperance,  but  has  gradually  allowed  them  to  resume 
their  former  sway  ;  if  after  years  of  irreligion  he  has  begun 
to  be  in  earnest  about  his  soul,  but  has  again  relapsed  into 
moral  apathy — is  not  this  like  Saul  seeking  help  in  the  cave 
of  the  enchantress,  whose  class  he  had  proscribed  ?  Such 
men  are  wells  without  water;  clouds  carried  before  the 
blast  of  the  tempest,  for  whom,  in  the  words  of  the 
Apostle,  is  reserved  the  worst  of  darkness  for  ever  :  "  For  if 
after  they  have  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world  through 
the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  they 
are  again  entangled  therein  and  overcome,  the  latter  end  is 
worse  with  them  than  the  beginning ;  for  it  had  been  better 
for  them  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness,  than, 
after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  back  from  the  holy  com 
mandment  delivered  unto  them." 


XXV. 


(2  SAMUEL  i.  19,  etc.) 

"  He  who  did  most,  shall  bear  most  ;  the 

strongest  shall  stand  the  most  weak. 
'Tis  the  weakness  in  strength  that  I  cry  for  ! 

my  flesh,  that  I  seek 
In  the  Godhead  !     I  seek  and  I  find  it  O 

Saul  it  shall  be 
A  Face  like  my  face  that  receives  thee  a  Man 

like  to  me, 
Thou  shall  love  and  be  loved  by,  for  ever  :  a 

Hand  like  this  hand 
Shall  throw  open  the  gates  of  new  life 

to  thee  !     See  the  Christ  stand  !  " 

R.  B. 

'""T^HE  Song  of  the  Bow,"  for  that  is  the  title  of  the 

touchingly  beautiful    elegy    with   which    David's 

muse    mourned    over    the  tragedy  of  Gilboa,  is 

very  pathetic  and  inspiring.        It  seemed  as    though    the 

singer  had  forgotten  the  rough  experiences  which  had  fallen 

to  his  lot  through  the  jealous  mania  of  the   king  ;   and, 

passing  over  recent  years,  he  was  a  minstrel-shepherd  once 

more,  celebrating  the  glory  and  powers  of  his  King. 

"  Thy  glory,  O  Israel,  is  slain  upon  thy  high  places  ! 
How  are  the  mighty  fallen  ! 

Saul  and  Jonathan  were  lovely  and  pleasant  in  their 
lives, 

And  in  their  death  they  were  not  divided." 

It  makes  us  think  of  the  love  of  God  to  hear  David  sing 
like  that.  It  reminds  us  that  God  has  said,  "  Their  sins 
and  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  Here  at  least, 


JV.  Solemn  Cljougbt.  l89 

long  before  the  Christian  era,  was  a  love  that  bore  all 
things,  believed  all  things,  hoped  all  things,  endured  all 
things,  and  never  failed  ;  which  cast  the  halo  of  its  idealism 
around  the  memory  of  the  departed ;  which  thought  only  of 
what  had  been  noble  and  beautiful  in  them,  and  refused  to 
consider  aught  that  had  been  base  and  unworthy.  It  is  thus 
that  we  also  would  think  of  Saul,  the  first  king  of  Israel 

It  always  seems  to  us  as  though  Saul  were  one  of  those 
castaways  of  which  the  Apostle  speaks,  and  among  whom  he 
feared  lest  he  should  finally  be  classed ;  who  were  once 
selected  by  God  for  some  high  and  holy  purpose,  who  bade 
fair  to  realize  it,  but  who  at  last  were  cast  aside  from  his 
use  and  service  as  salt  which  has  lost  its  savour,  and  is  cast 
out  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  men. 

It  is  a  very  solemn  thought !  No  career  could  begin 
with  fairer,  brighter  prospects  than  Saul  had,  and  none 
could  close  in  a  more  absolute  midnight  of  despair;  and 
yet  such  a  fate  may  befall  us,  unless  we  watch,  and  pray,  and 
walk  humbly  with  our  God. 

We  cannot  forget  that  representation  on  the  pages  of  the 
"  Immortal  Dreamer,"  of  the  man  in  an  iron  cage.  The 
man  said,  "I  was  once  a  fair  and  flourishing  professor,  both 
in  mine  own  eyes  and  in  the  eyes  of  others ;  I  once  was,  as 
I  thought,  fair  for  the  Celestial  City,  and  had  then  even  joy 
at  the  thoughts  that  I  should  get  thither ;  but  I  left  off  to 
watch  and  be  sober ;  I  laid  the  reins  upon  the  neck  of  my 
lusts  ;  I  sinned  against  the  light  of  the  Word  and  the  good 
ness  of  God;  I  have  grieved  the  Spirit,  and  He  is  gone; 
I  tempted  the  devil,  and  he  has  come  to  me ;  I  have  pro 
voked  God  to  anger,  and  He  has  left  me;  I  have  so  hardened 
my  heart  that  I  cannot  repent."  "  Well,"  said  Christian, 
"  this  is  fearful !  God  help  me  to  watch  and  be  sober, 
and  to  pray  that  I  may  shun  the  cause  of  this  man's 
misery ! " 


i9° 

But  those  who  are  most  fearful  of  falling  into  such  a  case 
are  they  who  are  least  liable  to  it.  It  is  the  disciple  who 
says,  Lord,  is  it  I?  in  lowly  distrust  of  himself,  who  will 
never  be  found  guilty  of  treading  the  Son  of  God  beneath 
his  feet,  or  crucifying  Him  afresh. 

But,  deeper  than  all,  the  dispensational  aspect  of  Saul's 
reign  appeals  to  us  with  profoundest  interest.  He  seems 
to  represent  the  prince  of  this  present  age  (or,  as  it  might 
be  called,  "  the  world  "),  who  was  once  Lucifer,  the  Son  of 
the  Morning,  who  was  appointed  as  God's  vicegerent  to 
rule  over  his  heritage ;  who  fell  from  his  high  estate,  and  in 
his  fall  not  only  dragged  down  a  noble  retinue  of  bright  and 
beautiful  spirits,  but  cast  a  blighting  influence  over  the 
entire  realm  over  which  he  had  been  set.  In  each  of  these 
points  there  is  a  close  analogy  between  Saul  the  king,  and 
Satan  the  fallen  archangel.  Both  were  favoured  above 
most ;  both  began  with  high  promise ;  both  were  vice 
gerents  over  God's  heritage ;  both  were  disobedient,  wilful, 
and  proud;  both  fell  from  their  primal  estate,  and  in  their 
fall  dragged  many  in  their  train,  and  left  an  entail  of  woe  as 
their  legacy  and  memento.  And  both  incurred  the  sentence 
of  deposition  in  favour  of  another  kingdom,  which  was 
springing  up  in  the  heart  of  their  kingdom.  In  the  case  of 
Saul,  this  was  David's ;  in  the  case  of  Satan,  it  is  that 
Kingdom  which  can  never  be  removed,  but  abideth  for 
ever ! 

That  gathering  to  the  Cave  of  Adullam  of  all  who  were  in 
desperate  circumstances,  until  by  careful  discipline  and  the 
infusion  of  his  own  heroic  spirit,  David  moulded  them  into 
a  great  army,  and  won  the  empire  of  that  time  and  land  ; 
that  generous  and  noble  disposition  which  stood  out  in  such 
striking  contrast  to  the  character  of  his  adversary  ;  that 
incessant  persecution  and  pursuit  by  the  crowned  prince  of 
the  realm — what  are  these  but  striking  analogies,  which  have 


gibitte  purpose.  191 

their  highest  counterpart  only  in  the  history  of  the  Son  of 
Man,  who  from  his  cradle  to  his  grave  was  always  subjected 
to  the  hatred  and  opposition  of  Satan  ! 

Notwithstanding  all  that  Saul's  malice  could  do  to  thwart 
and  frustrate  the  Divine  plan,  yet  Jehovah  set  his  king  upon 
the  holy  hill  of  Zion,  and  He  came  forth  to  declare  the 
decree  of  his  enthronement  and  coronation.  Similarly  the 
Divine  purpose  with  regard  to  our  Lord  must  stand,  though 
demons  and  men  oppose  it.  The  Son  of  God  is  destined  to 
be  the  crowned  King  of  men.  His  kingdom  is  now  hidden 
and  in  mystery  ;  his  followers  are  not  manifested  to  the  eyes 
of  men  ;  the  full  proportions  of  his  empire  are  concealed. 
It  has  yet  "to  come."  The  overthrow  of  its  great  antagonist 
must  precede  its  establishment.  For  the  universe  also  there 
is  to  be  an  Armageddon,  just  as  there  was  a  field  of  Gilboa  ; 
and  only  when  that  last  fight  has  been  fought,  and  the 
powers  of  darkness  have  been  shattered,  never  to  be  re 
constructed,  shall  there  be  heard  the  sound  of  many  voices, 
as  of  the  tumultuous  shout  of  vast  multitudes,  saying, 
"  Hallelujah  !  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become 
the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Christ,  and  He  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever." 

"Wherefore  we,  receiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be 
moved,  let  us  have  grace,  whereby  we  may  serve  God 
acceptably,  with  reverence  and  godly  fear  :  for  our  God  is  a 
consuming  fire." 

The  reign  of  Saul  would  be  almost  too  bitter  to  contem 
plate,  unless  under  its  rough  cuticle  and  rind  we  could 
detect  the  formation  of  the  luscious  fruit  of  David's  kingdom, 
destined  to  sow  eternal  seed  over  the  world.  Similarly,  we 
might  despair  of  the  condition  to  which  the  Trinity  of  Evil 
has  reduced  our  world,  did  we  not  know  that  in  the  days  of 
these  kings  the  God  of  Heaven  shall  set  up  a  kingdom 
which  shall  never  be  destroyed,  nor  shall  the  sovereignty 
thereof  be  left  to  another  people ;  but  it  shall  break  in 


192  ^-n  (Epilogue. 

pieces  and  consume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand 
for  ever  (see  Daniel  ii.  44). 

"  Samuel  the  prophet  "  thus  practically  bridges  the  gulf 
between  Samson  the  judge  and  David  the  king :  and  there 
is  deep  significance  in  the  fact  that  his  name  is  identified 
with  the  two  books  of  Scripture  which  describe  this  great 
transitional  period,  every  event  of  which  was  affected  by  his 
influence. 


London :  MORGAN  AND  SCOTT,  12,  Paternoster  Buildings,  E.G. 


DATE    DUE 


