Ill llill|ii|l!li 




"REVERB. MEYER 








THE GIFT OF 

Alfred on. Barnes. 



«f*tp 



B//^^ 





Date Due 




cecJ 


rgPiiL »! 






Pif "^ 


m^ 




dfi 


"^^S/u/ 


1 








^n 




mr-ff 


'^dfinr 


\. 






^''•rTr 






















































































PRINTED IN 


U. 5. A. 


(Of 


NO. 23233 



Cornell University Library 
BS580.S2 M61 

Samuel, the prophet. 



olin 



3 1924 029 310 251 




The original of tliis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029310251 



Samuel the Prophet 



By Rev. F. B. Meyer 



The Shepherd PsaJm. Illustrated. Printed in two 

colors. lamo, cloth, gilt top, boxed, Si. 25 ; fuU gilt, 
*i.5o. :. 

The Bells of Is. Echoes from my early pastorates. 

With portrait, i2mo, cloth, 75 c. 

Prayers for Heart and Home. 8vo, flex, cloth, 75 c. 
Paul : a Servant of Jesus Cfirist lamo, cloth, $1 .00. 

Old Testament Heroes. 8 vols., lamo, cloth, each, 

$1.00 ; the sec, boxed, 88.00. 

Abraham, Elijah. Jeremiah. Joshua. 

David. Israel. Joseph. Moses. 

The Expository Series. i2mo, cloth, each $1.00 ; 
the set, boxed, $4.00. 

Tried by Fire. The Way Into the Holiest. 

Christ in Isaiah. The Life and Light of Men. 

Tlie Christian Life Series. i8mo, cloth, each, 30 c. 
The Shepherd Psalm Through Fire and Flood. 
Christian Living. The Glorious Lord. 

The Present Tenses Calvary to Pentecost. 
The Future Tenses Key Words to the Inner Life. 

*** The first four also issued in flexible, decorated cloth, 
i6mo, each, 50 c. ; the set, boxed, $2.00. 

Addresses. i2mo, paper, each, 15 c.; cloth, each, 
net, 30 c. 

Meet for the Master's Use A Castaway 
The Secret of Guidance Light on Life's Duties 

Saved and Kept. Long i6mo, doth, 50 c. 

Cheer for Life's Pilgrimage. Long i6mo, cloth, 50 c. 

Peace, Perfect Peace. i8mo, cloth, 25 c. 

The Psalms. Notes and Readings. 1 8mo, cloth, 60 c. 

Envelope Series of Booklets. Packets Nos. i and 2, 
each containing 12 Tracts, assorted, net, so c. 

Choice Extracts. 24mo, paper, each, 5 c. ; per doz. 
net, 35c,; i6mo, paper, 150. 



Fleming: H. Revell Company 

New York : 158 Fifth Ave. Chicago : 63 Washington St. 
ToROMTo : 154 Yonge St. 



Samuel the Prophet 



BY 

F. B. MEYER, B, A. 



AUTHOR OF 



"John the Baptist," " Shepherd Psalm," " Our Daily 
Homily," etc., etc. 




New York Chicago Toronto 

Fleming H. Revell Company 

London and Edinburgh 



•¥- 






1)UUU 



tAx ,.^^-^LtMx^ <C-^ -^ c c rvvy' &<^UuL.^ 



'J>T> 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER 

I. An Age of Transition, 

II. A Woman's Anguish of Heart, 

III. The Young Levite, 

IV. The Vision of God, . 
V. Misfortune on Misfortune, 

VI. The Work of Reconstruction, 

VII. The Victory of Faith, 

VIII. The Stone of Help, . 

IX. A Great Disappointment, 

X. The Voice of Circumstances, . 

XI. As Occasion Serves, 

XII. The Inner and Outer Conflicts, 

XIII. Forsaken? Never! 

XIV. Not Ceasing in Prayer, . 
XV. The Causes of Saul's Downball, 

XVI. " Two Putting Ten Thousand to Fligh 

XVII. Failure under the Supreme Test, 

XVIII. A Remarkable Colloquy, 

XIX. " An Evil Spirit from the Lord," 

XX. "Sin Bringing forth Death," 

XXI. The Sin of Jealousy, 

XXII. "Cruel as the Grave," 

XXIII. A Great Sunset, 

XXIV. Endor and Gilboa, 
XXV. An Epilogue, 



page 
9 

i8 
28 

37 
46 
62 
67 
77 
85 

lOI 

109 
119 
132 
144 
155 
165 
175 
185 
196 
208 
219 
228 
241 
252 
265 



SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 



Bn Bqc of transition. 

(i Samuel i.) 

The old order changeth, yielding place to new, 

And God fulfils himself in many ways. 

Lest one good custom should corrupt the world. 

— Tennyson. 

" ^ \ N whom the ends of the ages are come " — 
»^ t i. €., the end of one age and the beginning 
of another. Such is our position to-day. 
In every direction the old order is giving place to the 
new. It was thus in the days of the Primitive 
Church, when the typical institutions of the Levitical 
system were being replaced by " the heavenly things 
themselves." And it was also thus at the time when 
our narrative begins. The story of Samuel is a divine 
interlude between the diays of the Judges and those of 
David the King. 

Hitherto the High Priesthood had been the su- 
preme authority recognised in the Hebrew Common- 
wealth. To Moses, its founder, there could be of 



lo SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

course no successor ; but Aaron was the first of an un- 
broken line of priests. No other office stood for the 
whole of Israel. The Mosaic era, however, was not 
destined to culminate in the rule of the Priest, who has 
seldom combined the sacerdotal functions with the 
special qualifications that constitute a great leader 
and ruler. Too often the reign of the Churchman has 
been warped by bigotry, tyranny, and the repression 
of the nobler aspirations of mankind. The Priest was 
to make way for the King. 

A suggestion that a fresh development of the He- 
brew polity was near occurs in the closing verses of 
the Book of Ruth, with which this book is conhected 
by the conjunction now. The genealogy which is the 
evident climax of that sweet pastoral story closes, has 
no connection with Aaron or his line. It expressly 
deals with the tribe of Judah, of which itothing was 
spoken concerning the priesthood. Evidently the Di- 
vine purpose was moving forward — but whither? 
At the time its goal was not apparent; but as we look 
back on all the circumstances from the vantage- 
ground of accomplished fact, we can see that it was 
slowly moving towards the establishment of the king- 
dom under David; and veiled from all eyes there was 
the yet profoundier movement towards the revelation 
of " that Proper Man," as Luther calls Him, in whose 
nature, fitly known as Wonderful, the priestly, the 
prophetic, and the royal blend in perfect symmetry 
and beauty. 



AN AGE OF TRANSITION. u 

T. The Urgent Need for a Strong Man. — 
Every age takes up and urges the cry— Give us men ; 
but if ever a strong man was needed, it was in the days 
of which the Book of Judges affords some startling 
glimpses. 

Canaan had been conquered, but the ancient in- 
habitants were far from being subdued; they remained 
much as the Saxons under the early Norman kings. 
In the South, the Philistines held their five cities. 
The mountain fortress, which was afterwards known 
as Mount Zion, garrisoned by Jebusites, was proudly 
defiant so far forward as the days of David. Nearly 
all the seacoast, and all the strongholds in the rich 
plain of Esdraelon, were in the hands of the Canaan- 
ites. The little kingdom of Gezer remained inde- 
pendent till it was conquered by the King of Egypt, 
and given as a dowry to Solomon's Queen. On the 
northern frontier were the remains of those mighty 
nations which Joshua had overthrown in the great 
battle of the Waters of Merom, but which probably 
only gave a nominal allegiance to the Israelite suzer- 
ainty. " So the Lord left those nations, without driv- 
ing them out hastily, ... to prove Israel by them, 
even as many as had not known the wars of Canaan, 
... to teach them war, at the least such as before- 
time knew nothing thereof." Had it not been for the 
presence of these warlike tribes, we should never have 
heard of Gideon, of Barak, of Jephthah, of Samson, or 
of David. . Without this discipline, Israel might have 



12 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

become an effeminate and molluscous race, lacking 
backbone and muscle. They would have dwelt in 
security, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and 
secure in a large land, a place where there was no 
want of anything that is in the earth (Judges iii. 1-3; 
xviii. 7, 10). 

How often in our earthly discipline we come into 
experiences which are the counterpart of these. 
There are wars where we looked for peace; fret and 
chafe where we expected freedom from annoyance; 
pouring from vessel to vessel where we hoped to be 
allowed to settle 00 our lees. Are not these clearly 
permitted to try us, that we may I'earn war; that we 
may know ourselves and know God; that we and our 
children may grow up into a nobler and healthier 
style of character than had otherwise been pos- 
sible? 

In Israel this incessant exposure to attack was ag- 
gravated by the absence of a strong central govern- 
ment. The priesthood had evidently fallen into the 
bands of weaklings from the days of Phinebas. Of 
this there is striking confirmation in the fact that Eli 
sprang, not from the house of Eleazar, the eldest son 
of Aaron, in which the succession ought to have been 
continued, but frotn the family of the younger son, 
Ithamar. There is a strong probability that the repre- 
sentatives of the elder branch had proved themselves 
so unable to cope with the disorders of the time; that 
they had been set aside in favour of anyone who 



AN. AGE OF TRANSITION. 13 

evinced faculty enough to take the field and marshal 
the forces of Israel. Perhaps Eli, in his young life, 
had done some stirring deed of prowess which raised 
him to the supreme position his fellow-countrymen 
could give; though, when we are introduced to him, 
he is pitiful in his senile decrepitude and weakness 
(i Chron. vi. 4-15; xxiv. 4). 

From time to time prophets had been rciised up as 
a temporary expedient. " He gave them judges until 
Samuel the prophet." " And when the Lord raised 
up judges, then the Lord was with the judge, and 
saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the 
days of the judge ; for it repented the Lord because of 
their groaning by reason of them that oppressed them 
and vexed them " (Acts xiii. 20; Judges ii. 18). The 
reign of a judge was, however, a very 'transient gleam 
of light in that dark and stormy age. At the furthest, 
his power was only recognised within his own and the 
adjacent tribes. Samson, for instance, was little else 
than the hero of the south country, whilst Jephthah 
was pre-eminently the captain of the trans- Jordanic 
tribes. In many cases the office ceased with the 
special crisis that called it into being. Only in 
the case of two or three, such as Deborah and 
Gideon, did conspicuous service lead to a lifelong 
primacy. 

Thus the nation was in danger of des'olaitioti by in- 
termal anarchy and external attack. With no prin- 
ciple of cohesion, no rallying-point, no acknowledged 



14 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

leader, what was there to resist the pressure of the Ca- 
naanites from within, and of the hostile nations from 
without, its borders? " In those days there was no 
king in Israel, but every man did that which was right 
in his own eyes " ; " The children of Israel did evil in 
the sight of the Lord "; " The children of Israel cried 
unto the Lord." These three sentences, repeated fre- 
quently and emphatically, are the keynotes of the 
whole book. The religious ties, moreover, were very 
weak. We find, for instance, the name of Baal, a 
Phoenician deity, occurring three times in the names 
of members of the family of Saul (i Cliron. viii. 30, 33, 
34). The stories of Micah, of Ruth, and of the exter- 
mination of the Danites, supply graphic pictures of 
the disunion, independence, and wildness of the time; 
of wild licence, and of exposure to attack. 

It was necessary, therefore, to introduce a new order 
of things. To assert and achieve the national unity; 
to make the best aspects of the rule of the judges per- 
manent in the office of kingship; to resuscitate and 
maintain the allegiance of Israel to the God of their 
fathers; to carrj' over the whole nation from the time 
of the last judge to that of the first king — was a task 
that demanded a pre-eminently strong man.; and the 
want was superbly supplied, as we shall see, by the 
prophet Samuel, who conducted his people from one 
age to another, without a revolution, and almost with- 
out the excitement which naturally accompanies so 
great a change. 



AN AGE OF TRANSITION. ,5 

II. How THE Need was Met. — God's greatest 
gifts to man come through travail. Whether we look 
into the spiritual or the temporal sphere, can we dis- 
cover anything, any great reform, any beneficent dis- 
covery, any soul-awakening revival, which did not 
come through the toils and tears, the vigils and blood- 
shedding of men and women, whose sufiferings were 
the pangs of its birth? iTliat which costs nothing is 
of small avail to the salvation and help of mankind. 
The souls that are set on saving themselves will never 
be the saviours of the race. If the temple is raised, 
David must bear sore afflictions; if the Gospel of the 
grace of God is to be disentangled from Jewish tradi- 
tion, Paul's life must be one long agony; if the Refor- 
mation is to be rendered possible for Europe, men like 
John Huss and Jerome must be burnt at the stake; if 
great scientific discoveries are to be established, men 
like Galileo, Galvani, Faraday, and' Edison must spend 
sleepless nights and laborious days through long 
years; if great religious truths are to be enunciated, as 
the priceless heirloom of pilgrim souls, men like Bax- 
ter, Bunyan, or Charles Simeon must be willing to 
undergo ostracism, misrepresentation, and contempt. 
Before Samuel could be given to his people, Hannah 
must be a woman of a sorrowful spirit. 

Some few miles to the north of Jerusalem, on the 
confines of the territories of Ephraim and Benjamin, 
was situated the town of Ramath'aim-Zophim. It was 
also known as Ramah, and has passed inlto New Tes- 



1 6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

tament history as Arimathiea, the town from which he 
oame who begged of Pilate the body of the Lord. 
Ramathaim means the two Ramahs, as there were 
probably an upper and a lower city, to which reference 
is made in the after-story (i Sam. ix. 13). Zophim 
recalls the name of an ancestor of Elkanah, named 
Zuph, who appears to have been a m^an of considerable 
importance, and to have given his name to the whole 
district (i Chron. vi. 35; i Sam. ix. 5). In this moun- 
tain city a child was to be bom who was to give it 
interest and importance, not only during his lifetime, 
when it became the focus of the national life, but for 
centuries of years. 

Towards the close of Samson's career in Southern 
Judah, a family resided at Ramah consisting of Elka- 
nah, a Levite, and his two wives, Hannah (Grace) and 
Peninnah (Pearl or Margaret). He had formerly lived 
in Ephraim, and was therefore considered to belong 
to that tribe (Joshua xxi. 20). That he had two wives 
was not a violation of the Levitical law, which did not 
forbid polygamy, but carefully regulated the marriage- 
law, penetrating the home-life with such ideals as 
would gradually bring men and women back to the 
original institution of Paradise (Mark x. 4-9). 

It is supposed that Elkanah brought a second wife 
into his home because of Hannah's childlessness; but, 
whatever had been the cause, the step had been 
fraught with misery. The house at Ramah was filled 
with bickering and strife, which was augmented as 



AN, AGE OF TRANSITION. 



17 



child after child fell to the lot of Peninnah, whilst 
Hannah Was still childless. Apart from all else, her 
desolate condition was an almost intolerable condition 
(Gen. XXX. i); but that it should be made the subject 
of biting sarcasm and bitter taunts was the occasion of 
the most poignant grief. The pain was not confined 
to Ramah, but seems to have reached its climax when, 
according to the Hebrew custom, the household went 
up to offer unto the Lord the yearly sacrifice, and 
Hannah was compelled to witness the many portions 
which fell to the lot of her rival, for all her sons and 
daughters, at the sacrificial feast, when, after offering 
to Jehovah the victims they h'ad brought, they retired 
to feast on the remainder. Then it was that the needy 
sat upon the dunghill, and the poor in the dust; then 
it was thiat her soul was pierced as by the sword of 
the Lord, and drew near unto the grave; then it was 
that the hunger of her soul could not be appeased even 
by the consciousness of Elkanah's fond affection 
(i. 5, 8; ii. 5-8). But out of this soul-travail the joy of 
hier life and the saviour of her country were to be bom. 



ir. 
a Moman's Hnguisb of Ibeart. 

(i Samuel i. 15.) 

Unanswered yet? Faith cannot be unanswered, 
Her feet were firmly planted on the Rock; 

Amid the wildest storms she stands undaunted, 
Nor quails before the loudest thundershock. 

She knows Omnipotence has heard her prayer, 

And cries " It shall be done " sometime, somewhere. 

— Browning. 

WE may infer that Hannah's barrenness, and 
the provocation of her rival, were not the 
only reasons for Hannah's sorrow. As her 
noble song proves, she was saturated with the most 
splendid traditions and hopes of her people; her soul 
was thrilling with the conceptions that inspired the 
songs of Moses. Stricken with an agony of grief for 
the anarchy and confusion around her, she longed 
with passionate desire to enshrine her noblest self in 
a child, who should resuscitate the ebbing prosperity 
of the nation, and set it on an enduring foundation. 
Frail woman that she was, she might not even hope to 
emulate a Jael or a Deborah, but she might save her 
people if she could only breathe her ardent nature into 
a child. What if she were to be deprived of his pres- 



A WOMAN'S ANGUISH OF HEART. 19 

ence and support from his eiarliest years, would she 
not be compensated a thousandfold if only the Lord 
would accept him as his own, and use him to be the 
channel through which his redemptive schemes might 
be achieved? Levites ordinarily were consecrated to 
the Lord's service between the ages of thirty and fifty, 
but her son, if only she might have a man-child, 
should be given to the Lord all the days of his life, and 
no razor should ever come upon his flowing locks. 

On one occasion, whilst the feast was proceeding 
at Shiloh, it seemed as though Hannah could restrain 
herself no longer, and after her people had eaten and 
drunk — she fasting, save from tears — she rose up and 
returned to the outer court of the Tabernacle. Most 
of its ancient glory had departed. Probably only a 
few curtains were draped around the Ark and the 
other sacred furniture, which bad escaped the wreck 
of the previous two or three hundred years; and this 
simple structure was, if we may credit Rabbinical tra- 
dition, surrounded by a low stone wall, at the gate of 
which was a seat or throne for the High Priest. 
" And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto 
the Lord, and wept sore." Others went with burnt- 
offerings, but she with the broken heart which God 
will not despise. She didn't chide God, but she held 
out her cup of trial, that it might become a cup of 
salvation. 

We are told that " she prayed," and it becomes us 
to study her prayer and its issue. 



20 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

It was heart-prayer. It is the custom of Orientals 
to pray audibly, but as she stood beside Eli's seat 
(ver. 26) she spake in her heart; her lips moved, but 
her voice was not heard. This indicates that she had 
made many advances in th'e Divine life, and had come 
to know the secreit of heart-fellowship with God. 
Hers were not vain repetitions, but such an inter- 
change of spirit with spirit, of need with supply, of 
hunger with satisfaction, of the human with the Di- 
vine, as requires no speech, for speech could not con- 
vey those " groanings which cannot be uttered." 

It was based on a new name far God. She appealed 
to Jehovah under a new title, " Jehovah of Hiosts," as 
though it were nothing to Him to summon into ex- 
istence an infant spirit, whom she might call child. 
She asked Him to look down from the myriads of holy 
spirits who circled round his throne, and did his be- 
hests, to her dire affliction and anguish. She vO'Wed 
in words which Elkanah by his silence or consent 
afterwards ratified (Num. xxx. 6-15), that she did not 
want this inestimable boon for herself merely, but for 
the kingdom and glory of God, and that her son 
should be a Nazarite from his birth, abstaining from 
intoxicating drink, his locks unshorn, his body unde- 
filed by contact with the dead (Num. xxx. 6-15). 

It was definite prayer. " Give unto thine handmaid 
a man-child." " For this child I prayed." So many 
of our prayers miscarry because they are aimed at no 
special goal. We launch them aimlessly in the air, 



A WOMAN'S ANGUISH OF HEART. 21 

and wonder that they achieve nothing. How many 
of God's professing children would be nonplussed if, 
on leaving God's audience chamber on any morning, 
they were questioned as to what precious gift they had 
gone thither to obtain? We are too often contented 
with asking generally that God would bless those 
with whom we are connected, without entering specifi- 
cally into the case of any. Experienced saints who 
are versed in the art of intercessory prayer tell us of 
the marvellous results which have accrued, when they 
have set themselves to pray definitely for the salvation 
of individuals, or for some good and perfect gift on 
their behalf. 

There is a notable instance of this in the life of 
Bishop Hannington of Uganda. It is recorded in the 
diary of a fellow-clergyman, who had known him at 
the University, that on a certain day he wais led to 
pray definitely for his friend; and almost simultane- 
ously Hannington notes in his diary that he was con- 
scious of unusual drawings towards God. 

It was prayer without reserve. " I have poured out 
my soul before the Lord." Ah! how good it would 
be if we could more often follow Hannah's example. 
We pour out our secrets to confidential friends, and 
in many instances have reason bitterly to repent; or, 
if we commit our cause to God, we tell Him one sidte 
of the case — our side — and hide from Him the other. 
Often the matter would be ended, if we dared to pour 
out all our soul; not defending ourselves, not apolo- 



22 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

gising, not glossing over what demanded clear and 
unequivocal confession. When the heart is breaking, 
when its frail machinery seems unable to sustain the 
weight of its anxiety, when its cords are strained 
to the point of snapping, then, as you remember 
these things, pour out your soul in you (Psa. 
xlii. 4). 

It was persevering prayer. " It oame to pass, as she 
continued praying before the Lord." Not that either 
she or we can claim to be heard for our much speak- 
ing, but when the Lord lays some burden on us we 
cannot do other than wait before Him. 

It was prayer that received its coveted boon. Eli was 
seated in his place at the entrance to the sanctuary. 
His notice was attracted by Hannah, though she was 
indifferent to all around. At first his attention was 
probably arrested by the signs of her excessive sorrow, 
and he expected that she would pour out her prayers 
in an audible voice, as so many other burdened souls 
were wont to do. But since her lips moved, while her 
voice was not heard, the high priest thought she had 
been drunken, and rather rudely and coarsely broke 
in on her with the rebuke, " How long wilt thou be 
drunken? Put away thy wine from thee." Therein 
another proof was given of the inability of the priest- 
hood to understand and sympathise with the best spirit 
and temper of the time. Eli judged after the sight 
of his eyes, and clearly the mind of God had not been 
revealed to him. He had degenerated into the mere 



A WOMAN'S ANGUISH OF HEART. 



23 



official, from whom the Divine purposes were con- 
cealed. 

Hannah answered the unjust reproach with greiat 
meekness. " No," she said, " it isn't as you think. I 
have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have 
poured out my spirit unto the Lord." She had al- 
ready suffered so much that this last misapprehension 
could not seriously add to her burden. She was con- 
tent to cast it, with all the rest, on God; and she real- 
ised, even before Eli replied, that the merciful Burden- 
bearer had heard and answered her prayer. She had 
entered into the spirit of the prayer, which not only 
asks, but takes. She anticipated those wonderful 
words, which, more than any others, disclose the 
secret of prevailing supplication, " All things what- 
soever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye Wave re- 
ceived them, and ye shall have them " (Mark xi. 24)., 
Before ever the words of Eli, " Go in peace, and the 
God of Israel grant thy petition that thou hast asked 
of Him," had fallen like a summer shower on a 
parched land, she knew that she had prevailed, and 
the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, 
filled and kept her mind and heart. And she said, 
" Let thy servant find grace in thy sight. So the 
woman went her way, and did eat, and her counte- 
nance was no more sad." Well may Anstice sing: 

"Could we but kneel, and cast our load, 
E'en while we pray, upon our God, 
Then rise with lightened cheer." 



24 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Too often we return from prayer with sad faces and 
burdened hearts. We have not cast our burden on 
the Lord, or if we have done so, we have taken it back 
again. There has been no interchange, and no ex- 
change. We have failed to abandon our weights, 
anxieties, and sins, leaving them in the hands of our 
Almighty Friend, receiving instead beauty for ashes, 
the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise 
for the spirit of heaviness. 

The next day was fixed for their return hiome. 
" And they rose up in the morning early, and wor- 
shipped before the Lord, and returned, and came to 
their house in Ramah." But what an altfered woman 
she was! How differently she has borne herself in 
that last brief visit to the holy shrine! And with what 
a glad face she entered the home which'had been asso- 
ciated with such sorrow. Peninnah must have won- 
dered what had happened to make so great a change; 
but Elkanah was the confidant of her secret, and his 
faith was made stronger by her unquestioning trust 
(ver. 23). 

The Workings of Sorrow. — In this prayer we can 
trace the harvest sown in years of suffering. Only 
one who had greatly suffered could have poured out 
such a prayer. The notes of resignation, of chiastened 
submission to the will of God, of appeal as from the 
dust, of the abandonment of all hope save in God, of 
the simple desire for his kingdbm and righteousness, 
are touched with infinite delicacy and tenderness by 



A WOMAN'S ANGUISH OR HEART. 25 

this sorrowful woman's hand. Sorrow gives an in- 
definable beauty to the soul. The blue of heaven 
does not seem so beautiful in rainless Egypt as in 
countries where the atmosphere is saturated with 
moisture. "What do you think of her singing?" 
asked the trainer of a soprano vocalist. " She sings 
superbly," was his friend's reply, " but if I had to do 
with her, I would break her heart." It may be that 
the long sharp pain, which has been your I'Ot for these 
many years, the heart-hunger, the disappointed hopes, 
the silent waiting, the holding your peace, even from 
good, have been necessary, to teach you how to pray, 
to lead you into the secret of a childlike faith, and to 
fit you to be the parent of some priceless gift to the 
world. 

It fell out to Hannah according to her faith. 
Blessed was she that had believed, for there was a per- 
fortnance unto her of the promises which God had 
made to her secret soul. " The Lord remembered 
her, and it came to pass, when the time had come 
about, that she bare a son, and she called his name 
Samuel, saying. Because I have asked him of the 
Lord." 

The good Elkanah had a new joy in his heart as he 
went up to ofifer unto the Lord his yearly sacrifice; 
and it would seem that he added to it some special ex- 
pression of a vow that he had made — " the yearly sac- 
rifice, and his vow." But Hannah abode at Ramah 
until the child w'as weaned, which would probably be 



26 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

on his completion of his third year, for at that age 
Levite children were permitted to be enrolled and to 
enter the house of the Lord (2 Chron. xxx. 16), 

At last the time arrived when the child should be 
openly presented to the Lord. The parents set out 
on their solemn journey with their child. The 
mother's heart was now as full of praise las it had for- 
merly been of sorrow. Her heart rejoiced in the 
Lord ; her spirit was exalted in h'er God. The beggar 
was lifted from the dunghill to inherit the throne of 
glory. She had learned that there was no Rock like 
her God, and she rejoiced in his salvation. Her song, 
on which the Mother of our Lord modelled the Mag- 
nificat, is the outburst of a soul whose cup was simply 
overflowing with the loving-kindness of the Lord. 

Presently the memorable journey from Ramah was 
finished. The sanctuary was again in sight, where 
she had suffered so poignantly and prayed so fer- 
vently. How it all rushed on her memory. " I am 
the woman that stood by thee here," she said to Eli; 
" for this child I prayed, and the Lord hath given me 
my petition." 

Notice thos'e words, " I stood by thee here." How 
closely we associate certain experiences with certain 
spots. Here we suffered; here we resolved to live a 
new life; here we heard God speak. It was thus with 
Hannah. And was it not befitting that she should 
rejoice where she had sorrowed; that the harvest of 
joy should wave over the furrows where her tears had 



A WOMAN'S ANGUISH OF HEART. 27 

fallen so lavishly; that the blue skies should overarch 
the very spot where the dark cloud's had lowered? 

Take heart, thou man or woman of a sorrowful 
spirit! Only suffer according to the will of God, and 
for no wrong or sinful cause! Suffer for his Church, 
for a lost world, for dying men! Travail in birth for 
souls! Exercise thyself as thou wilt for the coming 
of his kingdom! Bear the weight of some other soul, 
dear to thee as life ! And if thou dost abide thy Lord's 
time. He will bring thee again to tread in garments 
of joy, where th'ou hast stood in the drapery of woe. 
Thou shalt come again from the land of the enemy. 
They that go forth an'd weep, bearing precious seed, 
shall doubtless, doubtless, doubtless come again, with 
rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them. 



III. 
Ubc J^oung Xevfte. 

(i Samuel ii. and iii.) 

Be still ! sad soul ! lift thou no passionate cry, 
But spread the desert of thy being bare 
To the full searching of the All-seeing eye; 
Wait ! — and through dark misgiving, blank despair, 
God will come down in pity, and fill the dry 
Dead place with light, and life, and vernal air. 

— J. C. Shairp. 

DEAN STANLEY tells us that, in his gentler 
moments, Luther used to dwell on these early 
chapters of the Books of Samuel with the ten- 
derness which formed the occasional counterpoise to 
the ruder passions and enterprises of his stormy life. 
Indeed, students of the Scriptures in every age have 
been arrested by the figure of this little child girded 
with his linen ephod, or in the little robe which his 
mother brought him from year to year, when she 
came up with her husband to ofifer the yearly sacri- 
fice. 

With what passionate and almost irrepressible de- 
sire the mother must have anticipated that annual 
visit, all too transient to satisfy her natural longings. 
It must have been hard enough to leave him at all at 
so tender an age as three; and specially with the 



THE YOUNG LEVITE. 29 

women who seem to have been regularly occupied in 
the service of the Tabernacle, and to whose care he 
was probably entrusted. Probably mot all of them 
were infected with the shameful sin into which sev- 
eral seem to have been seduced (i Sam. ii. 22, r. v.). 
There may have been amongst them some like Anna, 
the prophetess, who departed not from the sacred 
shrine, worshipping, with fastings and supplications, 
night and day (Luke ii. 37). These would attend to 
the physical needs of the child; whilst his training in 
the law, and the elements of such education as was 
possible, would be under the direct supervision of the 
high priest. 

But Hannah was solaced for her deprivation. 
There was the precious memory of those early years, 
when he had filled the house with his childish prattle, 
and she had been able to sow in the receptive soil of 
his tender heart the seeds of manhood's harvest. 
Other children, also, were born to her; and, as three 
sons and two daughters grew up at her knees, surely 
the thought of their little brother, in his sacred office 
a continual inspiration, must have been a subject of 
lively and perennial interest? We need not accept 
the Jewish legend, which narrates that, as one of Han- 
noli's children was born, one of Peninnah's died. 
Such an infliction would have given no satisfaction to 
Hannah, and have been unkind to Elkan'oh. It was 
enough that Jehovah had vindicated the woman's 
wrongs, as He will assuredly vindicate all those who, 



30 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

when they are reviled revile not again, when they suf- 
fer threaten not, but commit themselves and their 
complaint to Him who judgeth righteously. Peace- 
ful, reverent, and loving thoughts filled the mother's 
heart as she wrought at the little robe, which in shape 
was of the pattern which, probably, Mary made for 
her Son, " woven from the top without and without 
seam," which the soldiers would not tear. 

The Influence of a Mother. — Mothers still make gar- 
ments for their children — not on the loom or with 
their busy needles merely, but by their holy and en- 
nlobling characters displayed from day to day before 
young and quickly observant eyes, by their words and 
conversation, and by the habits of their daily devo- 
tion. What the children see they imitate, and uncon- 
sciously array themselves in the gentleness or rade- 
ness, the reverence for religion or indifference, the re- 
finement or coarseness of manner, which are daily 
presented to their gaze. As fish take on the mottled 
colour of the ground on which they lie, and as the 
plovers change their plumage to match the winter or 
the spring, so children wear the robes which their 
mother's character and behaviour, temper and tones, 
weave for them. 

" And so the child did minister unto the Lord be- 
fore Eli the priest"; slept his innocent slee'p uncon- 
scious of the sins around him, attracted the growing 
attachment of the old man by his reverent affection 
and endearing ways, and gave many evidences tliat 



THE YOUNG LEVITE. 31 

he was being prepared to become a link between God 
and his people, a mediator between the old and the 
new — between the turbulent days of Samson and the 
splendid peace of the reign of Solomon. 

Notice THE SACRILEGE AND SINS OF Eli's SONS. 

" Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial (imrthless- 
ness); they knew not the Lord, nor the due of the 
priests from the people " (ii. 12, r. v.). The law of 
Moses authorised the priest to take as his portion, 
and instead of fees in coin, the whole of the sin-ofifer- 
ings, and the breast and right shoulder of the peace- 
ofiferings; the fat only of the latter being burne'd on 
the altar, whilst the remainder of the animal was 
handed back to the offerer, to be consumed by himself, 
his sons, and his daughters, his men-servants and his 
maid-servants, and the Levite that was within his 
gates (Deut. xii. 12). It was befitting, as the apostle 
states it, that they which ministered about sacred 
things should eat of the things of the Temple, and that 
they which waited upon the altar should have their 
portion with the altar (i Cor. ix. 13). 

The first act of every peace-ofifering was the sprin- 
kling of blood upon the altar round about ; the second 
was the burning of the internal fat. It was never 
eaten, but always consumed by fire. The flame fed 
on it, as the food of God, who, so to speak, ate with 
the accepted worshipper (Lev. iii. 16, 17). After this 
solemn rite was performed, the priest's portion was 



32 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

waved and presented to God, and the grtmp of wor- 
shippers made way for others, carrying away with 
them their portion for the joyful sacrificial feast. 

Here Eli's sons stepped in with their rapacious 
greed. Not satisfied with their legally allotted por- 
tion, they sent their servant after the retiring group, 
with a flesh-hook of three teeth in his hand, and while 
the meat was boiling for the siacred meal, he thrust his 
trident into the cauldron, and claimed as the priest's 
perquisite whatever was brought up. " So they did 
in Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither.'' 

But even this did not long satisfy them. They went 
on to insist that after the breast and shoulder had been 
handed them, but before the remainder had been put 
to boil, they should be supplied with raw meat from 
the offerer's portion; nor would they burn the fat, 
which was the essential part of the whole sacrifice, 
and one for which the worshippers must needs wait, 
until their demands were satisfied. This final touch 
seems to have aroused the long-suffering people to 
exasperation. " At least," they said, " wait till the 
Lord's portion has been presented before you proceed 
to your lawless depredations. Bum the fat, and then 
take as much as you will." " Nay," was the ruthless 
answer of the priest, " but you shall give it me now, 
or I will take what I choose by force." " And the 
sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, 
for men abhorred the offering of the Lord." 

It becomes us to inquire with much anxiety and 



THE YOUNG LEVITE. 33 

heart-searching whether we, as the servants of Christ, 
'are doing or abetting things which cause men to ab- 
hor that holy Name by which we are called. We may 
begin with our own characters and hiabits, an'd thence 
proceed to our doctrinal statements and ecclesiastical 
arrangements. Rightly or wrongly, I have heard of 
men forswearing the Christian religion, to which they 
were once attached, because professing Christians 
were so dilatory in paying their debts, so evasive in 
their excuses, so profuse in promises that were never 
kept, so difficult to please, so thoughtless and care- 
less in their demands on work-people and servants, 
so touchy and fretful, so liable to do things in busi- 
ness which high-minded men of the world would not 
permit. I have heard of men, rightly or wrongly, 
turning from misstatements of Christian doctrine 
which revolted their moral sense and miade God our 
Father as cruel as Chemosh or Molech. I have heard 
of men, rightly or wrongly, refusing to enter places of 
worship because of the class distinctions which were 
maintained, and the strong dislike with which a stran- 
ger's admission into the family pew was resented. 
For these things too many excuse their refusal of the 
Gospel and their absence from the house of prayer. 

Not content with their extortionate greed, Hophni 
and Phin'ehas perpetrated the vilest excesses of 
heathenism amid the woods and vineyards of Shiloh. 
Licentious rites had from time immemorial been asso^ 
ciated with heathen festivals, but never before had 



34 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

they sullied the sacred vestures of the priests of 
Aaron's line. So abandoned were these young men, 
though they had wives of their own, that they did not 
scruple to lead astray the women who were appointed 
to perform the various olifices about the sanctuary 
that demanded female labour. 

Remonstrances were addressed to the aged priest; 
he heard of their evil doings from all the people 
(ii. 23), but instead of strong disapproval and strin- 
gent threats, he contented himself with a mild rebuke, 
"He said unto them. Why do ye these things? Nay, 
my sons, for it is no good rqjort that I hear; ye make 
the Lord's people to transgress." On this the Di- 
vine Judge makes the terrible comment that his sons 
made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. 
He had reproved, but not restrained them. Even 
supposing they had disregarded the reproof of their 
father, they could hai'dly have defied their deposition 
insisted on by him as High Priest, embodying as he 
d^d the highest authority in the realm. And for 
this w'eak laxity he was condemned and deposed. 
" Therefore the Lord, the God of Israel, saith, I said 
indeed that thy house and the house of thy father 
should walk before Me for ever; but now the Lord 
saith. Be it far from Me, for them th'at honour Me I 
will honour, and they that despise Me shiall be lightly 
esteemed." 

The Need of Family Training. — ^This suggests a very 
serious inquiry for those who take a prominent posi- 



THE YOUNG LEVITE. 35 

tion in the Church and before the World, but who neg- 
lect their own families. We are held responsible for 
our children. Our weakness in restraining them is 
sin, which will be inevitably followed, not only by 
their punishment, but by our own. Better do less in 
the Church and the world than allow your children to 
grow up a misery to themselves and a reproach to 
you. Remember that one essential qualifioation for 
office in the Primitive Church was the wise and whole- 
some rule of house and children. If a man could not 
keep his children in subjection, with all gravity, and 
rule his house well, he surely could not know how to 
take care of the house of God (i Tim. iii. 4, 12). 
Probably Eli had not begun early enough. The wise 
parent will begin training children from their earliest 
months, to say nothing of years; and the early strain 
of careful observation and chastisement may well be 
lightened and eased by remembering that the child 
who from the earliest is trained in God's way will not 
depart from it when he is old. 

Above all, let us seek the conversion of our young 
children to God. The apostle distinctly affirms that 
God will give us life for those who sin not unto death; 
and this description is, above all, applicable to little 
children. Surely He will not be unrighteous to forget 
the tears and prayers, or to overlook the faith, of those 
who travail a second time till Christ is formed in the 
hearts of their ofiEspring. As the child of godly 
parents, who cannot date the hour of my conversion. 



36 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

because the love of God stole over my hieart in early 
boyhood like the dawn of a summer sky, I put my 
seal to that word of God as true : " My Spirit that is 
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy 
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of 
the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy 
seed's seed, from henceforth and for ever" (Isa. lix. 
21, and I John v. i6). 



IV. 
Ube IDiston of (Bo5. 

(i Samuel iii.) 

Oh ! give me Samuel's mind, 

A sweet, unmurmuring faith, 
Obedient and resigned 

To Thee in life and death ; 
That I may read with child-like eyes 
Truths that are hidden from the wise. 

— J. D. Burns. 

IT is very touching to notice the various references 
to the child Samuel as they recur during the 
progress of the narrative, especially those in 
which an evident contrast is intended between his 
gentle innocence and the wild licence of Eli's sons — 
it is like a peal of sweet bells ringing on amid the 
crash of a storm. 

Hannah said, "... I will bring him, that he may 
appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever." 
" And she . . . brought him unto the house of thte 
Lord in Shiloh ; and the child was young." " As long 
as he liveth he is lent to the Lord. And he worshipped 
the Lord there." " And the child did minister unto the 
Lord before Eli the Priest." " Now the sons of Eli 
were wicked men ; they knew not th'e Lord : . . . and 
the sin of the young men was very great before the 



38 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Lord, for men abhorred the offering of the Lord; 
but Samuel miniskred before the Lord, being a child." 
" Now Eli was very old, and he heard all that his sons 
did unto all Israel. . . Notwithstanding they heark- 
ened not unto the voice of their father, because the 
Lord would slay them. And the child Samuel grew 
on, and was in favour with the Lord, and also with 
men.'' " And there came a man of God unto Eli, and 
said unto him, . . . Wherefore kick ye at my sacri- 
fice and at mine offering? . . . And the child Samuel 
ministered unto the Lord before Eli." " And the Lord 
said. Behold, I will do a thing in Israel, at which both 
the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle. . . 
And Samuel grew, and the Lord was iitfith him, and did 
let none of his words fall to the ground; and all Israel 
from Dan even to Bccr-sheba knew that Samuel was 
established to be a propltet of the Lord." " The Lord 
revealed Himself to Samuel in Shiloh, by the word 
of the Lord, and the word of Samuel came to all Israel." 

His life seems to have been one unbroken record of 
blameless purity, integrity, and righteousness. One 
purpose ran through all his years, threading them to- 
gether in an unbroken series. There were no gaps 
nor breaks; no lapses into sensuality or selfishness; no 
lawless deeds in that wild, lawless age. Towards the 
end of a long life he was able to appeal to the verdict 
of the people in memorable wwds, which attested his 
consciousness of unsullied rectitude: " I am old and 



THE VISION OF GOD. 39 

gray-headed, . . . and / have walked before you from 
my youth unto this day. Here I am; witness against 
me before the Lord and before his anointed: whose 
ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom 
have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of 
whose hand have I received any bribe? " And they 
said, " Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, 
neither hast thou taken aught of any man's hand." 

It was a beautiful Hfe — strong in its facuUy of ad- 
ministration, wise in steering the nation from the rule 
of the judges into the royal state of the kings, un- 
impeachably just, but blamelessly pure, towering 
above his contemporaries like a peak of glistening 
chrysolite, on which the sunlight plays, while all the 
valleys beneath are wrapped in scudding clouds and 
sweeping rain. 

Samuel was not a prophet in the sense of foretelling 
the long future, and was not possessed of Isaiah's 
genius and eloquence; his only contribution to his 
age was a saintly character, which reminds us of that 
of James, the brother of our Lord, whose pure white 
robe was emblematic of his spotless character. 
Samuel was the James of the Old Testament; and it 
was by the saintliness, the moral grandeur of his char- 
acter, that he arrested the ruin of his people. 

We too may be called to face an era of change ; our 
eyes may have to witness the passing of the old and 
the coming of the new ; it may be that in our time also 
the Lord will shake once more, not earth only, but 



40 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

h'eaven, that the things which cannot be shaken may 
remain; in our time also ancient landmarks may be 
removed, as familiar and sacred as the tabernacle of 
Shiloh, and the Ark of the Covenant to Israel; but 
there is one property within our reach which need 
never pass away, which shall remain unimpaired and 
radiant through the years — and that is an lunblemished 
character, a soul stainlessly arrayed, and the holy life 
in which these shall be embodied. " Let thy work ap- 
pear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their chil- 
dren, and let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon 
us, and establish Thou the work of our hands upon 
us ; yea, the work of our hands, establish Thou it." 

The noblest gift that any of us can make to our 
fatherland or age is an undefiled character and a stain- 
less life. Let us live our best in the power of the 
Spirit of God, and prove that the God of Pentecost is 
living still. 

I. The Transition of a Young Soul. — For 
Samuel, however, a great change was necessary and 
imminent. Up to this moment he had lived largely 
in the energy and motive-power of his mother's in- 
tense, religious life. It was needful that he should 

EXCHANGE THE TRADITIONAL FOR THE EXPERI- 
MENTAL. His faith must rest, not on the assertions 
of another's testimony, but because for himself he 
had seen, and tasted, and handled the Word of Life. 
Not ^t s?cond-hand, but at first, the Word of th^ 



THE riSION OF GOD. 41 

Lord must come to him, and be passed on to all Israel. 
Probably this change comes to everyone who de- 
sires and seeks after the best and richest life. You 
may be the child of a pious home, where from boy- 
hood or girlhood you were trained in the traditions of 
Evangelical religion, you were expected to pray and 
to serve God, you have been borne along by a blessed 
momentum; but suppose for a minute that that mo- 
mentum should fail 3'ou, have you come to apprehend 
Christ as a living Reality for yourself? It may be that 
God, out of mercy to you, will break up and destroy 
the traditions and forms on which you have been rely- 
ing; that the eternal and divine may stand forth ap- 
parent to your spiritual apprehension, and be appre- 
hended by yourself for yourself, as though they were 
meant for you alone. It is a great hour in the history 
of the soul when the traditional, to whicli it has be- 
come habituated b\' long wont and use, is suddenly 
exchanged for the open vision of God; when we say 
with Job, " I have heard of Thee with the hearing of 
the ear, but now mine eye seeth Thee "; when we say 
with the apostle, " Leaving the things that are behind, 
and reaching forth to those that are before, I press 
toward the mark." 

Will you believe then that God may be coming very 
near you, and is about to reveal Himself to you in the 
Lord Jesus, as not unto the world? He is about to 
transform your life, and lift it to an altogether new 
kvel, so that though you may have to face th? old 



42 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

circumstances, it shall be from a higher standpoint, 
as the spiral staircase is always returning to the same 
view-point, though always at the elevaition of some 
few additional feet. 

II. The Vision of the Young Eyes. — (i) When 
God came near his young servant, it seemed as though 
He placed his seal upon his faithfulness. Hitherto but 
small services had been required of him. To close 
and open the doors of the Tabernacle; to light the 
seven-branched candlestick in the late afternoon, and 
supply it with pure olive oil every morning; to render 
little services to the aged priest, whether by dlay or 
night — such were the duties assigned to him and per- 
formed with punttilious care. It was meet that he 
who had shown himself faithful in a very little should 
have a larger and wider sphere assigned to him. 

(2) The vision came as night was beginning to yield 
to dawn; but " the lamp had not yet gone out in the 
temple of the Lord, where the ai-k of God was." 
Thrice the boy was startled from his innocent slum- 
bers on his little bed in the chamber he occupied ad- 
jacent to the sacred building. He heard his name 
called softly, tenderly, lovingly, and made sure that 
Eli needed him, and thrice sped across the intervening 
space to report himself. Once, and again, and yet 
again, he ran unto Eli, and said, " Here am I, for thou 
calledst me." 

When God approaches us to reveal his Son in us. 



THE VISION OF GOD. 43 

the tendency is always to speed with all haste to some 
place, or some spiritual adviser, where we suppose 
that the interpretation of the vision Avill be given. 
Young converts, for instance, are apt to say, " If only 
I could have my questions answered by such a man 
of God, I am sure I should get blessing." And thus 
they are kept in constant perturbation, nmning back- 
wards and forwards, repeating Samuel's vain experi- 
ence — running to Eli and saying, " Surely you called 
me, and can interpret for me the vision and the voice." 

(3) Eli was very tvise in his treatment of the lad. He 
might have posed as the sole depository of the Divine 
secrets, might have warned the lad against listening to 
vain delusions, might have given way to ungoverned 
jealousy and suspicion, might have stood on the dig- 
nity and pride of office. But instead of any of these, 
without the slightest trace of hurt pride, he took the 
boy's hand in his, and, so to speak, led him into the 
Divine Presence, knowing full well that the seals of 
sacred office, which had been taken from himself, were 
about to be laid on those youthful palms. 

If Eli had inherited the traditions of the priesthood 
merely, he would stand between that young soul and 
God, hearing its confession, wielding over it a terror- 
ising influence, and directing it, as in the place of 
God. Instead of this, however, the old man said 
sweetly, " Go and lie down again, and it shall be when 
He shall call thee, that thou shalt say, ' Speak, Lord, 
for thy servant heareth.' " 



44 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

It is not the business of the Christian minister to 
lord it over the eager and aroused disciple, to demanid 
confession, or offer absolution, but to say in efifect: 
" Thou needest more than we can give. God, and 
God only, can sufifice thee. Go, and lie down again. 
Be quiet. Let thy soul be still before God. 'Wait, 
for He will assuredly come again. 'And it shall be, if 
He call thee, that thou shall say, ' Speak, Lord, for 
thy servant heareth.' " 

As Thomas a Kempis puts it, " ' Speak, Lx>rd, for 
Thy servant heareth.' 

" Let not Moses speak unto me, nor any of the 
prophets, but rather do Thou speak, O Lord God, the 
Inspirer and Enlightener of all the prophets ; for Thou 
alone without them canst perfectly instruct me, but 
they without Thee can profit nothing. 

" Speak Thou unto me, to the comfort, however im- 
perfect, of my soul, and to the amendment of my 
whole life, and to Thy praise, and glory, and honour 
everlasting." 

(4) The message entrusted to the lad was a very ter- 
rible one. We cannot wonder that he feared to show 
Eli the vision. With a beautiful modesty and reticence 
he set about the duties of the day, and opened, as 
usual, the doors of the house of the Lord. It was not 
for him to blurt out the full thunder which had burst 
on him. This was another lovely trait in the boy's 
character. But he had misread Eli's character; he 
did not realise that men like him will die, but not mur- 



THE VISION OF GOD. 45 

niur — will resign themselves without a word of ex- 
postulation or defence, determined to know the worst, 
and when they know it, meekly answering, " It is the 
Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good." 

(5) // is znvU to notice that the Lord revealed Himself 
to Samuel hi Shiloh by the Word of tlie Lord. Let us 
not seek for revelations through dreams or visions, but 
by the Word of God. Nothing is more harmful than 
to contract the habit of listening for voices, and sleep- 
ing to dream. All manner of vagaries come in by 
that door. It is best to take in hand and read the 
Scriptures reverently, carefully, thoughtfully, crying, 
" Speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth." And in re- 
sponse there will come one clear, defined, and repeated 
message, asseverated and accentuated with growing 
distinctness from every part of the inspired volume. 
" Tliis is the way — walk in it; this is my will — 'do it; 
this is my word — speak it." Let us heax what God' 
the Lord shall speak. 



V. 

/IlJisfortune on /IDistortune. 

(i Samuel iv., v., vi.) 

Oh, the outward hath gone! but in glory and powec 
The Spirit surviveth the tilings of an hour; 
Unchanged, undecaying, its Pentecost flame 
On the heart's secret altar is burning the same. 

— Whittiee. 

THE scanty records of these chapters (iv. i-vii. 
7) bridge over a considerable tract of Scrip- 
ture, covering, perhaps, forty years. The de- 
tails of Samuel's life and growing influence given by 
the sacred historian during that period are very frag- 
mentary. But the narrative of events is interesting, 
and must be understood by those who would have a 
right conception of the great service that Samuel ren- 
dered to his people. It will appear, also, that there is 
a remarkable parallel, not only between those days of 
anarchy and our own, but between the work he did 
and the w^ork that is needed as urgently in the present 
day. 

It was an age of disunion and anarchy. After the 
deaths of Joshua, Caleb, and of all thait generation, 
" there arose another generation after them, which 
knew not the Lord, nor yet the work which Fie had 
wrought for Israel "... (Judges ii. 10), There was 

46 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 



47 



no man, and no tribe, able to unite the people under 
one leadership, or recall them to the lofty monotheism 
— the worship of the one Jehovah — which character- 
ised the founder of their commonwealth. Tlie bonds 
of their national unity were loosened, each tribe and 
each great city asserted its independence of all the 
rest, the heart of the national life beat feebly, and, to 
quote again the expressive phrase which so completely 
represents the age of the judges, " Every man did that 
was right in his own eyes." 

The only common centre was afiforded by the Taber- 
nacle, the Ark, and the High Priesthood ; but even the 
influence of these had becoime greatly reduceid, as 
" the children of Israel forsook Jehovah, the God of 
their fathers, which brought them up out of the land 
of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the 
peoples that were round about them, and bowed them- 
selves down unto them." 

There was, therefore, nothing to hinder the steady 
encroachments of the neighbouring nations. Now it 
was the children of Ammon on the east, then the 
Amalekites and Midianites from the desert, and again 
the Philistines on the southwest, that broke in on the 
land of Promise. From time to time judges were 
raised up, but their authority was only temporary and 
limited. For the most part it ceased with fheir death, 
and was the means of delivering only a settion of the 
land. " When the Lord raised them up judges, then 
the Lord was with the judge, and saved them out of 



48 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge . . . 
but it came to pass, when the judge was d'eald, that 
they turned back, and dealt more corruptly than their 
fathers " (Judges ii. i8, 19). 

Our story is specially connected with the southern 
and midland districts of Canaan, which, notwithstand- 
ing Samson's herioc exploits — for he was contempo- 
rary with Samuel's early years — lay under the tyran- 
nous yoke of the Philistines, who seem about this time 
to have been largely reinforced from the original seat 
of their empire in the neighbouring islanid of Crete, 
and to have made the position of the Hebrews almost 
intolerable. 

In these Philistines stealing up from their own ter- 
ritories and cities to dominate the Hebrews, in the 
land which God gave them for an heritage, a land to 
which the Philisitines could have no possible claim, but 
which was certainly the allcrtted jxjssession of the 
chosen people — I see the type of much which is al- 
ways taking place in our own experience. For in- 
stance, they stand for unholy desires and evil habits, 
from which we were once set free by the risen Son of 
God, but which, in subsequent years, may have come 
back to assert their former sway and tyranny. And 
again, they represent the inroads of worldliness into 
the Church, and of wickedness into the State. The 
forces of evil are never at rest. Just as the spirit of 
destruction and waste is perpetually at work in until- 
ing our roofs, stripping off our wall papers, pulling 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 49 

down our walls, and sowing our gard'cns with weeds 
whilst we sleep; so the evil tendencies in the heart, 
tlie Church, and the nation are ever warring against 
the law of the mind, and bringing men into captivity 
to the la/w of sin. 

In the insidious attempts to rob us of our Rest Day, 
and to turn it into one of public amusement; in the 
unblushing eflfrontery of vice in various forms; in the 
threatened domination of all other interests by the 
mad greed for money; in the spirit of amusement 
which infects society; in the worldliness and luxury 
which divide with the spiritual and heavenly the hearts 
and lives of professing Christians — we are brought 
face to face with the bands of the Philistines as they 
steal up from their lowlands to the uplands of religious 
constancy and strength. They have no rights, but 
they never fail to assert their pretensions; and some- 
times we almost lose heart, and begin to question 
whether there is any use in opposing them. 

Why this constant strife? Were it not better to 
yield the point in controversy, and to acquiesce? 

At other times, like the children of Israel, we are 
goaded to make one desperate eflfort for freedom. 

I. An Ill-fated Attempt. — " Now Israel went 
out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched be- 
side Ebenezer, and the Philistines pitched in Aphek " 
(" the Fortress," perhaps in the neighbourhood of 
Bethlehem). From these words we infer that the 



50 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

war was comm'enced by Israel throwing down the 
gage of battle, because the yoke of Philistia was too 
galling to be endured; but it is almost certain that 
from the first it was an ill-starred and badly managed 
campaign. 

Very distinct directions were issued by Moses as to 
the way in which a campaign should be commenced 
and conducted (Deut. xx.), but none of them seems 
to have been put in force on this occasion. No priest 
was called in to ask counsel of God, or bless the going 
forth of the Israelite hosts. Not even Samuel, in 
whom the people were beginning to recognise the 
servant and prophet of Jehovah, seems to have been 
consulted. It was the sudden flaming out of a spirit 
of hatred and revenge from a race of slaves who were 
stung to the quick by the taunts, the insults, and the 
scorpion-whips of their masters. 

Such has been the spirit in which we have some- 
times turned on the powerful sins which have asserted 
their mastery over us. We have seen the ruin to 
which they were bringing us, we have winced at the 
shame and indignation which they were causing to 
others, we have felt insulted and outraged in any lin- 
gering sense of honour and nobility that may have 
escaped the general wreck, and we have turned on 
our tormentors. We have signed the pledge against 
the use of intoxicants, we have taken a solemn oath 
never more to yield to our besetting sin, we have 
vowed that we will be free. But within a month we 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 51 

Have been back in the old state. It has not gone bet- 
ter with us than with Israel, for this battle is not to the 
strong, nor this race to the swift. 

It went hai-d with the Israelites. Their hosts, 
hastily summoned and insufficiently armed, suffered a 
heavy defeat. Four thousand men lay dead on the 
battlefield, and a spirit of intimidation and dismay 
spread through the entire host. Such will ever be the 
result when God's people leave Him out of account. 
Their education is so costly and necessary that He 
can afford to let them suffer, again and again, thiat an 
arrest may be put on courses that are not good. 

II. The Ark, but not God, to the Rescue. — On 
the evening of that disastrous day the elders of Israel 
held a council of war (v. 3). It was evident that their 
defeat must be attributed to some failure in their rela- 
tions with Jehovah. They said, " Wherefore hath the 
Lord smitten us to-day before the Philistines? " They 
were conscious that they had left Him out of their 
reckoning, and suddenly bethought themselves of a 
happy expedient by which they might almost compel 
Him to enter into the fray, and to take sides with 
them against their foes. " Let us fetch," they cried, 
" the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh, 
that it may come among us, and save us out of the 
hand of our enemies." 

They remembered the wonderful scenes in which 
that Ark had played a part; how the waters of the 



52 



SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 



Jordan had fled before it, and the walls of Jericho had 
fallen down. Its going forth, in the words of their 
great lawgiver, had always meant the scattering and 
flight of Jehovah's foes. Surely it would do the same 
again. They did not realise that God's very present 
help depended not on the presence of a material 
symbol, but on moral and spiritual conditions which 
they should have set themselves to understand and 
fulfil. It was much as though a high Sacramentarian 
should depend for deliverance from trial by wearing 
some amulet or charm, or even carrying a piece of the 
consecrated wafer in a golden casket upon his person, 
instead of exercising himself in mianly faith and 
prayer. 

The arrival of the Ark, in due course, borne by the 
Levites, and accompanied by the sons of Eli, as its 
custodians, was received with the exultant shouts of 
the entire host. Eli had evidently been most unwill- 
ing to allow it to leave the sacred enclosure — " his 
heart trembled for the Ark of God " — but he had 
yielded too often and too long to be able to sustain a 
successful protest; and probably no one else had any 
misgivings, for " when the Ark of the Covenant of the 
Lord came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a 
great shout, so that the earth rang again.' 

As soon as the Philistines, by mean's of their scouts, 
were acquainted with the cause of this exuberant out- 
burst, they were correspondingly depressed, for they, 
too, identified the presence of the God of Israel with 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 



53 



the advent of tlie Ark, which had always been asso- 
ciated in their minds with the hand of "these mighty 
gods that smote the Egyptians with plagues in the 
wilderness." Neither had they any idea of those 
moral considerations on which alone tlie co-operation 
of God could be given. " Woe unto us! " they cried, 
" for there hath not been such a thing heretofore. 
Woe unto us! Who shall deliver us?" 

It was necessary that a decisive answer shbuld be 
given to these materialistic conceptions of the He- 
brews and their foes. It must be demonstrated that 
the mere possession of the sj'mbol of the Covenant 
was valueless, so long as the strange gods and the 
Ashtaroth were tenaciously cherished, and the abomi- 
nations of the heathen were constantly and shame- 
lessly pursued (vii. 3, 4). Tlie asseveration of holy 
words, the quoting of venerable precedents, the re- 
liance on sacred emblems, are alike in vain, unless 
the heart is pure and the hands clean. " If I re- 
gard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear 
me." 

Tlie Philistines seem to have stirred themselves to 
deeds of desperate valour because they believed that 
they were to fight, not only against flesh and blood', 
but against the deities who had led Israel in one 
long succession of victories. They advanced to the 
conflict witli the words of their leaders ringing in their 
ears: "Be strong, and quit yourselves like men, O 
ye Philistines, thiat ye be not servants to the Hebrews, 



54 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

as they have been to you. Quit yourselves like men 
and fight " (see i Cor. xvi. 13). 

The issue of that terrible day was disastrous in the 
extreme. " Israel was smitten, and they fled every 
man to his tent, and there was a very great slaughter, 
for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen." 
Around the Ark the ground must have been heaped 
with corpses, as the Hebrews fought desperately in 
defence of the symbol of their faith; but in vain, for 
the Ark of God was taken, and the two sons of EH 
were slain. Thus had Samuel foretold, and thus it 
befell. 

That afternoon a Benjamite, with his clothes rent, 
and dust upon his head, bore the tidings to the ham- 
lets and villages that lay all along the ascending an'd 
open road to Shiloh, and, as he passed through eager 
and expectant groups, a wail arose that grew in 
volume as he sped onwards until it reached its climax 
in the City of the High Priest, the capital, so far as 
there was any, of the entire land. " When the man 
came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out." 
On the still evening air arose a piercing outburst of 
lamentation, for what was there to hinder the imme- 
diate march of the victorious army on the defenceless 
city, deprived in one day of its warriors, and appar- 
ently of its God! 

The old man, Eli, blind and anxious, had caused 
himself to be seated on his throne, facing on the main 
thoroughfare. He had a foreboding that bad news 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 55 

was in the air, and when the noise of the tumult 'arose, 
he anxiously inquired of the attendant priests and Le- 
vites, and, perhaps, of Samuel, waiting as usual to re- 
spond to his least appeal for help, " What meaneth 
the noise of this tumult? " At the same moment the 
messenger appears to have burst into the presence of 
the little group, telling Eli who he was, and in answer 
to the eager inquiry of the High Priest, " How went 
the matter, my son? " without warning or preface, and 
with no care to soften the asperity of the harsh words, 
he blurted out, with an ever-rising climax of dread 
awfulness : " Israel is fled before the Philistines, and 
there hath been also a great slaughter among the 
people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, 
are dead, and the Ark of God is taken." 

The old man received the tidings in silence. The 
three first shots hit him severely, but not mortally; 
but " when he made mention of the Ark of God, he 
fell from off his seat backward by the side of the gate, 
and his neck brake and he died." With her last gasp 
the wife of Phinehas gathered up the horror of the 
situation with the single word which she uttered as the 
name of her child, prematurely bom. It was sorrow 
indeed that she was a widow; sorrow that her father- 
in-law had died at the moment when he was needed 
so sorely; but sorrow most of all that the Ark was 
taken, for with it the glory had departed. True soul 
that she was, and worthy to be classed with Hannah 
in her loyal devotion to the name and house of God. 



56 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

But worse troubles still befell. In frantic haste the 
Israelites bore away the remnants of the sacred tent 
and its furniture, and concealed them. In subsequent 
years they were at Nob (i Sam. xxi. i). The removal 
of these precious relics was hardly effected before the 
Philistine invasion burst on the deserted city as an 
overflowing flood. " Go ye now," says Jeremiah, 
" in the Divine Name, into my place which was in 
Shiloh, where I caused my name to dwell at the first, 
and see what I did to it for the wickedhess of my 
people Israel " (Jer. vii. 12). And the further fate of 
the city, which for 300 years had been the centre of the 
national life and worship, may be guessed from the 
pathetic words of the Psalmist : 

He forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, 

The tent which He pitched among men; 

And delivered his strength into captivity 

And his glory into the adversary's hand. 

He gave his people over also unto the sword, 

And was wroth with his inheritance. 

Fire devoured their young men, 

And their maidens were not praised in the marriage song; 

Their priests fell by the sword. 

And their widows made no lamentation. 

(Psa. Ixxviii. 60, etc.). 

III. The Awful Name of God. — We need not 
concern ourselves, to any great length, with the most 
interesting adventures of the Ark, the sacred symbol 
of the worship of Jehovah. This part of the history 
more closely concerns the growing illumination of the 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 57 

surrounding nations as to the true nature of the Go'd 
of Israel. 

There was no other way in which the Spirit of God 
could inform the people of Philistia, as to his holi- 
ness and power, than that which He adopted in the 
present instance. They bore the Ark from the battle- 
field to the Temple of Dagon in exuberant triumph. 
It seemed as though they had not only triumphed over 
Israel, but over its tutelary deity, and that Dagon was 
superior to Jehovah. But it would have been a great 
disaster had they been allowed to cherish this idea in 
perpetuity. As in Egypt, centuries before, so now in 
Philistia, God must reveal his lonely and unapproach- 
able supremacy. He cannot give his glory to another, 
nor his praise to graven images, and therefore He 
suits Himself to the crude and materialistic concep- 
tions of these blinded idolaters, and meets them in 
their own sphere. They would not have been im- 
pressed by the message of a prophet. They would 
have scouted and stoned any who opposed the uni- 
versal, national adoration of Dagon; but they could 
not resist the conclusions forced on them when, on 
two following mornings, they found his image pros- 
trate before the emblem of Jehovah, and on the 
second otcasion the head and arms severed from the 
body, so that the only part which was left intact was 
the fish's tail with which the figure ended. That it 
might be made still clearer that this was no coinci- 
dence, but the act of God, and that He had a con- 



58 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

troversy with them, a terrible plague of " tumours " 
broke out on each successive city to which the ark 
was removed, and a visitation of destructive vermin 
on the country districts where it may have been de- 
posited. 

We must not suppose, of course, that God had no 
love towards these untutored souls ; but that there was 
no other way of convincing them of his real nature 
and prerogatives. The plagues of Egypt were or- 
dained, not only to punish the sins of pride and ob- 
stinacy, with which Pharaoh made himself strong 
against the Almighty, but that the Egyptians might 
be forced to recognise that He was the great God of 
Heaven, of whom now and again they caught a 
glimpse. Similarly, in this instance, the prostrated 
form of Dagon, the painful disease by which they 
were smitten, and the devastation of their crops, 
caused them to cry unto heaven (v. 12), as though 
they realised that they were being dealt with by a 
greater than Dagon, by the great Being who was su- 
perior to all local gods. In after-years the Hebrew 
psalmists and prophets heaped scorn on the gods of 
the heathen that were no gods, and magnified Je- 
hovah, who made the heavens; but the lesson took 
years to learn, and cost an infinite amount of pains 
and patience, before monotheism became the gener- 
ally admitted creed. 

The reverence with which the Philistines refer to 
the God of Israel indicates that new and lofty con- 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 59 

captions were beginning to take the place of the low 
and materialistic ones that had degraded Jehovah to 
the level of their own local deities. " Tlie cry of the 
city went up to heaven." " Ye shall give glory unto 
the God of Israel." " Take the ark of Jehovah." 

What a sublime revelation this is of the Divine 
methods with man! With an infinite longing He de- 
sires to win the allegiance and devotion of all men. 
The consummate and unapproachable revelation 
which He has made for this purpose is in the Son of 
his Love. " The only begotten of the Father, He 
hath declared Him." But of what use had it been to 
have spoken of his Son in those early days, when the 
hearts of men were darkened by the grossest concep- 
tions and basest morals? No! line must be on line, 
precept upon precept. The times of ignorance must 
be " winked at." The light must be tempered to the 
weak and diseased eyes. God must aidopt the lan- 
guage that could be understood by the children of 
men, whom He loved, just as in after days our Lord 
exposed his hands and side to the incredulous 
Thomas, condescending to a method of demonstra- 
tion which he could appreciate, and had himself sug- 
gested. If the Philistines could have understood 
Epistles like those of St. John, they would, without 
doubt, have been written for their learning and cor- 
rection, and communicated to them by some man of 
God ; but since they could not understand such means 
of instruction, they were reached by the overthrow 



6o SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

and shattering of their idol, the plagnes which ac- 
companied the progress of the Ark, and the direction 
taken by the milch kine, who, whilst lowing for their 
little ones, bore their sacred burden along the straight 
road which led them from their home towards Beth- 
shemesh. 

Similarly, the inhabitants of that frontier town had 
to learn by a stern lesson that God was a holy God, 
and that He could not permit them to manifest a 
wanton curiosity and irreverence in handling the 
sacred emblem of his presence. To pry into the Ark 
as they did, lifting its lid, and peering on its contents, 
was forbidden to the priests, and even the High Priest 
himself; how much more to them? It hW been dis- 
tinctly asserted, when the two sons of Aaron perished 
on the day of their inauguration to the priesthood, 
that God would be sanctified in all that came nigh 
Him, and before all the people He would be glorified 
(Lev. X. 3). 

The reverence d^ue to Him must be shown to the 
vessels of the sanctuary, which were carefully veiled 
by the priests before they were taken up for transpor- 
tation by the Levites (Num. i. 50, 51 ; iv. 5, 16-30). 
The swift retribution which followed on this act of 
irreverence extorted the reverent acknowledgment of 
the awful holiness of God, as the men of Beth- 
shemesh said, " Who is able to stand before this holy 
Lord God?" When, on the other hand, the Ark 
had been reverently borne to Kirjath-jearim, the city 



MISFORTUNE ON MISFORTUNE. 6i 

of the woods, some three miles' distance from the 
great valley of Beth-shemesh, on which the crops 
were goldening in the sun, and had been carefully 
entrusted to the custody of Abinadab and his son 
Eleazar, the blessing that befell his house was an in- 
dication of the tender love and pity of the Divine 
nature, who is willing to dwell with him that is of a 
humble and lowly heart, and that trembleth at his 
word. 

Oh, do not fear Jehovah with the dread of a craven 
heart, but with the loyal love and devotion of sons, 
and open your heart to receive not the Ark of the 
Covenant only, but Him whom God had set forth for 
a propitiation, and who is the propitiation for our 
sins, i. e., the mercy-seat which covers the Ark of the 
Covenant, sprinkled with blood, and exactly fitting 
and hiding the Tables of the Law beneath. 



VI. 
Ube Morft of IReconstruction. 

(i Samuel vii. 2.) 

Be still and strong, 
O Man, my Brother! hold thy sobbing breath, 
And keep thy soul's large window pure from wrong! 
That so, as life's appointment issueth. 
Thy vision may be clear to watch along 
The sunset consummation — lights of death! 

— E. B. Browning. 

WHILST the events described in the last 
chapter were in progress^ Samuel was giv- 
ing himself to the great and noble work of 
reconstruction. As soon as our flesh is lacerated, or 
our bones broken, Nature begins to pour out her 
reparative forces to renew the broken tissues, and so 
rebuild the ruined temple. As it is in physical life, so 
in spiritual there are always holy and gentle natures 
that are charged with the Divine work of bridging 
over the roaring torrent of revolution, and of rearing 
new continents of order from the weltering ocean 
waste by which the previous land had been engulfed. 
Blessed work, indeed, is this, like the work of the Al- 
mighty, who, when the earth was without form and 
void, began to build in the midst of her the habitable 
places for man's existence. 



THE WORK OF RECONSTRUCTION. 63 

To this Samuel devoted the twenty years that fol- 
lowed directly on the fatal field of Aphek. The Phil- 
istine invasion seems to have somewhat subsided from 
its first triumphant outburst, and to have retired from 
the occupancy of the interior portions of Israel. He 
was thus able to pursue his quiet and unobtrusive 
toils for his fatherland, free from the zealous super- 
vision and opposition to which, otherwise, he must 
have been subjected. 

He seems to have taken up his abode in Raniah, so 
intimately associated with his earliest days. Here 
were his headquarters, where young men gathered 
to him,, and were formed into the earliest of the 
schools of the prophets, and where also he married, 
and became the father of two sons. Their names are 
suggestive of their father's piety and walk with God, 
the name of the one being Joel — " Jehovah is God," 
and of the other Abiah — " Jehovah is my Father." 
Amid the general disturbance of the religious life in 
which he had been nurtured, with the Ark in one 
place and the remnants of the Tabernacle in another, 
with the discontinuance of the sacred rites and feasts, 
which had been so great an assistance to piety in for- 
mer years, Samuel nevertheless was able to walk with 
God, and to preserve a devout religious life. Prob- 
ably this is why God permits from time to time so 
great a shaking of tlie things that are made, that the 
things which cannot be shaken, the unseen and eter- 
nal, may be more clearly defined and more eagerly 



64 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

sought unto. In this present age, we have heard 
Him saying, " I will overturn, overturn, overturn " ; 
we have seen theories of inspiration rudely assailed, 
churches menaced with destruction, ancient creeds 
ruthlessly questioned ; but out of it all true religion is 
destined to emerge in undiminished lustre, as gold 
from the purifying furnace. In the meanwhile let us 
say with Samuel, Jehovah is God and Jehovah is my 
Father. Let us hold fast, above all, to the unchang- 
ing love of our Father, who loves us with a love with 
which there is nothing to compare in heaven or earth. 

Samuel knew that there were two objects which 
must be realised before Israel's sad condition could 
be remedied or the Divine ideal realised. First: The 
national unity must be recovered from the anarchy in 
which it had been overwhelmed. It was useless to think 
of holding the land against the inroads of the neigh- 
bouring people so long as each tribe was content with 
an isolated existence, repelling its own enemies for a 
time, but indifferent to the condition of its neighbours 
and of the country at large. Israel must be one, ani- 
mated by a common enthusiasm for its future inde- 
pendence and integrity. Let each tribe be proud of 
its idiosyncrasy, and fulfil its own distinctive mission; 
but let all be one in asserting the independence and 
glory of the chosen people. 

This is no less desirable in our own age. The divi- 
sions of the Church are her bane, and render her im- 
potent before her foes. Ephraim envies Judah, and' 



THE WORK OF RECONSTRUCTION. 65 

Judah vexes Ephraim; and their common enemies 
make profit out of their mutual recriminations and 
rivalries. It is a sad spectacle to witness the divi- 
sions between Christians in the face of a mocking 
world, and we shall never be able to make men be- 
lieve, till we have learned to magnify the points of 
agreement, and to bear with all those who love the 
Lord Jesus, and are united with Him as their living 
Head, though their method of stating the truth may 
differ widely from our own. 

Secoyidly: The evils that had eaten into the nation's 
heart must be put azvay. The people had forsaken the 
God of their fathers for the Phoenician and Philistine 
deities, whose images were worshipped in his stead. 
Shrines to Baal and Ashtaroth covered the land. 
Foul orgies of shameless impurity were everywhere 
rife. And it was evident that only a widespread re- 
vival of religion could save the people from rotting 
away before the very evils for which the ancient 
Canaanites had been destroyed. 

Samuel was pre-eminently a man of prayer. He is 
known on the subsequent page of Scripture as he that 
called on the Divine Name (i Sam. ix. 6, 7, 8, 9; Psa. 
xcix. 6; Jer. xv. i). In addition, he was a man of 
blameless reputation and life^in themselves eminent 
qualifications. It has been truly said that the special 
work of guiding, moderating, and softening the jar- 
ring counsels of men is the particular privilege of 
those who have grown up into natural strength from 



66 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

the early beginnings of purity and goodness ; of those 
who can humbly and thankfully look back through 
middle age, and youth, and childhood, with no sudden 
rent or breach to their pure and peaceful recollections 
— and such was certainly Samuel's happy lot. He 
was also a man of practical sagacity, and by his ap- 
peals wrought upon the national conscience; so that, 
as the result of his efforts, " it came to pass, while the 
Ark abode in Kirjath-jearim, that the time was long; 
for it was twenty years: and all the house of Israel 
lamented before the Lord." 

Notice those two phrases ; all the house of Israel — 
there is the restoration of the lost unity ; lamented be- 
fore the Lord — there is the national repentance, which 
was followed by a widespread reformation: "Then 
the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ash- 
taroth, and served the Lord only." Would that there 
might be a similar turning unto God in our own time 
and land! " Revive, O Lord, thy work in the midst 
of the years. In the midst of the years make known." 



VII. 

XLlic IDictors of jfaitb. 

(i Samuel vii. 1-14.) 

Oh bring us back once more 

The vanished days of yore, 
When the world with faith was filled! 

Bring back the fervid zeal, 

The hearts of fire and steel, 
The hands that believe and build. 

— Longfellow. 

AFTER twenty years of quiet and unobtrusive 
, toil, Samuel had led his people to desire both 
to feel and manifest the old unity, which had 
made them one before their enemies, and there was a 
distinct yearning after Jehovah. The sacred writer 
tells us that all the house of Israel " was drawn to- 
gether " after Jehovah (ver. 2, r. v. margin). In 
being drawn to God they were drawn towards each 
other, as the spokes of a wheel centre in the hub. If 
the Lord Jesus is the centre of our heart-life, we must 
inevitably be drawn into fellowship with all those to 
whom He is also first and best. 

In verses 3 and 4 we probably have the substance 
of innumerable exhortations which Samuel delivered 
to all the house of Israel. From end to end he trav- 
ersed the country, urging the people to return to 

67 



68 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Jehovah; to put away the false gods and Ashtaroth, 
and to direct their hearts to the God of their fathers 
and serve Him only. Wherever he could find a 
group of willing listeners, he poured forth his prayers 
and tears, his rugged denunciations of sin, and his 
fervent exhortations to a true repentance. Now he 
would stand upon the historic site of Jericho; then he 
might be found on the ancient heights of Carmel, 
Shiloh, Nob, or Hebron, witnessing to vast gaither- 
ings of deeply moved and repentant people; and 
finally, as the result of all that he had said, there was 
a great turning to God. On every hand idols were 
cast from their pedestals, and the vicious orgies were 
brought to an end in the groves and valleys. It was 
as though the spirit of spring were breathing over 
some wintry waste, and through the thawing snow the 
grass and flowers began to appear. Oh, that Samuels 
by the score might be raised up to induce the Church 
of God to put away what grieves Him, with the assur- 
ance that when she has arrayed herself in the beauti- 
ful garments of humility and purity, God will deliver 
her out of the hands of the Philistines. 

I. The Convocation at Mizpeh. — ^Tlie move- 
ment to which we have referred at last demanded a 
public demonstration, and Samuel sutnmoned all 
Israel to Mizpeh — ^which means zvatchtowcr, and is 
evidently a commanding summit that can still be 
identified in Central Palestine, rising some five hun- 



THE VICTORY OF FAITH. 69 

dred feet above the surrounding country, and nearly 
three thousand above the sea level. It is remarkable 
that on the summit of this hill, as at Shiloh and 
Kirjath-jearim, there is a level platform some five or 
six feet high, cut out of the rock, where doubtless 
some kind of building was erected to receive the 
sacred tent. 

The day was devoted to fasting, as the law en- 
joined on the great Day of Atonement. The people 
confessed their sins, afflicted their souls, and humbled 
themselves before Jehovah. In addition, a some- 
what novel rite was introduced. Water was brought 
from a neighbouring well, and solemnly poured out 
before the Lord, as afterwards at the Feast of Taber- 
nacles. Whenever that great festival had nearly run 
its course, as it was being celebrated in the Temple, 
it was the custom for the priests to go forth to the 
Spring of Siloam, accompanied by the Levite choir, 
and bring thence water in a golden vessel; this was 
poured out at the foot of the altar at the hour of the 
morning sacrifice, while all around the white-vestured 
choir chanted Isaiah's words, " With joy shall ye draw 
water out of the wells of salvation." Whether this 
scene in the life of Samuel was the origin of that 
solemn procession, it is impossible to say. Such 
may have been the case, though it is generally as- 
sumed that, as used in the Temple service, the pouring 
out of water was a memorial of the flowing of water 
from the smitten rock in the wilderness, and the type 



70 



SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 



of the pouring out of the Holy Spirit (John vii. 37- 

39)- 

The pouring forth of water may have implied that 
they poured forth from their full hearts floods of peni- 
tence and tears ; that they desired by the heaviness of 
their grief to wash their land free from the accumu- 
lated evil of the past years ; or that the people realised 
their utter helplessness, so that they were as water 
spilt on the ground, which could not be gathered up. 
But whatever it may have signified, it must have been 
a very striking spectacle, when Samuel, as the repre- 
sentative of his countrymen, brought the whole nation 
back to true loyal allegiance to the God of their 
fathers. It was a worthy act for his manhood's 
prime, and we are not surprised to learn that, as by a 
sudden outburst of acclamation, he was appointed 
judge (ver. 6). 

Oh, who shall induce the professing Church of God 
to put away the evil things by which her testimony is 
now impaired! Sometimes in buildings connected 
with the Church we hear of fancy-fairs, raffles, full- 
dress soirees, dances, theatricals, comic concerts, and 
many other such like things, which indicate the cor- 
ruption of the spiritual life as certainly as an army of 
fungi indicate the damp and unwholesome atmos- 
phere in which they thrive. What would not be the 
blessed result if the children of God would come to 
another Mizpeh and confess, as Israel did, " We have 
sinned against the Lord ! " 



THE VICTORY OF FAITH. 71 

TI. The Victory of Faith. — The tidings of this 
great convocation reached the Philistines, who looked 
upon it as an unmistakable sign of the returning spirit 
of national life, and " the lords of the Philistines went 
up against Israel " (ver. 7). From every part the 
contingents of a great army were assembled, and there 
was every reason to fear that the terrible experiences 
of Aphek would be renewed. A panic of fear spread 
through the multitudes of Israel. There appeiared 
but one hope: God must arise to his people's help, or 
they would be trampled as the leaves of autumn be- 
neath the heel of the conqueror. What could timid 
sheep do against wolves? What could unarmed 
peasants do against such soldiers? How could the 
national life, which was just reviving, after the dis- 
couragement and anarchy of years, withstand the on- 
set of these bitter foes ? " Cease not to cry unto the 
Lord our God for us," the people said to Samuel, 
" that He will save us out of the hand of the Philis- 
tines." 

Ah, soul! this is the only hope for thee. Thou hast 
been ground down beneath tyrant sins, which have 
held thee in subjection as the Philistines did Israel; 
thou hast groaned in the prison-house like another 
Samson shorn of his locks. There seems no help or 
hope of deliverance, because thy moral life is impaired 
by the commission of evils analogous to those which 
infected the Hebrew nation in the days of the Judges. 
Only put these away, and stand clear of them; in the 



72 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

name of God pour out all your self-confidence before 
the Cross where Jesus died, receive the forgiveness 
which is never withheld from the penitent and believ- 
ing soul; and then, however many be the obstacles, 
temptations, and sins that beset thee, know that the 
Lord will save thee out of the hand of thine enemies. 

If only the tempted and overwhelmed would bathe 
their souls in the purifying waters of the Word of 
God, and cultivate the spirit of unwavering prayer 
and faith, the Lord would fight for them, and they 
might hold their peace. 

When so far as we know them we have put away 
our sins, or at least are steadfastly resolved to be rid 
of them, we may count on an ungrieved Holy Spirit; 
and this always means the consciousness of our 
Saviour's presence, as our Deliverer from the power 
of the enemy. 

The power of Samuel's prayers was already known 
throughout the land, like those of John Knox in the 
days of Queen Mary. The people had come to be- 
lieve in them; they felt them to be the palladium of 
their liberties. If only Samuel would pray, they 
might count on deliverance. They knew that he had 
prayed; they now entreated that he would not cease. 

But Samuel did more than pray. He took a suck- 
ing lamb and offered it as a whole burnt-offering to 
the Lord, symbolising thus the desire of Israel to be 
wholly yielded to the Divine will. There must be 



THE VICTORY OF FAITH. 73 

consecration before there can be faith and deliverance. 
It is not enough simply to put away sin ; we must also 
give ourselves absolutely and entirely to God. There 
must be a wholeness in the offering, the yielding our- 
selves — spirit, soul, and body — ^to be whatever God 
would have us be. Failure in the walk always de- 
notes failure in the heart-life. If you are perpetually 
overcome by the Philistines, be sure that there is a 
flaw in your inner consecration. 

While the smoke of this offering was rising in the 
calm air, and the eyes of tens of thousands were fixed 
upon the figure of Samuel, who, as a prophet of the 
Lord, was within his rights in superseding the Leviti- 
cal priests in this solemn function, and while his pierc- 
ing cries for Divine help were rising to heaven, the 
Philistines drew near to battle against Israel. Can 
you not see them creeping up the mountain slopes, 
and encircling the defenceless crowd which had no 
might nor power to resist? But suddenly the voice 
of God answered the voice of the Prophet. " The 
Lord thundered with a great thunder (Hebrew, voice) 
on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited 
them." The sky was suddenly black with tempest, 
peal after peal rolled through the mountains, the 
heart of the foe was stricken with terror, and though 
Israel drew never a sword, the heathen turned in dis- 
may to flee. Then at a signal from Samuel, the men 
of Israel flung themselves upon the flying foe. Down 
the steep they sped, catching up the arms which were 



74 



SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 



cast away in flight, and stripping the dead of their 
weapons. Josephus tells of another circumstance 
that added to the horrors of that irresistible onslaught. 
" God destroyed their ranks with an earthquake; the 
ground trembled under their feet, so that there was 
no place whereon to stand in safety. They either fell 
helpless to the earth, or into some of the chasms that 
opened beneath them." 

The pursuit only stayed when the Philistines came 
beneath the shadow of their own fortress of Bethcar, 
the Well of the Vineyards as it is now called. 

This is the great message of the whole story for us. 
If only the Church of God would put away the evils 
that grieve his Holy Spirit, if only we would ourselves 
come out and be separate, not touching the unclean 
thing, and cleansing ourselves from all filthiness of 
the flesh, the Spirit would interpose for us too. The 
Lord would deliver us, fighting on our behalf against 
our foes, so that we should be more than conquerors 
through Him that loveth us and have to do nothing 
more than take the spoil. 

HI. The Stone of Help. — " Then Samuel took 
a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and 
called it Ebenezer (the stone of help) saying, 
Hitherto hath the Lord helped us." This was the 
same spot upon which Israel had suffered the great 
defeat which led to the capture of the Ark (iv. i). 
How wonderful this was, that the story of the victory 



THE VICTORY OF FAITH. 75 

should be told upon the plain which had been the 
scene of defeat! Does not this carry sweet encour- 
agement? 'Is it not true that when we turn to God, 
the disgrace of our failure is blotted out in the glory 
of our deliverance, so that we talk no more of our 
sins and their fatal consequences, but only of God and 
his almighty succour? Yes, child of God, be sure 
that the place of defeat may become that of victory, 
sublime and glorious so as to iill thine heart with 
adoring rapture, and heaven with consenting praise. 
Think how, in the generations that succeeded, fathers 
brought their childi'en to look at that great stone, and 
read the inscription, " Hitherto hath the Lord helped 
us," arguing from it that what He had done He would 
do; that the forgiveness and grace which He had 
shown upon that site would be renewed and repeated 
in all after years. 

From that moment Samuel's supremacy in the 
country was established. The Philistines came no 
more during his judgeship within the border of Israel. 
The hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all 
his days. The alienated cities which the Philistines 
had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from 
Ekron even unto Gath. The very A'morites, who had 
taken part with the Canaanites, found it to their ad- 
vantage to side with Samuel, and abstain from hostili- 
ties (ver. 14). As Dean Spence, in " Ellicott's Com- 
mentary," says: "Tliis success at Ebenezer was no 
miere solitary victory, but was the sign of a new spirit 



76 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

in Israel, which animated the nation during the life- 
time of Samuel, and the reigns of David and Solomon 
and of the great Hebrew kings. The petty jealousies 
had disappeared, and had given place to a great 
national desire for unity. The old idol worship of 
Canaan, which degraded every nationality which 
practised it, was in a great measure swept away from 
among the chosen people, while the pure religion of 
the Lord of Hosts was established, not only through 
the care and guardianship of the tribe of Levi, but by 
the new order of the Prophets." 

What cannot prayer do? It can not only open and 
close heaven, but will give the soul that prays an un- 
disputed supremacy over his times, so that men will 
acknowledge that the saviour of the city is not so 
much the politician, the man of intellect, or the man 
of affairs, but he who has learned how to walk with 
God, and by his character and intercession to be the 
palladium of the national liberties and existence. 



VIII. 

xrbe Stone of ibelp. 

(i Samuel vii. 12.) 

And in the strength of this I rode, 
Shattering all evil customs everywhere. 
And past thro' Pagan realms, and made them mine, 
And clash'd with Pagan hordes, and bore them down, 
And broke thro' all, and in the strength of this 
Came Victor. 

— Tennyson. 

THERE are many such monoliths as the " Stone 
of Help " to be found strewn through these 
northern lands, from such venerable circles as 
those of Stonehenge to the single ones v*rhich are 
pointed out to the traveller in Northern Wales — the 
last home of the Druids and cmcient Britons. 

Throughout the world man has endeavoured to 
associate himself, and the history of his life, with the 
permanent monuments of nature. In this he has ap- 
proved alike his littleness and his greatness — his 
littleness, because every such endeavour is a confes- 
sion on his part of the transience of his days, and his 
consciousness that he has so slight a hold on the 
earth, on which he is but a sojourner and a pilgrim; 
his greatness, because he is capable of investing with a 
halo of undying interest wild glens and barren rocks, 



78 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

darksome caves and deep, rushing rivers. It is for 
this reason that every spot in the older countries of 
the world teems with interest. It is with difficulty 
that the tourist can make his way through England or 
Scotland, Germany or Italy; whereas he will haste, 
without hesitation or halting, through thousands of 
miles of Canada or the Western States. H'ow differ- 
ent, for instance, is the interest of travelling through 
the New England States, or through Dakota and 
Wisconsin. Each square mile of the one is fragrant 
with some interesting reminiscence of the past, whilst 
the other only recalls a vanished race. 

At the foot of this stone let us linger for a little, to 
learn one or two lessons more. For stones have ears 
and voices. Joshua said that the stone which he 
reared, at the end of his life-work, had heard; and our 
Lord said that the stones around Him might be ex- 
pected to cry out (Josh. xxiv. 26; Luke xix. 40). 

I. Its Site. — It stood on ground which had wit- 
nessed a terrible defeat and disaster. We are told in 
the fourth chapter that the great battle of Aphek was 
fought on this spot. " Israel went out against the 
Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer, 
and the Philistines pitched in Aphek." " Now the 
Philistines had taken the ark of God, and they 
brought it from Ebenezer unto Ashdod " (iv. i ; 

V.I). 

Many who gathered around Samuel when he raised 



THE STONE OP HELP. 



79 



and named this stone must have been present twenty 
years before on that fatal field, the Flodden of Israel's 
glory. Here the fight had been fiercest, the slain 
thickest; there the corpses of Hebrews and Philistines 
had fallen like leaves in Vallombrosa, trampled be- 
neath the feet of the combatants; yonder the fight 
had raged around the Ark of God, as it was taken, 
and retaken, and taken again. At this point, des- 
perate deeds of valour had been done to turn back 
Israel from a shameful flight, but in vain. There 
Hophni fell, and there Phinehas. In this place a brief 
stand was made, but again the ill-formed line was 
broken, and the children of a chosen race, whose fore- 
fathers turned not back in the day of Gideon and 
Jephthah, fled like sheep before the wolf. 

But, notwithstanding all this, and though the spot 
was associated with the memories of disgrace and 
shame, which in turn were the result of deep trans- 
gression on the part of people and priesthood, yet 
there was the stone erected which spoke so eloquently 
of the Divine help. 

What living encouragement is contained in this for 
us all! We, too, may be traversing at this very hour 
battlefields which have been sadly marked by defeat. 
Again and again we have met the foes of our peace 
in mortal conflict, only to be repulsed. Our hopes 
have been dashed to the ground and our banners 
rolled in dust and blood. We meant never to yield 
again, but we did yield. We meant that that solemn 



8o SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

vow should be kept, that holy resolution carried into 
effect; but they were shivered in pieces. We have 
been overthrown by our adversary, and overpowered 
in spite of all our efforts by our besetting sin. Yet 
take heart. At the very place where you have fallen 
you shall stand, for " God is able to make you stand " ; 
where you have been overthrown you shall be more 
than a conqueror. You shall tread these very fields 
with songs of joy. The rocks which saw the with- 
ered leaves of autumn swirl in eddies around you shall 
behold the young green of spring and the mature ful- 
ness of summer. Be of good cheer! The stone of 
Ebenezer shall be raised on the very field of the fatal 
battle of Aphek. 

II. Its Retrospect. — What a story this stone had 
to tell, if all were unfolded, of the wonderful dealings 
of God with his people. It looked back on the twenty 
years of patient work, by which the Prophet Samuel 
had been leading the people homeward to the God of 
their fathers — quiet, unobtrusive, and unseen work, 
like that of the coral insects from the bottom of the 
mighty ocean, till presently the islet emerges, with its 
crown of fronded palms. 

It looked back on many a scene of iconoclasm as, 
from Dan to Beer-sheba, there had been a general put- 
ting away of the Baalim and Ashtaroth, the cutting 
down of groves, and overthrow of altars. It looked 
back on that memorable convocation of all Israel at 



THE STONE OF HELP. 8i 

Mizpeh, when water was poured out before the Lord, 
in confession of sin and humble penitence. 

It looked back, specially, to the ofifering of the 
burnt-offering, which declared Israel's resolve to be 
henceforth wholly devoted to God, and to Samuel's 
piercing cry of intercession. Above all, it looked 
back on that memorable moment, when, as the Phil- 
istines drew near to battle against Israel, " the Lord 
thundered with a great thunder upon the Philistines, 
and discomfited them, and they were smitten down 
before Israel." If that stone had engraved slabs of 
memory within its old heart, as well as eyes and ears, 
it surely never would forget the miad onslaught of the 
men of Israel on their fleeing and panic-stricken foes, 
to avenge in one brief hour the wrongs and oppres- 
sions of twenty long years. 

Has anything like this taken place in your life? 
On your answer much will depend. If since your last 
failure and defeat there have been no acts of the soul, 
like those which took place at Mizpeh, believe me, 
there is no probability of there being any break in the 
long mcmotony of your reverses. As you have been 
defeated, so you will be defeated; as you have failed, 
so you will fail, unless there is the pouring out of your 
heart before God, the putting away of idols, and the 
resolve to follow Him fully. 

If I may be permitted to quote my own experience, 
I must bear witness to the incessant failiu-e of my life, 
so long as I cherished things in my heart which were 



82 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

alien to God's holy will. Rules for holy living, 
solemn and heart-stirring conventions, helpful books 
and addresses produced but very small result. There 
was temporary amendment, but little else. But when 
the scene at Mizpeh had been reflected in the inner 
mirror of the soul, then victory took place on the 
very spot marked by defeat. Let my reader ponder 
this. You cannot keep the nioth out of your house, 
so long as one old blanket, stored in some neglected 
cupboard or box, is full of it. You cannot keep diph- 
theria from your home, so long as one crack in the 
drains is emitting the poison of sewer-gas. You will 
never raise your stone of Ebenezer until you have 
stood on the watchtower of Mizpeh and put away all 
known sin, all complicity with what is grievous in the 
eyes of Christ. Only so will even his keeping power 
avail. 

You say that you cannot. The evil thing clings to 
you as the serpent folds around Laocoon and his sons. 
The deadly creeper has wound itself around the tree 
of your life, and threatens to crush it to death in its 
deadly embrace. How can you rid yourself of that 
which has so strong a fascination that you feel you 
cannot live apart from it? Ah, that is the point where 
the Great Physician is willing to interpose for your 
rescue and deliverance! What you cannot do for 
yourself. He will do. The only question is, Are you 
willing? or Are you willing to be made willing? Often 
enough in the history of the soul it happens that the 



THE STONE OF HELP. 83 

will, like a tough piece of iron, resists and resents. 
Then there is one glad resource — take it to Christ, 
tell Him that you cannot be as you would, or that you 
will not be as you should, and pray Him to undertake 
your difficult and almost desperate case. 

Do not doubt the result. He takes what we give 
at the moment of our giving it; and when once He 
has taken it, we may press to our heart the consola- 
tion which the good Naomi gave to Ruth in a mem- 
orable moment of her life: " Sit still, my daughter . . . 
for the man will not rest until he have finished the 
thing this day." 

HI. Its Inscription. — " Hitherto hath the Lord 
helped us." Surely if the stone had a retrospect, as 
we have seen, it had also a prospect. It looked for- 
ward as well as backward. It seemed to say, As God 
has helped, so He will help. It would have been im- 
possible to secure such results as those twenty years 
had witnessed, culminating in this glorious victory, 
unless He had been a very present help ; and could He 
have done so much without being prepared to finish 
what He had commenced? Would He have begun 
to build without calculating on his ability to finish? 
Would He have entered on a campaign without 
counting the cost of carrying it to a conclusion? 

As we go through life, let us be careful to erect our 
Ebenezer stones, so that when new responsibilities be- 
gin to crowd on us, or fresh and unforeseen difficul- 



84 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

ties threaten, we may be emboldened to sing with 

Newton : 

" His love in time past forbids me to think 
He'll leave me at last in trouble to sink, 
Each sweet Ebeuexer I have in review 
Confirms his good pleasure to help me quite through." 

All through life, if you will only trust God, if only 
by faith you will derive from Him grace for grace, if 
only you will claim a continuance and a crowning of 
all that He has begun, you will have occasions to 
raise these stones of help and to say with the Aix)stle, 
" Having, therefore, obtained the help that is from 
God, I stand unto this day testifying both to small 
and great." 'The last stone that we shall erect will 
be on the margin of the river. As we turn our back 
for ever on the land of our pilgrimage, and enter on 
the work and worship of eternity, we shall set up a 
great stone to the glory of our God, saying once 
more, with a deep sigh of perfected satisfaction, 
" Hitherto hath the Lord helped." 



IX. 
a ©reat Disappointment. 

(i Samuel vii.-viii.) 

They who have steeped their souls in Prayer 
Can every anguish calmly bear — 
They who have learnt to pray aright 
From pain's dark well draw up delight. 

— Houghton. 

THE supreme test of character is disappoint- 
ment and apparent failure. When the flow- 
ing stream is with us, and our plans are 
ripening into fruition, it is easy enough to be at our 
best. But what we really are does not appear under 
such conditions. Let the tide turn against us, let 
men avert their faces and refuse our counsels, let us 
be driven to stand on the defence against a world in 
arms — then our true metal is approved. We are now 
to see how Samuel bore himself in the face of a keen 
disappointment. This at least may be said of him, as 
of old it was said of Job, that he still held fast his 
integrity. 

I. How THE Disappointment Befell. — During 
the twenty years that followed the glorious victory of 
Aphek, Samuel set himself to build up in the hearts of 
his fellow-countrymen something of that profound 

8s 



S6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

belief in the Reign of the Divine King which we 
know as the Theocracy, and which was so dear to all 
devout Hebrews. 

His headquarters and home were at Ramah, the 
scene of his happy childhood's years. Thence he 
went on itinerating journeys, and wherever he came, 
Samuel strove to act only as the representative and agent 
of the Divine King. Who was he but the messenger 
and minister of the Lord of hosts? With all the force 
of his character and eloquence of his speech he in- 
sisted that the people were the subjects of Jehovah, 
owing allegiance to Him alone, and receiving from 
Him direction in times of perplexity, and deliverance 
in days of battle. They needed no king — ^Jehovah 
was King; no officials, but those who uttered his 
messages; no code of laws, but those that emanated 
from Him. It was a beautiful and inspiring concep- 
tion; and as he went to and fro throughout the land 
of Israel, still upon his lips, like a musical refrain, the 
words were constantly being breathed, " Speak, Lord, 
for thy servant heareth.'' 

The same object was in his mind as he instituted the 
schools of the prophets. To Samuel's wise interpreta- 
tion of his times we must attribute the institution of 
these seats of learning. The priesthood had forfeited 
its right to stand between Jehovah and his people. 
Eli and his sons had failed too abjectly and entirely 
to realise the purpose for which their office was insti- 
tuted, to encourage the hope of the resuscitation of the 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 87 

priestly order. It was clear that some other religious 
body must be called into existence. The times de- 
manded an order of men who should be trained in the 
law of God, who should be fitted to interpret the holy 
oracles to the people, and from the midst of whom 
men should arise from time to time to tell in the light 
what they had heard in the darkness, to proclaim on 
the housetops what God had whispered to their ears 
in secret. We find these schools flourishing in the 
days of Elijah and Elisha — some apparently on the 
same sites, where they had been instituted by Samuel 
(x. 3> 4. 5; xix. 23, 24; 2 Kings ii.). 

As Samuel laboriously built up these institutions, 
he had but one purpose in his heart. It was his 
eager desire to imbue the minds of his countrymen 
with his own sublime conceptions of the Divine King- 
ship; and how would he do it better than by these 
young and ardent disciples? And it must have been 
a constant inspiration to them to live in contact with 
this great and illustrious man, who was statesman and 
saint in one, whom they revered for the loftiness of 
his character, whilst they felt the inspiration of his 
high ideals. They saw how respected he was in his 
own city, by young and old (ix. 12, 13); how accessi- 
ble he was to all who needed his assistance (v. 9); 
how mightily he wrestled and prevailed in prayer 
(vii. 17; viii. 10, 21, 27); and they counted it their 
highest honour to be associated with him in the re- 
generation of their national life. 



88 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

But the failure to realise his high purpose seems to 
have befallen through the failure of his sons. As 
Samuel became old, he was less able to administer 
justice, and continue to act as the adviser of his people 
in their national and domestic affairs. The burden 
of administering the government, in the name of the 
unseen King, became too heavy for him, and he ap- 
pointed his sons to assist him on the extreme fron- 
tiers of the South country. The experiment of dele- 
gating to them a part of his authority proved, how- 
ever, to be a disastrous failure. " Tliey walked not 
in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took 
bribes, and perverted judgment." 

This precipitated the catastrophe; and "all the 
elders of Israel," who evidently formed a kind of 
representative and popular assembly, came to Samuel 
at Ramah, to urge that he should make more satis- 
factory and permanent arrangements for the peq^etu- 
ation of his authority. " They said unto him. Behold 
thou art old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways; 
now make us a king to judge us like all the 
nations." 

Looked at from the human standpoint, there was 
much to warrant the request. Tlie Philistines were 
pushing their outposts into the heart of the country 
(xiii. 3, 5); Nahash, the Ammonite, wjis a dangerous 
neighbour on the Eastern frontier (xi. i); there was 
fear that disintegration might again separate the 
people on Samuel's death. But, on the other hand, 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 89 

the request shattered the prophet's hopes, ilt showed 
him that his ideal was too lofty and spiritual for the 
people to appreciate and maintain. They could not 
believe only in the invisible; they must have the out- 
ward symbols and splendour of royalty. 

This is the universal failure of the heart of man. 
It is always craving for the sensuous and visible. 
Like the children of Israel, with their cry, " Make us 
gods, which may go before us," men demand some- 
thing which they may see and handle, and before 
which they may prostrate themselves. Hence all 
spiritual worship shows a tendency to become ma- 
terialistic. It is hard to believe that God is a Spirit, 
and that He must be worshipped in spirit and in truth ; 
it is easier to enter into the debate, whether " in 
this mountain or in Jerusalem men ought to 
worship." 

These paragraphs are being written in a land where 
this fact is strikingly illustrated. The national 
Church was the earliest product of apostolic days — 
the Church of Athanasius, Cyril, and Chrysostom. 
From the first it recited the prayers and read the 
Scriptures in the tongue of the people, eschewed 
images, and insisted on spiritual worship. Yet now 
its churches are full of the pictures of the saints, be- 
fore which women burn candles and men cross them- 
selves; the Holy of Holies is shut off from the com- 
mon foot by golden gates; the deep bass of the reader 
mingles with the exquisite voices of boys in render- 



go SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

ing the service in an almost unknown tongue — every- 
thing that can appeal to the sense is called into requi- 
sition. Apparently the people love to have it so, for 
they stand in dense crowds on the spacious pave- 
ments, following each invocation of the Divine Name 
with profuse genuflections and obeisance. As I turn 
from these ornate and splendid symbols to other 
gatherings of God's people, in which the eye has noth- 
ing to allure, or the ear to attract, where the thought 
is centred on God, and the only splendour is in those 
great conceptions that elevate and ennoble, I do not 
wonder that the nature of the ordinary man rebels 
and cries out for something more suited to the com- 
mon levels of daily experience. 

To combat desires like these the Epistle to the He- 
brews was written, that our minds and hearts might 
thither ascend, and there continually dwell, where the 
Lord has gone before us. For us, not a mount that 
can be touched, but a mount not less certainly — 
Mount Zion; not a city, whose minarets and monu- 
ments catch the rays of the rising and setting sun, but 
a city as surely, whose streets we may walk each day 
— the heavenly Jerusalem; not the festal crowds of 
worshippers that jostled each other in their climb to 
the Temple of Solomon, but fellow-worshippers 
equally real and numerous — the innumerable hosts 
of angels, the spirits of just men made perfect, the 
general assembly and church of the first-bom, with 
whom we come into contact at each hour of prayer. 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 



9» 



II. How Samuel Bore his DisAPPOiNXMEisrT. — 
" The thing displeased Samuel when they said, Give 
us a king to judge us." It was not so much that they 
had rejected himself, but that they had rejected God' — 
that He should not be King over them. They had 
failed to grasp the great conception, and had fallen 
to the level of the nations around. The one hope that 
had arisen in his soul, and been nurtured by the dew 
and sun of every summer, was frustrated; and it was 
clear that there could never be the realisation of his 
cherished dream, since it was impossible to imagine 
circumstances more favourable for giving it effect. 
If it failed in Israel, it would fail entirely — unless, in- 
deed, the Divine Kingdom could be set up, which 
would never pass away. 

Under these bitter circumstances he made for the 
one Harbour of Refuge, the one assured safeguard 
for all broken hearts and wrecked lives, for all that 
labour and are heavy laden — " Samuel prayed unto 
the Lord." 

By how many disappointed ones these words may 
be read! Women whose young hearts were filled on 
their marriage day with high and buoyant hope, as 
they dreamed of an ideal life of love and blessedness, 
but who are mourning over the withered vows, the 
broken promises, the irrecoverable sense of trust and 
peace! 'Men that meant to effect such great things 
by their lives, to succeed in business, to lead society, 
to mold and fashion the State! Ministers who, as 



98 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

they knelt on the threshold of their sacred calling, 
saw visions and dreamed dreams of consecration, ten- 
derness, shepherd-care, and parental solicitude, which 
have vanished, as the pictures of foliage reflected in 
deep lakes when a breath of wind stirs the surface of 
the water! What are such to do? Whither can they 
go? What resort is there for broken hearts? 

There is no answer to these questions but that sug; 
gested by Samuel's action, when he prayed unto the 
Lord. Go to Him, and tell everything — what you 
hoped, how you endeavoured, how you failed. Weep 
your tears out at his feet. He can understand, can 
sympathise, can bind and heal. There is Balm in 
Gilead, there is a Physician there. There is help for 
the helpless, and comfort for the comfortless. To tell 
God everything is to be far along the road to peace ; 
and where you cannot tell, where the sobs choke the 
utterance, there the Father seeth, knoweth, and com- 
forteth. Through His love you may be as one whom 
his mother comforteth. 

Then the Lord answered his servant. He always 
does, and will, answer. Tlie voice may be so soft 
and low as to be almost inaudible; but it will be there. 
The words may not quite chime in with our notions 
at first. Unlike the prophet's roll, they may be bitter 
in the mouth, but they will be sweet to the heart. 
" Be careful for nothing, but in everything by prayer 
and supplication, with thanksgiving let your requests 
be made known unto God, and the peace of God that 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 



93 



passeth all understanding shall guard your hearts and 
your thoughts in Christ Jesus." 

III. The Divine Answer and Encouragement. 
— When Samuel cried to the Lord about his sore 
trouble, in the Divine answer it was made clear that 
the cherished ideal of a lifetime would have to be 
abandoned. The distinct impression, was borne in 
on the prophet's mind that he must renounce his high 
purpose, abdicate his position, and step down to be- 
come subordinate to a king. " Now, therefore," said 
his Almighty Friend and Confidant, " hearken unto 
their voice." 

At the same time his sorrow was greatly mitigated 
by discovering that God was his Fellow-Sufferer, and 
that the sorrow of the Divine heart was infinitely 
greater than his own. " They have not rejected thee, 
but they have rejected Me." It is a great honour when 
a man is summoned to enter into fellowship with God 
in the awful pain and grief which men bring on his 
tender and Holy Spirit. 

Surely none will count the phrase extravagant 
which attributes suffering to God on account of his 
rejection by human hearts which refuse his reign and 
do despite to the Spirit of his Grace. Did not Jesus 
suffer when his own received Him not, when his 
brethren believed not, when the city, which He loved 
with patriot devotion, refused to shelter under his 
shadowing wings, and when his chosen apostles for- 



94 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

sook Him and fled? The very abandonment of his 
self-sacrifice proved the tenderness of his yearning 
love, and this could not have been present to so large 
an extent within Him, without exposing Him to ex- 
cessive suffering on account of human sin. 'It has 
been beautifully said by a modern writer: " There is 
a common saying that cruelty and cowardice go to- 
gether; so also do self-sacrifice and tenderness. They 
are different sides of the same idea, and all the deli- 
cacy of Christian tenderness is perceptibly an out- 
growth of the Cross. It seems as though, till Christ 
had lived and died, that fulness of human sympathy 
was impossible." Now, if that be true — if the Cross 
of Christ has exhaled through the world the aroma of 
tender sympathy — how strong this element must have 
been in his Holy Nature, and how acutely He must 
have suffered when the keepers of the vineyards cast 
Him out and slew Him. But He did not suffer alone ; 
they that saw Him saw the Father. He taught us 
that God was not impassive; but that He yearned, 
sorrowed, loved, as human fathers do, only with 
heights and depths of intensity which are indeed 
Divine. 

" Thou who hast borne all burdens, bear our load, 
Bear Thou our load, whatever load it be; 
Our guilt, our shame, our helpless misery. 
Bear thou who only canst, O God, my God, 
Seek us and find us, for we cannot Thee." 

The prophet says that God was pressed beneath 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 95 

the sin and rebellion of men, as the groaning wagon 
is pressed beneath its sheaves. 

IV. Samuel's noble behaviour towards the 
PEOPLE demands our notice. 

The request of the people for a king was, no doubt, 
in part based on Deut. xvii. 14, which seemed to an- , 
ticipate just such a crisis as had now arisen. In 
Hannah's song, also, there had been an unmistakable 
prophecy of the day when Jehovah should give 
strength to his king and exalt the horn of his anointed 
(i Sam. ii. 10). But the present request had been 
sprung on Samuel prematurely, and with undue 
passion and haste. Instead of seeking to ascertain 
the mind of God, the people had m^de up their own 
mind ; instead of consulting with the aged prophet on 
the best policy for coming days, they dictated the 
policy on which they had set their hearts. 

Under these circumstances, and with the express 
direction of God, he protested solemnly to the deputa- 
tion of elders, and through them to the people, show- 
ing the manner of the king that would reign. It was 
impossible that a king demanded in such a spirit as 
characterised the people could be a man after God's 
own heart. They wanted one who, in his stature and 
bearing, in his martial prowess and deeds, should be 
worthy to compare with neighbouring monarchs. 
This was much more to them than character, obedi- 
ence to God, or loyalty to the Mosaic code. And as 



96 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

they desired, so it was done unto them. lAJi! how 
often it happens that God grants us according to the 
insistence of our strong and vehement self-will. He 
gives us according to our request, but sends leanness 
into our souls (Psa. cvi. 15). 

All the Oriental extravagance and prodigality of 
human life, which were the familiar accompaniment 
of royalty in neighbouring countries, were destined 
to reappear in the court of the Kings of Israel. They 
would enforce the service of the young men to fabri- 
cate their weapons, fight their battles, and minister to 
their royal state. They would exact unremunerated 
labour in the tillage of their lands. From the daugh- 
ters and wives of the people they would demand con- 
fectioneries and bake-meats, and other elaborate 
luxuries for the royal appetite. Vineyards and olive- 
yards, farms and lands, would be confiscated at their 
caprice. A system of heavy taxation would be im- 
posed on the produce of the land, and on the flocks 
and herds which covered the pasture lands; while the 
people would have to stand still and see their hard- 
earned money squandered on the pleasures and self- 
indulgence of the palace. A brief experience of this 
kind would lead to a universal outcry, as the nation 
awoke to its grievous mistake; but the step so rashly 
taken would be found to be irreparable. " Ye shall 
cry out in that day, because of your king which ye 
shall have chosen you; and the Lord will not answer 
you in that day." 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 97 

•Samuel's protest and remonstrance were, however, 
alike in vain. " The people refused to hearken unto 
the voice of Samuel; and they said, Nay, but we will 
have a king over us, that we also may be like all the 
nations, and that our king may judge us, and go out 
before us and fight our battles." Tliey trusted in 
man and in the arm of flesh, their heart departed from 
the Lord, and in the sequel they were destined to see 
their king slain on the fatal field of Gilboa, their land 
overrun by the enemy, and the national fortunes re- 
duced to the lowest possible ebb. 

Does thy heart cry out for a king, for one who shall 
reduce the conflicting passions of thy nature to unity 
and order; beware lest thou choose after the sight of 
thine eyes, or the hearing of thine ears; let not sense 
or appetite make the selection; take heed of the lust 
of thy flesh, the lust of thy eyes, and the pride of thy 
life ! 

I was told, when in Russia, that in one of the 
villages in the Baltic provinces a man is imprisoned 
in the strong bars of an iron cage, who approaches 
each person on entering the chamber where it is fixed, 
and, presenting a silver rouble, says, "This is God." 
Very few state the truth so boldly; but of how many 
such a statement would express the very fact? Let 
thy King be the man whom God hath chosen, the 
Man of Calvary, whom He hath exalted to be a Prince 
and a Saviour. He will not exact from, but bring to 
thee. He does not impoverish, but enrich. His 



98 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

sceptre is the broken reed ; his steed, a foal ; his crown, 
of thorns! 



When Samuel saw that the people had made up 
their mind he dismissed the assembly, and set him- 
self with remarkable magnanimity to do the best he 
could for them. He did this in obedience to the Di- 
vine summons, which lay along the line of his own 
thoughts. 

This is very remarkable, and justifies the remark 
of Ewald : " Samuel is one of the few great men in 
history who, in critical times, by sheer force of char- 
acter and inimitable energy, terminate the previous 
form of a great existing system — at first against their 
own will, but afterwards, when convinced of the 
necessity, with all the force and eagerness of their 
nature; and who then initiate a better form with the 
happiest results, amid much personal suffering and 
persecution." 

During the early years of his life, and well on into 
the maturity of his power, Samuel sought to vitalise 
the existing institutions, which were ready to his 
hands. Only slowly, and against his wishes, he 
awoke to realise that he must abandon further efforts 
in this direction, and set himself to build up an en- 
tirely new organisation. In doing this he had to 
sacrifice his previous convictions, and do violence to 
his better judgment; he had to pull down the very 
structure that he had been at such pains to establish; 



A GREAT DISAPPOINTMENT. 99 

he had to be second, where he had been an unchal- 
lenged first. But when once he realised that there 
was no alternative, he becam'e the most devoted and 
efficient organiser of the new age; just as Dr. Chal- 
mers, when he found that it was impossible to secure 
what he sought within the borders of the Established 
Church of Scotland, stepped out from its pale and 
began to build the Free Church, which has become 
one of the greatest churches of the age. 

" And," continues Ewald, " if David's visible deeds 
are greater or more dazzling than Samuel's, still there 
can be no doubt that David's blaze of glory would 
have been impossible without Samuel's less conspicu- 
ous, but far more influential career; so that all the 
greatness of which the following century boasts goes 
back to him as its real author." 

There are supreme crises in the lives of some of us 
which search us to the quick. The people whom we 
have loved, have suffered and sacrificed for, suddenly 
turn from us. They want something else, and some- 
thing more. We realise that we must abdicate, and 
are tempted to do it with grudging courtesy and an ill 
grace. Why should we make way for others; 
why renounce our rights and refuse to press our 
claims? 

At such times let us remember Samuel's heroism; 
let us acknowledge that God's will is leading us by a 
right way; let us care for the flock over which we 
have been placed as overseers more than we care for 



loo SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

ourselves; let us adapt ourselves to the new order; 
nay, let us expedite it with all the grace and grit that 
we can command, knowing that the blood of our self- 
sacrifice will, by God's blessing, be the best cement of 
our handiwork. 



X. 

xrbe IDoice of Circumstances. 

(i Samuel ix., x.) 

Yes! thou dost well to build a fence about 
Thine inward faith. Oh, mount a stalwart guard 
Of answers, to oppose invading doubt. 
All aids are needful, for the strife is hard. 

— Coleridge. 

" T T T HOSO is wise and will observe these 
\/ \/ things, even he shall understand the lov- 
ing-kindness of the Lord." 'In these 
words the Psalmist sums up his five tableaux of hu- 
man life (Psa. cvii.). The track of the pilgrim-host, 
the experience of the prisoner languishing in his 
chains, the recovery of the sick from long depression, 
the deliverance of the storm-tossed crew from the 
angry breakers, the evolution of a smiling paradise 
from an arid and parched wilderness — all these things, 
if carefully observed, yield their testimony and assur- 
ance that God is in all events, permitting, directing, 
controlling, and causing all things to work out his 
perfect plan. 

In all Scripture there is no passage more illustrative 
of this than the chapters before us, which show how 
clearly and mightily God is in the circumstances of 
our lives. 



I02 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

It was the spring of the day. With exquisite 
clearness and purity the dawn was breaking in the 
Eastern sky, when three men descended the steep 
ascent on which Ramah stood, and emerged from the 
city gate (ver. ii, 12, 14, 27). The group was a re- 
markable one, comprising the aged seer ; " a young 
man and a goodly," who was the king-elect, though 
he did not realise it; and a herdsman, Doeg, so tradi- 
tion states, who afterwards attained such an unhappy 
notoriety, but was at that time simply a servant in at- 
tendance on his master's son. When the city gate 
had been left behind, the servant was sent on in front, 
that he might not be a witness to the solemn transac- 
tion, which inaugurated a new epoch in the life of 
Saul. " As they were going down at the end of the 
city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid thy servant pass on 
before us, but stand thou still at this time, that I may 
cause thee to hear the Word of God." 

'I. The Circumstances that Led up to this 
Incident.^(i) The asses of Kish, Saul's father, were 
lost. But they were too valuable to lose. " And 
Kish said to Saul, his son, Take now one of the 
servants with thee, and arise, go seek the asses." 

But when they left home they little realised how 
far their search would lead them. " And he passed 
through the hill country of Ephraim, and passed 
through the land of Shalisha, but they found them 
not; then they passed through the land of Shalini, and 



THE VOICE OF CIRCUMSTANCES. 103 

there they found them not ; and he passed through the 
land of the Benjamites, but they found them not." 
Tliree days were consumed in this fruitless search, in 
stopping every traveller, asking many questions, 
scrutinising every trail — but all to no purpose. 

Lost she-asses! Well, what of them! Let them 
stray! Yes, but they are worth seeking, not for their 
worth only, but because the man who tracks them will 
presently come on a kingdom! Be faithful in a little, 
and God will promote thee to be faithful in much. 
Do what thou hast to do for God, and He shall call 
thee for the highest service! Often the finding of 
the hid treasure depends on the care with which we 
drive the plough of lowly labour along the common 
furrow of daily toil. 

(2) By God's providence, which some call chance, 
the seekers found themselves in the land of Joseph, 
and there the thought of his father's possible anxiety 
arrested the steps of the young farmer, and he said, 
" Come, and let us return, lest my father leave caring 
for the asses, and take thought for us." This remark 
indicated a good and commendaible trait in Saul's 
character. On the whole, a man who cares for the 
feelings of those nearest to him in the ties of natural 
kindred is likeliest to be a good ruler of men. Would 
that all our young men and women, especially those 
who are away from home in our great cities, would 
be a little more considerate of the heart-strings 
stretched even to breaking, and the eyes that often 



I04 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

brim with tears because the tidings of their welfare 
are so scanty and intermittent ! Saul feared the effect 
of three days on his father. What would he have 
thought of three weeks or months without tidings? 

(3) Having arranged for the offering of the piece 
of shekel (about 2s. 6d.) which was discovered in the 
bottom of the servant's pocket, as their gift to the 
Seer, the two men made for the gate of the little city, 
" which was set on a hill," its white houses glistening 
in the intense sunshine. The maidens of whom they 
made inquiries, the fact that Samuel was in the city, 
and on his way to a feast in the high place, the en- 
counter with Samuel himself in the main street, and 
the tidings that the asses were found, were like so 
many signposts that pointed them by the way which 
they should go, till they came to the place that awaited 
them, the seat and portion which had been prepared 
by the instructions of the Prophet. 

How evidently a Divine hand was in all these cir- 
cumstances! They could not have happened by 
chance. Clearly every separate detail had been 
wrought out in a designing mind with the express 
purpose of driving Saul into the precise position 
where he might stand still and hear the Word of the 
Lord. 

But if it was so with these circumstances, must we 
not believe that as much may be said of all circum- 
stances? If a hair cannot fall to the ground from our 
head, or a sparrow from the tree, apart from God, can 



THE VOICE OF CIRCUMSTANCES. 105 

we say of anything that it is too trivial to come into 
the Divine plan? Even let it be granted that many 
incidents happen at the instigation of evil men, yet 
they are permitted to reach us by the will of God, and 
therefore we may as much trace God's will in them 
for our own discipline and ennoblement, as in those 
others which are evidently of his direct sending. 
God's purpose ran through the wicked deeds of the 
betrayers and murderers of our Lord. There was 
not a single event on all those fateful days that was 
not marked on the chart of Divine Providence; and 
since God is everywhere the same, and the same infi- 
nitely, so that we cannot say that He was more 
present there than here, or was more powerful then 
than now, we must admit that He is still as much in 
every circumstance of our lot, as on those memorable 
and awful days when creation herself beheld the 
scenes of Gethsemane and Calvary with evident 
emotion. 

Let it never be forgotten that straying asses, an 
unexpected encounter in the street, the presence of a 
coin in the pocket, or its absence, are all part of a 
Divine plan. He who has opened eyes may read the 
Father's handwriting, and take the direction of his 
path, as though angels had flashed before his eyes to 
direct him. And the prepared path always leads to 
the vacant seat and the waiting portion. Tlie road 
may be long, and the tax on patience and strength 
considerable; but the Father never leads his trustful 



io6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

and obedient child into a quagmire, or leads him out 
on the moorland to perish of exposure to the cold. 
There is always a destination to which the road leads, 
and it only awaits the quick eye, the ready ear, and 
the obedient heart, to detect the things that God hath 
prepared for them that love him. 

II. The In^cident of Saul's First Anointing. 
— Saul slept at Samuel's house that night, and on the 
housetop. The Prophet had prepared his couch 
there with a special purpose, which burnt like a clear 
flame in his heart; for when the house was quiet, he 
stole up to the young man who was pondering the 
strange events of the day, and " communed with Saul 
on the housetop." 

He longed to stir his soul with a profound sym- 
pathy in his own passionate and patriotic longings. 
He may have poured into the listening ear the story 
of his hopes and fears, of hopes that had been frus- 
trated, of fears that seemed on the point of being 
realised. Probably he told the story of his own re- 
jection, and of the failure of his sons. He may have 
whispered into those young ears his longing that 
someone might appear at this juncture who would 
gather up the frayed and tangled threads and work 
out the Divine pattern. Thus, with careful skill, 
Samuel awoke the sleeping soul of the young son of 
the soil, who probably had lived in a narrow, circum- 
scribed sphere, interested in flocks and herds, in vines 



THE VOICE OF CIRCUMSTANCES. 107 

and crops, in the talk of the country-side, but stirred 
with few thoughts of the national welfare. 

He was awoke by Samuel before the breath that an- 
nounced the dawn had stirred the leaves of the sleep- 
ing woods. " Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, 
saying, Up, that I may send thee away." Then, on 
the descent at the end of the city, the servant was sent 
on, and as the two stood together, Samuel took from 
out of his breast the vial of oil, and poured it upon 
the strong young head, bent beneath his touch, giv- 
ing him the anointing which designated the king, and 
kissing him in token of his own fealty. " Is it not," 
said he, " that the Lord hath anointed thee to be 
prince over his inheritance? " 

It was a great hour in Saul's life. No wonder that 
" when he had turned his back to g'o from Samuel," 
it was with " another heart." The chronicle does not 
say that he received a neiu heart; there was no saving 
regeneration or conversion, no such radical change as 
comes over the soul at the hour of the new birth, or 
he would never have perished, as he did, on the field 
of Gilboa. But he had new aims, new conceptions 
of the importance and significance of life, new deter- 
minations and resolves. In a sense, though not the 
deepest, old things had passed away, and everything 
had become new. 

Let us mark this distinction. It is possible to have 
another, but not a new heart; to be arrested by some 
stronger mind and inspired by a fresh ideal; but be- 



io8 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

neath the rapid sprouting of the seed there may be 
a slab of impenetrable and unchangeable rock. iThe 
work has been only on the surface, but the dew has 
sped before the sun, and the cloud which seemed to 
presage rain has dissolved again into the sky. See 
that you make sure work for eternity. 

III. The Circumstances that Followed. — 
When we are on God's path, we may certainly count 
on the corroboration of outward circumstances. If, 
in travelling by the railway, one questions whether 
one is in the right train, it is a comfort to consult the 
time tables, to see if the names of the stations, as we 
hurry through them, are those which are mentioned 
in the list. So, when questions arise, as they will 
when we are confronted by difficulties and obstacles, 
of whether we are in the line of God's will, it is an 
immense reassurance to meet with corroborating cir- 
cumstances, which tell us that we are right, lis not 
this what is meant by the words, " I will make my 
mountains a way " ? 

It was not enough that Peter should hear a voice 
speaking to his heart, or see the sheet let down from 
heaven — he must hear the knock of the three men, 
sent from Cornelius, as they stand at the door of the 
tanner's house, inquiring for him (Acts x.). In all 
great decisions, seek the corroboration of circum- 
stances. We will trace this in the subsequent chapter. 



XI. 

as ©ccaston Serves. 

(i Samuel x. 7.) 

There lies no desert in the land of Life; 
For e'en that tract that barrenest doth seem, 
Laboured of thee in faith and hope, shall teem 
With heavenly harvests, and rich gatherings ripe. 

— Kemble. 

CIRCUMSTANCES led up to Samuel's secret 
designation of Saul as king; and circum- 
stances, so special and significant as to carry 
on their brow the Divine impression, were destined to 
corroborate the momentous act. With unerring ac- 
curacy the old prophet anticipated them, and with un- 
failing precision each of them took place. " All those 
signs came to pass that day." 

(i) First, by Rachel's tomb, in the border of Ben- 
jamin, two men met him to say that the asses had 
been found, and that his father had left the care of the 
asses, and was taking thought for his son, saying, 
" What shall I do for my son? " This was a very 
significant evidence of the Divine will and choice. It 
indicated that he was to be henceforth relieved of the 
care of the farm and the field, to devote himself to 
other and higher work. Asses could be found with- 



no SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

out his interposition. Others could attend to them 
and their hke, but for him the kingdom was waiting, 
and the hearts of men were being prepared. The 
home-ties, the love of father and family, would always 
have a claim, but he must leave to others the care of 
the estates at Gibeah. 

This sign is still of inestimable value to those who 
feel called to give themselves wholly to direct service 
for God. If it be the case that they are needed at 
home, to provide for the maintenance of aged parents 
or sisters, of wife or child, they have no right to with- 
draw from that sacred duty — that holy obligation — 
until God gives them an honourable discharge. The 
message to all such most certainly is that which the 
apostle gave in a time of great unsettlement to the 
Corinthian disciples. " Let each man abide in that 
calling wherein he was called." " Brethren, let each 
man, wherein he was called, therein abide with God " 
(i Cor. vii. 20, 24). 

When God has given a call, as clear and unmis- 
takable as that which Saul received at the lips of 
Samuel, let the recipient wait trustfully and patiently 
for his hand to slacken the hold of circumstances. 
Without long delay the shore-rope will be loosed, and 
the message will come in one form or another : " The 
asses are found." Any circumstance of that kind 
will be an unmistalcable assurance that the Lord's 
voice has been speaking to the heart, and that his 
cloud is beckoning us to follow. 



AS OCCASION SERVES. m 

(2) Next, as he went forward, filled with bewilder- 
ment and awe, near the oak, or terebinth, of Tabor 
(the situation of which is absolutely unknown), Saul 
met three men going on a sacred pilgrimage to 
Bethel, which, from the days of Abraham and Jacob, 
had been hallowed by the most sacred associations. 

These men were carrying, as Samuel said they 
would, their votive-oflferings to the shrine — three kids, 
three loaves, and a bottle (or skin, margin) of wine. 
First they saluted him with the invariable Eastern 
greeting, Peace be unto thee ; and presented him with 
two of the loaves, as though obeying an inner con- 
viction which was pressed home on them by the Di- 
vine Spirit, that he whom they had encountered was 
no ordinary waj'farer, but one who might share their 
homage even with Almighty God. 

What significance lay hid in this act also! Did it 
not imply that God would compel the respect and 
reverence of the nation to arise towards the king 
whom He had chosen, and that there should be no 
lack of the supplies which were required to sustain 
his royal state? Was it not an assurance that he 
need not be anxious about what he should eat or 
drink or how he should be clothed, since, if he sought 
first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, all 
things besides would certainly be added? 

This, too, will befall each servant of God who steps 
out on the path of obedience. He may be leaving a 
well-established business and giving up some lucra- 



112 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

tive source of income; he may seem to be stepping 
from the boat on to the heaving, changeful waters; 
he may be blamed, as Moses was no doubt blamed, 
for casting himself and those dependent on him on to 
the trackless, inhospitable desert; but if he will be 
only true to Grod's call he will have no reason to re- 
pent, his bread shall be given him, and his water shall 
be sure, the manna will fall where the cloud broods 
overhead; first the ravens, then the widow woman, 
and then the angels, will be commanded to provide 
bread that he may eat; God will care for his body in 
life, and in death will bury it with his own hands, as 
in the case of Moses, or by the hands of devout men, 
as wheiT Stephen was carried to his grave amid great 
lamentations. 

On one- occasion in the Lord's life He gave a 
memorable lesson on this matter to his apostles. 
The tax-collector had come to Peter with a demand 
which Peter could not meet, and he came to the Mas- 
ter with it. Dovibtless, if the fisherman had still been 
plying his craft, there would have been no need for 
anxiety — out of the produce of his labour he would 
have been well able to meet the application; but, as it 
was, there was no money in his purse or house avail- 
able for the purpose. " Go thou to the sea," said the 
Master, " and cast a hook, and take up the fish that 
first Cometh up; and when thou hast opened his 
mouth, thou shalt find a shekel; that take and give 
them for Me and thee." Tt was in obedience to the 



AS OCCASION SERVES. 113 

Saviour's call that Peter had given up his own means 
of livelihood, and the Lord recognised that the re- 
sponsibility of providing for the needs, that would 
otherwise have been met by his toil, was incumbent 
on Himself. He identified Himself in the common 
need when He said, " for Mc and thee." If you go^ 
forth on Christ's errands. He will not be unrighteous 
to forget; you may surely trust Him to pay the taxes, 
and all other legitimate dues. Do not set your hope 
on " the uncertainty of riches," or on the doles of the 
wealthy, but on God who giveth us richly all things 
to enjoy. 

(3) Finally, Saul came to Gibeali (r. v. margin). 
The A. V. and R. V. note that there was a garrison of 
Philistines there, but other commentators, thinking it 
unlikely that Samuel would announce to Saul a fact 
which must have been so well known to him, have 
preferred to employ the other meaning of the word 
translated garrison, and have rendered the sentence, 
" where the erection, column, or monument, of the 
Philistines stands," probably reared by them to com- 
memorate some famous victory. 

Hard by this spot, and almost within sight of his 
home, Saul encountered a band of young men con- 
nected with the prophetic school which Samuel had 
established. They were coming down from the high 
place with a psaltery, and a timbrel, a pipe, and a 
harp. The afflatus of prophetic fervour and ecstasy 
was upon them, and as Saul beheld their holy rapture 



114 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

he fell under its spell. So great a change had passed 
over him, during his brief absence from his home, that 
he had now a sympathy with these divine raptures 
which he had never known before. Chords within 
his soul, which had never vibrated before, began to 
answer in strange unison. Yearnings after God, sus- 
ceptibility to spiritual impressions, the sense of the 
unseen and eternal, filled his soul. "The Spirit of 
God came mightily upon him, and he prophesied 
among them." 

This remarkable assertion need not astonish us. 
It is by no means uncommon to find men temporarily 
and spasmodically affected by strong religious impres- 
sions, who are not permanently and savingly delivered 
from their former worldly or selfish manner of life. 
It is possible to be enlightened, to taste of the heav- 
enly gift, to be a partaker of the Holy Ghost, to be 
solemnised by the powers of the world to come, and 
yet fall away. A land may have drunk of the rain 
and been moistened with the gentle dew, and yet bear 
thorns and thistles. Seed may spring up quickly 
where there is no depth of earth, and yet wither away. 
Simon was deeply wrought on by all he saw and felt 
during Philip's visit to Samaria, but the Apostle de- 
clared that he was still " in the gall of bitterness and 
the bond of iniquity." 

But what to Saul was only a transient and super- 
ficial influence may become, in each of us, a perma- 
nent possession. The Spirit of God may come on us 



AS OCCASION SERVES. 115 

to fill us, and abide, as He did with those on whom 
He came in the early days of the Church. In suc- 
cessive waves of power and grace He may come on 
us, so that we may not only be filled suddenly and 
mightily for special work, but be constantly sensible 
of the holy infillings as were the first converts in the 
highlands of Asia Minor, so that we may be perma- 
nently full, as was Stephen. (Compare Acts iv. 8; 
xiii. 52 ; vi. 5 ; note the change of tenses, etc.) 

Whenever God calls us to special service He pro- 
vides a special anointing of the Holy Spirit. Re- 
member how the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, 
" See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri; 
and I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wis- 
dom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in 
all manner of workmanship." This is universally 
true. As certainly as there is the call, there will be 
the equipment. But we must look up for it, we must 
claim and appropriate it; without feeling it, we must 
reckon that it is ours, and step out on the predestined 
path. It is in the act of obedience that we become 
suddenly and thankfully aware of the possession. 
Oh, that the Spirit of Christ may come mightily on 
all his servants, so that they may be equipped for the 
demands of the present age, and that the Master may 
say of each of them, " Behold my servant, whom I 
uphold; my chosen, in whom my soul delighteth. I 
have put my spirit upon him, and he shall bring forth 
judgment to the people." 



ii6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

This transformation in the young farmer amazed 
all that knew him beforetime; and they said one to 
another, " What is this that has come unto the son of 
Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets? " It made 
as great a stir as when Saul of Tarsus joined the 
Christians, whom he had persecuted, or when Bunyan 
and Newton became ministers of the Word. One of 
the older people, however, divined the reason. 
Rumours of Saul's interview with Samuel were be- 
ginning to circulate, and he said, in effect : " Has he 
not been with Samuel, the father of these blessed and 
exalted movements? What wonder, then, if he par- 
take of his gifts!" 

When the first tremor of excitement had passed, 
and Saul regained full mastery of himself, he went up 
to the high place, probably for quiet meditation and 
prayer, that he might comprehend the full significance 
of the crowding events which had transpired within 
the recent hours. To whom can we turn, mo§t Holy 
God, in the supreme moments of life, but unto Thee? 
Only Thou canst understand. 

Ere Samuel dismissed his astonished and awe- 
stricken guest, he bade him act in each circumstance 
as occasion served (v. 7). There is always room for 
the exercise of sanctified common-sense. The cir- 
cumstances may be Divinely contrived, but we must 
use them for good or evil, making them stepping- 
stones or stumbling-blocks. Tlie same circum- 



AS OCCASION SERVES. 117 

stances may come to all, but one man receives their 
lesson and transmits his answer in a very different 
spirit from his friend and neighbour. In one case the 
sun and shower produce flowers and com, in another 
weeds and poppies. The Divine guidance of our 
lives does not obviate the necessity for the exercise 
of prudence, that looks before and after and ttpwards, 
in order to ascertain what the will of the Lord is. 

There is always in the regimen of life an abundant 
need for the exercise of our judgment, through which 
the light of God may be shining as through a clear 
pane of glass. We are not dumb, driven cattle, nor 
the creatures of fate or chance. We are not automa- 
tons. So long as we look for guidance it will be 
freely given, but when it is given, we must use it, and 
it is useless unless we do. Only they that receive the 
abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, 
shall reign in life. 

On that memorable night when God's Angel 
achieved the deliverance of Peter from his prison, we 
are told that the celestial visitant led the dazed 
apostle through the first and second streets, and then 
departed from him; and when Peter had considered the 
thing, he went to the house of Mary. So long as he 
was bewildered, and half asleep, living in a trance, 
walking in dreamland, it was necessary that he should 
be carefully watched and led ; but so soon as the sharp 
morning air had revived him, and brought him to 
himself, so that he was able to consider the matter. 



Ii8 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

he was left to act on the decisions of his own sancti- 
fied common-sense. 

To him that overcometh, the Master promises to 
give a white stone, which is surely the Urim and 
Thummim stone — a judgment through which the 
Shekinah light glows and shines. May it be our 
happy privilege to receive it at his hands, that we may 
be able to say with our Lord, " My judgment is just, 
because I seek not my own will, but his that sent me." 



XII. 

tTbe Inner anO ©uter Conflfcfs. 

(i Samuel xi.) 

What if He hath decreed that I shall first 
Be try'd in humble state and things adverse. 
By tribulations, injuries, insults. 
Contempts, and scorns, and snares, and violence! 

— Milton. 

THE eleventh verse records a great victory. It 
was the first pubHc act of the reign of Saul, 
taking place a month after his inaugfuration. 
It at once justified his selection, and silenced the voice 
of detraction; he stood forth before the eyes of his 
own people, and of surrounding nations, as every inch 
a man and a king. 

But in this chapter, for eyes that look beneath the 
surface, there is the record of another fight. There 
was the outward fight that Saul made for Israel; there 
was the inner and previous fight that Saul made for 
himself, against himself; and it was because he had 
conquered in the latter, of which there was probably 
no symptom or sign to the outward eye, that he 
carried himself erect in the fight with Nahash. 

This is always so; within the fight there is another 
fight. Within the fight that men are waging with the 



120 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

sin and darkness of the world there is always the 
inner fight, which they must wage with themselves, 
and for themselves. If, to use the suggestion of an- 
other, you had been familiar with Howard, the great 
prison evangelist, or had known Clarkson, who de- 
livered the slave; if you had been permitted to read 
the secrets of the heart of Garrison, the great Ameri- 
can philanthropist, you would have known that, full 
often, each was sick and weary with the inward com- 
bat, and closed the door of his heart upon the outward 
fight, that he might turn his thought and attention to 
himself; and you would have heard the soldier of 
Chi'ist saying bitterly to himself: " It would be easy 
for me to conquer, and to win the battle for my Lord 
against these outward ills, if only I had not perpetu- 
ally to wage this inward fight; if only I had solid 
ground to stand on, instead of the shifting sand of my 
own vacillating nature and irresolute temper." Per- 
haps you might even have heard these gteat soldiers 
saying: " Surely it would be better to relinquish the 
outward conflict, so as to bend all attention to the 
rule of the Home-land." 

Yet it is good for us all that these two conflicts 
should go on side by side, for if a man were only con- 
flicting against the evil of the world, and knew noth- 
ing about the inward fight, he might become arrogant 
and suppose that he stood aloof from the common sin 
and the common temptation; whereas if, on the other 
hand, we were only to confine ourselves to the inward 



THE INNER AND OUTER CONFLICTS. 121 

conflict, we might grow morbid and self-centred, dis- 
pirited and depressed. 

No, let those two go on together, and let the vic- 
tories that we win for God in the outward field of 
vision be weighed against the awful consciousness of 
failure that we all carry in our inner experience. Let 
these two go on side by side, and let every man know 
that if he conquers within, he will conquer without, 
and that if he fails within he will fail without. It is 
just in proportion as we are able to overcome, as Saul 
did, in his heart, that we shall overcome, as he did, 
against the Ammonites. 

Two thoughts lie upon this chapter which are full 
of interest — first, Saul's inward fight and conquest; 
secondly, Saul's outward fight and conquest. 

I. Saul's Inward Fight, Conflict, and Vic- 
tory. — (i) He fought the subtle temptation to pride. 
Samuel, eager to constitute the new kingdom, called 
a great national assembly at Mizpeh, where so great a 
defeat and victory had been recorded in earlier days. 
In their teeming multitudes the Israelites gathered 
there, and proceeded to elect their king by an appeal 
to God through a lot. After prayer the lot was cast, 
and the disposing of it was left to God. First the 
tribe of Benjamin was taken, then the clan of the 
Matrites, then the family of Kish, and ultimately the 
lot indicated Saul, the son of Kish, but he was not to 
be found. He knew from his previous conversation 



122 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

with Samuel that he was God's designated king; that 
the anointing oil had flowed over his head; that he 
was possessed of a kingly presence, standing head and 
shoulders above all ordinary men. If ever a man 
might have stood to the front, and allowed ambition 
to master him, that was the moment when Saul might 
have stood forth and presented himself to his people 
as the unrivalled candidate for their suffrages and the 
crown. iHowever, he was not to be found. They 
looked for him everywhere in vain. And it was only 
when, for the second time, they appealed to the direc- 
tion of the Urim and Thummim, that he was discov- 
ered hiding among the baggage-waggons. 

This modesty was extremely beautiful, and our 
admiration of the natural traits of Saul's character 
cannot but be greatly enhanced by his unobtrusive- 
ness. It reminds one of Athanasius, who left the city 
of Alexandria that he might not be elected bishop, 
and of Ambrose, who more than once sought to evade 
the responsibility which was thrust upon him at 
Milan. It reminds us also of John Livingstone, who, 
when he was chosen to preach that famous sermon 
of Kirk o' Shotts, travelled as quickly as possible in 
another direction, and only after some hours was led 
by the Spirit of God to turn again and assume the 
blessed burden. 'Those that assume to themselves 
high positions, yielding before the proud spirit of self- 
assumption, fail; but they who humble themselves, 
who generally think others better than they are, who 



THE INNER AND OUTER CONFLICTS. 



123 



deprecate notoriety and show, are such as God 
exalts. 

(2) There zvas the strong temptation which assailed 
him to vindictiveness. Amid the shouts, " God save 
the King," which applauded his nomination there 
were the voices of detractors, men of Belial, who 
whispered, "How shall this man save us?" One 
such voice is enough to spoil all the adulation that 
may be strewn before us by the crowd. What public 
man is there who has not felt that the clamour of kind 
voices was marred by the one sentence of criticism 
and spite, so that the drop of vinegar turned all the 
rest acid? These voices must have stung the heart 
of Saul. The adder's poison must have penetrated 
to his heart; but he quenched the desire for revenge; 
conquered, and trampled beneath his feet the smoul- 
dering embers of vindictiveness. It was not that he 
was pusillanimous, for we are told, in this same chap- 
ter, that when he heard of the cry of Jabesh-gilead, 
" his anger was greatly kindled." 'He was capable 
of flaming forth against wrong, but in this case he 
held himself well in hand. To use the old English 
phrase of the A. V., He held his peace. The more one 
examines that phrase, the more fascinating it is — to 
hold your peace, not to let it gO', not to let it be taken 
or snatched from you, not to let it be trampled under 
foot in anger, but to hold to it in the midst of irrita- 
tion and fret, to hold your ground. " He held his 
peace." 



124 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

The Hebrew, as suggested by the margin, is still 
more striking. " He was as though he had been 
deaf " — he pretended not to hear. He did hear; 
every word had struck deep into his soul, but he made 
as though he were deaf. It is a great power when a 
man can act as though he were deaf to slander, deaf 
to detraction, deaf to unkind and uncharitable 
speeches, and treat them as though they had not been 
spoken, turning from man to God, leaving with God 
his vindication, believing that God sooner or later will 
give him a chance, as He most certainly gave Saul a 
chance, of vindicating the true prowess and temper of 
his soul. 

If Saul had listened to these men and noticed them, 
he might have drifted into an awkward and perplex- 
ing position, for if, on the one hand, he had passed 
over their slander, he might have laid himself open to 
the imputation of cowardice ; whereas if, on the other, 
he had noticed it, he might have been goaded to act 
tyrannically, and so as to alienate a large number of 
his people. He could not have done better than to 
act as though he were deaf, and to conquer the 
spirit of vindictive revenge by the spirit of self- 
restraint. 

(3) There was one more temptation by which he must 
have been plied, the temptation to ostentation. When the 
assemblage was dispersed he returned from Mizpeh 
to Gibeah. He had been designated by Samuel, and 
kissed by him in token of homage. Sign after sign 



THE INNER AND OUTER CONFLICTS. 125 

had indicated him to be God's choice for Israel; he 
had stood forth amid tlie people's clamour, the ac- 
knowledged king of the land; a number of young 
men, whose hearts were fired by loyal enthusiasm, 
had thronged about his path, and with songs of re- 
joicing had accompanied him to his home; he was 
conscious of being able to rally about him the chiv- 
alry and strength of his fatherland; and yet, when he 
was back again in Gibeah, in spite of every tempta- 
tion to ostentation and excess, he was noble enough 
to return to his rustic life; he took again in hand his 
plough, and for one whole month he drove the oxen 
across the fields, meditating much on the strange 
chance which had befallen, and wondering when God 
would open the door for him to step forth into the 
manifestation and enjoyment of the royalty which was 
already his. 

These were the elements of a truly great soul. We 
do not forget Gilboa; the frenzied insanity by which 
his career was afterwards blasted; how more than 
once or twice he hurled his javelin at David; that he 
became moody and morose ; that he betrayed the heart 
of a murderer and died the death of a suicide; but at 
this time of his life at least, in his young manhood, 
he put his foot upon pride and remained humble; he 
put his foot upon the spirit of revenge and left it with 
God to vindicate him; put his foot upon that love of 
ostentation that tempts us all, setting himself to do 
his daily work, and waiting until God summoned him 



126 'SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

to take the helm of the state. We cannot but admire 
this greatly. 

You, too, may be conscious of the presence of many 
amiable natural traits, but unless the natural virtues 
of your soul be possessed and strengthened by the 
power of the Holy Ghost they will not be able ulti- 
mately to withstand the awful conflict of the world. 
See to it that in and through the traits of your own 
amiable nature there may come the transcendent life 
of the ever-glorious Saviour, that your character may 
not be the wild growth of nature, but the established 
and permanent indwelling of the Son of God by the 
Holy Spirit. 

n. 'The Outward Conflict. — One evening as 
Saul came back from the field he heard that low wail 
of distress and panic by which the Eastern populace 
makes known its anguish; and as he drew near to 
Gibeah he asked what it meant. " What aileth the 
people that they weep?" Then the story was told 
bow, across the Jordan, in the land of Gilead, the city 
of Jabesh-gilead was hard pressed by the Ammonites, 
who, a hundred years before, had been disastrously 
defeated by Jephthah, but who had never relinquished 
their claim to the land. Under Nahash, the king, 
they had gathered in overwhelming numbers around 
the beleaguered city. Its citizens had tried their best 
to extricate themselves, but in vain. One week of 
respite alone had been extracted from the contempt- 



THB INNER AND OUTER CONFLICTS. 



127 



uous clemency of Nahash; and if at the end of that 
week no deHverance came, then the right eye of every 
man would be put out, which, of course, would make 
him useless for purposes of war, because the left eye 
was, of course, always covered by the shield. 

In despair the messengers came to Gibeah of Ben- 
jamin, because in the days of the judges Jabesh- 
gilead had refused to join in the war of extermination 
against the Benjamites, and had given forty of its 
daughters in marriage to their sons. There was, 
therefore, a blood-tie between the people of Jabesh- 
gilead and those of Gibeah, and in this awful hour 
they felt they had a claim for help — if they would not 
help, who would? But the people of Gibeah de- 
spaired. It seemed as if it were impossible in that 
short space to send effectual help. Saul was living 
in the midst of them, but they had no hope that he 
could help them. The day threatened to close in 
hopeless despondenc}^ and despair. 

Then the man who had conquered himself became 
suddenly aware of the uprising of an altogether new 
power in his heart. We are told that "the Holy 
Spirit of God came mightily upon Saul " ; a little fur- 
ther on we learn that " the fear of God fell on the 
people " ; and still further on, " the Lord wrought a 
great salvation for Israel." 

If you will be true in the inward battle, if by the 
grace of God you will trample upon the sins which so 
easily besqt you, the time will come in your life also. 



128 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

when the Spirit of God will come upon you with an 
almost overwhelming power, and bear you forward 
to do what otherwise would be absolutely impossible; 
and as He works on you, He will work also on the 
people and on the foe. 

Instantly Saul laid hold of his bullocks, slew them, 
cut them in pieces, and by messengers sent those 
pieces throughout the land. In some such way, as 
Sir Walter Scott tells us, the old Highland chieftain 
used to summon the clans for war by the mission of 
the fiery cross. Killing an animal, kindling a fire, 
the cross was burnt in the flames, which were 
quenched in blood, and it was sent throughout the 
land, and every man who saw it was bound to hasten 
to the field. 

Similarly, the entire people throughout the whole 
land of Israel obeyed the royal summons. Tliree 
hundred thousand Israelites and thirty thousand of 
Judah rallied " after Saul and after Samuel." They 
were at first but an undisciplined mob. Probably 
they were armed with scythes and goads, for the 
Philistines had deprived them of all other weapons; 
but Saul, in the power of God, numbered them — i. c, 
disciplined, arranged, and marshalled them; directing 
them by three different routes to fall upon the Am- 
monites in the morning. A message was sent to 
Jabesh-gilead to tell the people that help was coming, 
and their hearts were glad. Then, as the morning 
broke over the quiet hills and valleys of Gilead, and 



THE INNER AND OUTER CONFLICTS. 



129 



the little city was astir with expectation and hope, 
from three different sides Saul launched his army 
upon the sleeping hosts. Panic-stricken, they sprang 
to their feet; hardly awake, and dazed with the 
clamour of the battle-cries, they were unable to resist 
the onset of the men of Israel; and the rout was so 
complete that, by the noontide, two men were not 
left together. It was a wonderful victory and an 
auspicious beginning for the new reign. 

Would you not win such a victory over the sin of 
the world? If so, there must be self-mastery. 
Gird yourselves to fight " the good fight of faith." 
We are reminded that there are several circles to that 
fight. First, there is, of course, tliie outer circle of cir- 
cmnstances. A man must always begin with these, 
and rightly so. It is quite wise on your part to give 
up that business which is a constant source of temp- 
tation; to remove from that house where bad people 
live ; to renounce that literature, those books, and that 
recreation, which are constantly causing you to 
offend; to extricate yourself from that friendship or 
fellowship which has been your curse. That is the 
first thing to do. Get right with your circumstances ; 
touch not, taste not, handle not; come out and be 
separate. At any cost deliver yourself from the con- 
ditions of life that tempt you to sin. 

Secondly, there is the inner circle of habit, for if our 
circumstances are like our clothes, our habits are like 
our skin, and every man has got to fight his lonely 



I30 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

fight against habit; it may be of alcoholism; it may 
be of narcotism; it may be of impurity and immo- 
rality; nothing but the power of God can break the 
bonds that bind you. Tliat is the second great fight 
in a man's life. 

Thirdly, there is the battle against heredity. It may 
be that your father was a passionate man, and has 
passed on, perhaps from his ancestors, strong and 
vehement desires; that your mother was a vain, or 
proud, or quick-tempered woman, and that she has 
passed on to you something of her own quick, sensi- 
tive nature; that you cannot keep calm and still, can- 
not hold your peace, cannot seem as if you were deaf. 
Everyone has to meet with a certain number of predis- 
positions in his life, which he has inherited, and which 
make the battle harder. Enumerate them, consider 
them, know them; then in the name of God put the 
grave of Christ between you and them, and let them 
meet you only through Him that died. Die to them 
all, die to the first Adam, die to yourself because you 
have risen to the second. In acting thus you may 
break the entail and arrest for others that awful in- 
heritance into which you have come. 

Then, after all, when all this is said and done, 
when your outward circumstances are adjusted, when 
by the grace of God you have broken the spell of 
habit, when you have died to heredity, then you come 
face to face lijith the inner citadel of yourself. There 
are things that you must not do, temptations to which 



THE INNER AND OUTER CONFLICTS. 



131 



you must not yield, an inner self which you must 
crucify. Ah, that lonely fight! Ah, the flowers and 
grass that become trampled down in the wrestle whilst 
the blood of your heart is sprinkled on the sward, and 
you know that all the possessions of your outward 
life are as nothing to you compared to the agony of 
the inward conflict. What is sviccess? What is ap- 
plause? What is the crown of victory compared with 
your confessed failure to yourself? Thus we fight 
our fight, and win in the power of the loving Christ. 
And then Ammon, Ammon, Ammon! Ah, not two 
men are left together. Fight, fight, fight the good 
fight of faith; lay hold upon the life which is life 
indeed. 



XIII. 

jporsaften? iReverl 

(i Samuel xii. 22.) 

For the glory and the passion of this midnight 
I praise Thy name, I give Thee thanks, O Christ! 
Thou that hast neither failed me nor forsaken 
Through these hard hours with victory overpriced. 
Now that I too of Thy passion have partaken, 
For the world's sake — called^elected — sacrificed! 

— H. Hamilton King. 

WHILST the whole land was ringing with 
the news of Saul's exploit in the deliver- 
ance of Jabesh-gilead, it appeared to 
Samuel to be an auspicious moment for confirming 
the kingdom in his hand: and therefore he summoned 
a great convocation of the nation at Gilgal. 

On that spot Israel had encamped for the first night 
after crossing the Jordan, and the twelve great stones 
commemorating that event were still visible. There 
the act of circumcision had been performed, cleansing 
the people of the neglect of the wilderness; and there, 
too, the first Passover in the Land of Promise had 
been celebrated. Amid these great memorials and 
memories of the past, with the swiftly flowing river 
sweeping constantly beside them to the Dead Sea, 
surrounded by all the associations of those glorious 



FORSAKEN? NEVER! 



•33 



days, which had left an unfading splendour upon the 
history of their fathers, the people gathered from far 
and near to crown Saul king. He had been desig- 
nated at Mizpeh; he was to be crowned at Gilgal; it 
was the inauguration of his reign, its ratification and 
confirmation by the entire people. After this great 
ceremony had taken place, Saul and his people re- 
joiced together with peace-ofiferings and thank- 
offerings before God; and this was the moment that 
Samuel chose to lay down his office as judge — ^the 
last of the judges, and the first of the prophets. 

I. Samuel's Resignation. — An end must come to 
the longest and most successful ministry, and the au- 
thor of the Book of Ecclesiasticus, reverting to this 
event in Samuel's life, says: "Before his long sleep 
Samuel made protestation of his innocence, before 
God and the people." Yes, the long sleep will come 
to all, and happy are they who before they lay their 
heads down to the last sleep and their spirits enter to 
receive their final award, are able to extend their 
hands and bare their hearts before those who have 
known them best, and say, " These at least are clean." 

This is what Samuel by the grace of God was able 
to do. 'Standing bare-headed before the vast audi- 
ence of the men of Israel, and pointing to his white 
locks, he said, " I am old and gray-headed, and I have 
walked before you [as in Eastern lands a shepherd 
precedes his flock] from my boyhood up." His had 



134 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

been an unblemished career, and for his own sake and 
for the sake of God on whose belialf he stood, he was 
anxious to obtain from the people a vindication of the 
blamelessness of his career. He therefore protested: 
" I have not defrauded you, nor oppressed you. 
Whose ox have I taken? Whose ass? Can any man 
confront me as having taken from his hand even a 
sandal as a bribe that I should turn away mine eyes 
from his misdoing? " And all the people, like the 
leaves of the forest rustling before the wind, with one 
unanimous consent, cried : " Thou hast not defrauded, 
nor oppressed, nor taken anything from our hand." 

But the old man was not content; he wanted to 
bind the people by a solemn oath, as in the very sight 
of God and the king; and, therefore, he said, lifting 
his hand to heaven, " I call God to witness against 
you this day and his anointed king, that what you 
have said is true." And again, from the lips of all 
the people, with one unanimous shout, there came the 
response, " God is witness.'' The old man was com- 
forted, and added: " Yes, God is witness, the very God 
who brought our people out of Egypt, and appointed 
Moses and Aaron." 

Oh, that all our public men to-day were as clean- 
banded and pure-hearted as Samuel was! that when 
the records of their actions are rehearsed before the 
judgment-seat of God it may be discovered that 
those who have been high in office have not prosti- 
tuted their high position for their own emolument, or 



FORSAKENf NEVER! 135 

acted for private gain, but that they are clean-handed 
and pure-hearted. Happy is that nation whose pubHc 
men are free from all complicity with bribery and 
from making profit out of the necessities or the sore 
distress of their fatherland! 

II. He Designated his People's Sin. — It was a 
great opportunity to show them where they had done 
wrong, and a man whose own hands are clean is per- 
mitted to be the sincere critic of others' misdoing. 
See to it that your own eye is single, and that the 
beam is extracted from it before you essay to remove 
the mote from your brother's eye. In several par- 
ticulars he pleaded with that dense mass of people, 
and dared to hold up the crimes of his nation, that 
they might see them as they were. 

First, he set himself to show the difference between 
their former and their latter method of procedure. 
He carried their thoughts back to Egypt, and, in 
effect, said: When your fathers were in bondage to 
the Egyptians, and under the oppression of Pharaoh, 
you cried unto Jehovah, and in gracious answer He 
raised up deliverance. And when in the days of the 
Judges you were oppressed first by Sisera, then by 
the Philistines, and then by the people of Moab, you 
cried to God for deliverance, and it camejJtj,uLJlow, 
when the threatened invasion of Nahash, the king of 
the Ammonites, was filling the horizon with thunder- 
clouds, instead of holding a great invocation for 



136 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

prayer, you insisted upon my appointing a king. 
Why have you deteriorated? Why was prayer your 
natural resort three hundred years ago, and now it is 
neglected? Is it not because you are prayerless that 
you have drifted from your ancient moorings? In 
this is a great sin. 

Must not we always take care that, instead of say- 
ing impulsively and impetuously, " We will do this 
or that," we should constantly wait before God that 
He would appoint a deliverer? 

Secondly, in his dealing with the people, he put a 
new reading upon past history. On their side, they 
pointed out the successive catastrophes which had 
befallen their country; how the Ammonites, the Phil- 
istines, the Moabites, and Sisera, and other surround- 
ing nations, had oppressed them, and brought them 
under their power, and therefore, as a way of deliver- 
ance from such troubles, they had argued the neces- 
sity of having a king. Samuel, of course, admitted 
the successive afflictions which had befallen his people, 
but he did not put the same reading upon them. He 
said : " You demand a king, who shall make such 
catastrophes no longer possible, but I tell you, on the 
other hand, that, whether you have a king or not, if 
you forget God, as you have forgotten Him, and if 
you turn to Baalim and Ashtaroth as you have turned 
to them, neither your king, nor any alternative mode 
of government you can invent, will deliver you from 
the consequences." In other words, he made it clear 



FORSAKEN? NEVERl 



137 



that it was not the presence or absence of a monarchy, 
but the want of singleness of purpose, and devotion 
to Jehovah, which had been the cause and root of all 
their troubles. 

Again, there is a lesson for ourselves. After all, it 
is not this man or that, who is necessary to a church, 
so long as the church itself is living before God in in- 
corruption, and sincerity of truth, and is following the 
lead of the beacon fire by night and the cloudy pillar 
by day. When a church is right with God, God 
stands for the church. 

Thirdly, he indicated to the people that God had 
never failed to send them a man when a man was 
wanted. He said: " Look back upon your past his- 
tory. 'Even apart from an hereditary line of kings, 
with the prestige of royal descent, God has always 
raised up a man to help you in an emergency. Con- 
sider — did not He raise up Moses and Aaron? Did 
not He raise up Jephthah and Barak (see R. v. mar- 
gin), Gideon and myself? See how perpetually, in 
the dark hour, in answer to prayer, God has sent you 
the man that was needed. Could you not have 
trusted Him; and instead of being so urgent for a 
king, could you not have waited for Him to do for 
you, as he had done aforetime? " 

Lastly, he said: " My countrymen, you have greatly 
deteriorated; you have failed in your faith, you have 
demanded a visible king, but have forgotten the in- 
visible Lord; you have magnified the arm of flesh, 



138 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

but have forgotten the mighty power of the Eternal. 
You have been sheltering under the idea of a new 
royalty, whereas God was your King, your true Head, 
the Leader and Patron of the nation. You should 
have rested only on Him." 

Are we not all liable to the same lapse of faith? 
We look to the visible and forget the invisible. The 
air is filled with anxiety, clamour, and controversy, 
whilst in the shadow, behind the thin veil of sense, 
stands the eternal crowned Christ, waiting ever to 
trim the lamps of the golden candlesticks and to hold 
the stars in his right hand. It was a brave thing, a 
noble thing, a right thing, for Samuel to show to his 
people how they had drifted from the old true stand- 
ing ground of faith into practical atheism and un- 
belief. 

in. Samuel's Assurance. — Having handed over 
his office to Saul, who henceforth was to be the shep- 
herd and leader of the chosen people, and having 
dealt with their failure and deterioration, he went on 
to say with inimitable sweetness, " Tlie Lord will not 
forsake his people for his great name's sake." Oh, 
take these words to heart, and let them sink, like a 
refrain of music, into your soul. The Lord will not 
forsake his people! They may have lost their ideal; 
for a moment they may have drifted from their ancient 
moorings of childlike confidence, but the Lord cannot 
forsake his people, for his great name's sake. 



FORSAKEN? NEVER f 139 

How perpetually this argument was used by the 
holy men of the old time. For instance, in Exod. 
xxxii. 12, where God talks of casting away his people, 
when they had made the golden calf and worshipped 
it with garlands and dances, Moses dares to go into 
the Divine Presence, and say: " Lord, Thou canst not 
do it, for if Thou dost, thy character will be impugned, 
and the Egyptians will say, ' He was not able to bring 
them in ; he brought them out, but his power was not 
sufficient to accomplish that to which He had put his 
hand.' Thou canst not do it. Tliy credit is at 
stake!" 

And in Josh. vii. 9, when Israel had fled before 
the men of Ai, Joshua threw himself upon the ground 
before the Ark and cried, " O my God, if thy people 
fail like this, what will the Egyptians say? What 
will the Philistines say? What will the nations of 
Canaan say? And what wilt Thou do for thy great 
Name. Before Heaven and earth Tliou wilt stand 
discredited if Thou failest to give us this land as Thou 
hast promised." 

Then in Isa. xlviii. 9, n, later on in the history of 
the chosen people, Isaiah, dealing with their sins, and 
speaking to them in God's name, says : " For my 
name's sake will I defer mine anger; and for my 
praise will I refrain for thee that I cut thee not off." 
" For mine own sake, for mine own sake, will I do it; 
for how should my name be profaned? and my glory 
will I not give to another." 



140 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

In Ezek. xx., these remarkable words are repeated 
thrice : " I wrought for my name's sake, that it 
should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, 
among whom they were." God's name is God's char- 
acter. He is bound by his self-respect not to forsake 
his people. 

The old prophet went on to say : " It hath pleased 
the Lord to make you his people." God hides his 
reasons. He loves because He will. The flame of 
his love requires no fuel. The bush is not consumed 
for its maintenance. We may put alongside with these, 
those words of the great apostle : " He gave Himself 
for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and 
purify unto Himself a people for his own possession." 
This assurance applies to men: 

( I ) As Individuals. — God will not forsake you. He 
did not choose you because of your goodness or 
beauty, and He will not forsake you because j'ou 
have failed of your best. He has made you his child 
by adoption and grace, not that there was anything 
in you to specially attract Him, but because He 
would. Some day He may explain to you his reason, 
but just now there is no reason that any of us can 
guess at, why we have been chosen from the rest of 
men to be his. It has pleased Him to make us his 
sons and daughters. We may have sinned against 
Him and grieved his Holy Spirit, we may have mixed 
ourselves with the seed of the people amongst whom 
we dwell, but God will not forsake his people. If He 



FORSAKEN? NEVER! 141 

did, there would be a charge against his love that it 
was not infinite, that it ceased after sin had reached 
to a certain height of outrage, that it could not 
abound over sin. His power also would be im- 
pugned, for the lost spirits in hell would boast that 
He had attempted more than he was able to perform 
— that He had not counted the cost. 

There would also be an imputation upon his im- 
mutability. It would be spread through the universe 
that He took .up a sinful soul, cleansed and clothed 
it, loved and blessed it, and then He changed. At the 
news that God could be fickle, the palace of eternity 
would rock, the throne of Heaven shake, and the 
mighty vault of space would reel to destruction. 
God dare not surrender the work which He has begun 
in the heart of man. That is why we may count on 
being saved. We have no positive claim on God; 
there is no native beauty nor attractiveness to Him 
who sees the inner life; there is nothing necessary in 
our service; but He has set his love upon us, and He 
must go through with it, and stand to his bargain be- 
fore all worlds. O soul of man, God will not forsake 
thee. 

(2) As a Church why could not God forsake 
Israel? Because the chosen people was the type of 
what He desired every nation to become; and there- 
fore He must needs go on building up Israel, that his 
type might not be broken; and He had to work 
through Israel to bring other nations to its level. 'If 



142 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

God had abandoned Israel, how could He have hoped 
to regenerate the world? 

What was true of Israel may be true of a church. 
There may be many failures and inconsistencies in 
her that ought to be altered. But God cannot cast 
her away in spite of all her sinful imperfection. He 
will refine and purify her till she realise his ideal and 
become his perfect Bride. 

(3) As a Nation. — Our country cannot go drifting 
on into materialism and irreligion, as she is doing. 
God cannot afford to let her become immoral and de- 
based; cannot permit her to follow in the way of 
Rome and Greece; cannot forsake the people whom 
He has blessed and used since the days of Alfred, who 
have been the pioneers of missionary and Christian 
civilisation through the entire world. For his Name's 
sake He cannot do it. No, it is certain that, sooner or 
later, a great revival of religion will bring us back to 
our first love. 

(4) As a World. — God cannot forsake this world, 
reeking though it be with blasphemy and impurity, 
with tyranny and sin. It has been saturated with 
the blood of his Son and of myriads of his saints. It 
has been bedewed with the tears of the noblest souls 
that have ever breathed, and it is yet destined to shine 
amidst its sister stars with an untarnished beauty; it 
is to be the specimen to all the universe of what God 
can do with a fallen world and a degraded race. God 
cannot forsake our earth, and some day we shall see 



FORSAKEN? NEVER! 



U3 



her glistening in the Hght that shone over paradise, 
and enswathed with an unpolluted atmosphere. 
Purity shall breathe again over her landscapes and 
oceans. Yes, the children of men will come out from 
all the sin and evil by which they have been so long 
oppressed, and shall walk in the white robes of purity, 
love, and truth. " The Lord will not forsake his 
people for his great Name's sake, because it hath 
pleased the Lord to make you a people unto Himself." 



XIV. 

■Rot QcaslnQ in iprager. 

(i Samuel xii. 16-25.) 

O, who can tell how many hearts are altars to his praise, 
From which the silent Prayer ascends through patient 

nights and days! 
The sacrifice is offered still in secret and alone, 
O world, ye do not know them, but He can help his own. 

— A. Procter. 

IN all Samuel's career there is nothing finer than 
the closing scene of his public action as the 
judge and leader of the Hebrew nation. Had he 
died young, his place in the annals of his country, 
and indeed in history, would have been much lower; 
and our appreciation of his character much less. 
Naturally he found it difficult to step down from his 
premiership, and inaugurate a regime with which he 
had no sympathy, since it seemed to be a setting 
aside of Israel's greatest glory in having God for 
King. But he suppressed his strong personal an- 
tipathies, and did his very best to start the nation on 
the new path it had chosen, selecting a king with the 
utmost care, and, regardless of personal suffering, 
bridging over the gulf between the old order and the 
new. 

We cannot turn from the record of the great con- 



NOT CEASING IN PRAYER. 



145 



vocation, assembled before the Lord at Gilgal, to 
ratify Saul's election, without noticing the repeated 
allusions to Samuel's power in prayer. He appears 
to have been the John Knox of his age, as mighty in 
prayer as in statesmanship. His whole career seems 
to have been bathed in the spirit of supplication. 

As a boy, with hands meekly clasped, as Sir Joshua 
Reynolds has depicted him, he asked God to speak, 
whilst his ear was quick and attent to catch his 
lowest whispers. In the Book of the Psalms he is 
mentioned as chief among those that call on Grod's 
name, and as having been answered (xcix. 6). The 
Prophet Jeremiah alludes to the wonderful power which 
he exercised in intercessory prayer, when he pleaded 
for his people (xv. i). All Israel knew the long, pierc- 
ing cry of the prophet of the Lord. In their perils 
his intercessions had been their deliverance, and in 
their battles his prayers had secured them victory 
(i Sam. vii. 8, viii. 6). There was " an open road " 
between God and him, so that thoughts of God's 
thinking were able to come into his heart; and he re- 
flected them back again with intense and burning 
desire. 

I. Samuel's Prayer for Thunder and Rain. — 
The heart of man cries out for Divine authentication. 
In every age a crooked and perverse generation seeks 
a sign, and in seeking it proves how far it has wan- 
dered from the source of light, and become blinded 



146 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

in spiritual vision. If our nature realised its Divine 
ideal, it would discern God in the ordinary and com- 
mon incidents of providence, in the morning light 
and the summer air, in dews that noiselessly alight 
and zephyrs that gently kiss the slumbering woods, 
in the garniture of spring and the carpeting of 
flowers (Acts xiv. 17). But the eyes of the soul are 
blinded, and men do not see the traces of the Divine 
footprints across the world day by day. " Lord," 
said the prophet, " thy hand is lifted up, but they see 
not " (Isa. xxvi. 11). 

In default of the faculty of detecting God's presence 
in the noiseless and' ordinary providence of life, man 
asks for some startling phenomena to prove that God 
is speaking. " Bring," he cries to the heaven-sient 
messenger, " credentials so startling and extraordi- 
nary that I may know without doubt that thou art 
properly accredited. The still, small voice is not 
enough. We must have the hurricane, the fire, and 
the bolt from the blue. Then we shall know that 
God speaks by thee, and that the word from thy lips 
is true." 

Samuel knew this, and he perhaps longed for some 
Divine corroboration of his words. God's trusted 
servants are content to work through long years 
amid persistent resistance and apathy, if only they are 
assured that they are on the line of the Divine pur- 
pose. " And it came to pass at the time of the offer- 
ing of the evening sacrifice that Elijah the prophet 



NOT CEASING IN PRAYER. 147 

came near, and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, 
and of Israel, let it be known this day that Thou art 
God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I 
have done all these things at thy word." Thus, in a su- 
preme moment, one of the noblest of his successors 
appealed to God, and his words expressed what was 
in Samuel's heart at this great hour. He had sur- 
rendered his prerogatives, and introduced his suc- 
cesscM-; had confronted his people with their sins, and 
announced the heavy penalties that must follow on 
disobedience; and he yearned that they should hear 
another voice, asseverating his words, and pressing 
them home on conscience and on heart. 

It was under the influence of these thoughts that 
he concluded his address and appeal, with the an- 
nouncement, " Now, therefore, stand still, and see 
this great thing, which the Lord will do before your 
eyes. Is it not wheat-harvest to-day ? I will call unto 
the I^rd, and He shall send thunder and rain, that ye 
may perceive and see that your wickedness is great 
which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking 
you a king." 

During the wheat-harvest, lasting from the middle 
of May to the middle of June, rain is almost unknown 
in Palestine, and the occurrence of a thunderstorm, 
coming as it did at the call of the aged prophet, was 
too startlingly unusual to be viewed as other than the 
Divine authentication of his claims. 

It may be supposed that this incident is altogether 



148 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

without parallel, belonging to the realms of Old 
Testament story; but I cannot think it to be so. 
Nature is much more sympathetic with man than we 
sometimes suppose, because her beauty or terror is 
but the veil beneath which the Almighty hides Him- 
self. How, save on the supposition that God an- 
swered the appeal of his servants, can we account for 
the fact of the terrific tempest that swept over our 
shores when the proud Armada of Spain menaced the 
liberties of Protestant England? And how, save on 
the supposition that Heaven itself protested against 
the blasphemous pretensions of the Papacy, can we 
account for the memorable fact that on the afternoon 
when the dogma of the Papal Infallibility was an- 
nounced the Vatican at midday was suddenly invested 
with a pall of blackest midnight? 

But there are other methods of Divine authentica- 
tion on which every true servant of God may rely. 
When Paul and Barnabas abode for a long time in 
Iconium, speaking boldly in the Lord, " He gave 
testimony unto the word of his grace " ; and the 
writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews generalises the 
experience of the early heralds of the Gospel when 
he says that the message of God's great salvation was 
confirmed by them that heard the word, " God also 
bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, 
and with divers miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, 
according unto his own will " (Acts xiv. 3 ; Heb. ii. 
3,4). 



NOT CEASING IN PRAYER. 149 

We cannot be too thankful for the witness of the 
Holy Spirit, whose voice is to the faithful servant of 
God all, and more, that the thunder was to Samuel. 
It was this that armed the primitive saints with irre- 
sistible power. " We are his witnesses," cried the 
apostles, " and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God 
hath given to them that obey Him." " Our Gospel," 
wrote the greatest apostle of all, " came not unto you 
in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy 
Ghost, and in much assurance " (i Thess. i. 5). 

May I ask if my fellow-servants realise this— that 
the Holy Spirit is in the Church to-day, that He is 
prepared to bear witness to every true word which is 
spoken in the name of Jesus, and that He will con- 
vict of sin, righteousness, and judgment; so that the 
faith of our hearers should not stand in the wisdom of 
man, but in the power of God, God bearing them wit- 
ness and giving them the Holy Spirit (i Cor. ii. 1-4; 
Acts XV. 8). 

This is the fatal lack of our preaching. We speak 
earnestly and faithfully, but we do not sufficiently 
look for nor rely on the divine co-witness; we do not 
understand the communion and fellowship of the 
Comforter, and our hearers do not hear his voice 
thrilling their souls, as thunder in the natural world, 
with the conviction that the things which we speak 
are the truths of God. Only let the passionate long- 
ing of our heart be, " Father, glorify thy name," and 
voices will come as from heaven, saying, " I have both 



15© SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

glorified it, and will glorify it again." Whilst some 
that stand by may say that " It thundered," others will 
say " An angel spake " (John xii. 28, 29). 

Oh, our God, give us such power in prayer that 
when we pray Thou shalt answer '' in the secret place 
of thunder," and send thunder and rain. 

n. Samuel's Unceasing Intercessions. — ^Terri- 
fied by the loud thunder-peals and the torrents of rain, 
the people were urgent to secure Samuel's interces- 
sion on their behalf. They feared for their lives and 
their property, and entreated him to pray for them. 
" Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God," they 
said, " that we die not " ; and the emphasis they laid 
on the word thy seemed to indicate that they felt no 
longer worthy of their ancient prerogative, as the 
chosen people. Touched with their appeal, and con- 
fident that Jehovah only desired to corroborate his 
word, the aged seer calmed their fears, urged them 
never to turn aside to vain idols, which could neither 
profit nor deliver, assured them that the Lord would 
not forsake them, and ended with the striking words: 
"Moreover, as for me, God forbid that I sitould ji« 
against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you." 

Samuel realised that prayer zvas action in the spiritual 
plane. The energy which we exert in action in the 
physical sphere becomes prayer in the spiritual. It 
has often been said, Laborare est orare (" to labour is 
to pray ") ; but the converse is much truer, Orare 



NOT CEASING IN PRAYER. 151 

est laborare ("to pray is to labour"). "The fer- 
vent prayer of a righteous man," says James, 
" availeth much in its working." Therefore it was, 
that when the good Epaphras could no longer help 
his brethren at Colosse by his words and deeds, he 
betook himself to prayer, and laboured fervently for 
them all in prayer (Col. iv. 12). 

" Work shall be prayer, if all be wrought 
As Thou wouldst have it done: 
And prayer, by Thee inspired and taught, 
Itself with work be one. " 

Samuel could no longer exert his energies for his 
people, as he had done. The limitations imposed by 
his advancing years, and by the substitution of the 
kingdom for his judgeship, made it impossible that he 
should make his yearly rounds as aforetime, but he 
was able to translate all that energy into another 
method of helpfulness. The light became heat, the 
water became steam. The prayers of God's saints 
were equivalent, henceforward, to battalions of 
soldiers. 

What the telescope is to the eye, the bicycle to the 
foot, the telephone to the voice, and the steam-driven 
machine to the hand, in enlarging and increasing 
human power, that is prayer to the soul, because it 
links us with the mighty power of God, it touches 
springs that unloose spiritual forces which are eternal 
in their duration and universal in their scope. 
" Mighty is he who is mighty in grayer; he hcis 



152 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

learned how to labour with the energies of God." 
Why, O soul of man, wilt thou not lay thy fingers on 
the keyboard of the eternal powers, which would 
respond instantly to the touch ! How great a mis- 
take and loss it is for thee to be satisfied with the 
lower keyboards of the natural and intellect, when 
the spiritual, the highest and furthest-reaching, awaits 
thee! 

Samuel viewed prayer as a Divine instinct. For him 
to thwart the promptings towards prayer which arose 
within his soul would be nothing short of sin. " God 
forbid," he said, " that I should sin against Him in 
ceasing to pray." 

Let us recognise, we may say with another, that, 
logic or no logic, men pray, and they want to pray. 
The instinct to do so seems to be part of ourselves. 
Probably it is not constant, and it is only the saint who 
remains in the spirit of prayer; but some time or 
other, and always when the spiritual nature stirs 
within us, we begin to pray. Prayer is therefore 
more than petition, it is the movement of the spirit 
Godward. We recognise our own limitations and 
attempt to reach beyond them into the infinite. 
Therefore, in every true prayer, there is much that 
cannot be put in words. " The spirit maketh inter- 
cession with groanings that cannot be uttered." 

To thwart this instinct, whether it prompts us to 
pray for ourselves or for others, is to do violence to 
our noblest nature, to grieve the Holy Spirit of God, 



NOT CEASING IN PRAYER. 



153 



and to sin against the Divine order. Prayerlessness 
is not only an indication of a besotted and demoralised 
nature, but is in itself a sin, that requires confession 
and cleansing in the blood of the Cross. And when, 
in answer to our lowly supplications, we are again 
brought nigh by the blood of Christ, we shall find 
that prayer will rise as naturally and freely in our 
hearts as a fountain from unseen depths fed from the 
everlasting hills. Prayer is the response of the soul 
to God, the return tide from us to Him, the sending 
back in vapour what we receive in showers of heav- 
enly rain. 

Samuel viewed prayer as a trusteeship. He could no 
longer act as judge, but he felt that the interests of the 
nation had been entrusted to his hands for the highest 
ends, and it would be treachery to fail in conserving 
and extending them at least by his intercessions. 
Often must he have gone aside, as Moses on the 
Mount, and as our Lord on the hills that engirdled 
the blue waters of Galilee, to pour out his soul in 
strong cryings and tears for his brethren, his kinsmen 
according to the flesh, who were Israehtes, to whom 
pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the cove- 
nants, and the giving of the law, and the service of 
God, and the promises. Often, like the apostle Paul, 
he had great heaviness and continual sorrow in his 
heart. Often, when the Philistines overran the land, 
and oppressed the people with their tyranny, it must 
have seemed as though his heart would break. The 



iS4 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

failure of Saul to realise his ideal only elicited the 
more strenuous appeals to God to save both king and 
people, and the victory which we must record in our 
next chapter must have been due to his eager en- 
treaties. 

This is a model which we may all copy. The one 
question for the Church in the present day is whether 
she may reckon on a new manifestation of the power 
of the Holy Spirit, and this is entirely corttingent on 
another question, "Is it possible to bring the whole 
Church to her knees? " If these words are of weight 
with any, let me ask them to join in one persevering 
and heaven-moving appeal to God that He would 
awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of 
old, and do great things like those of which our 
fathers have told us. 



XV. 

Ube Causes of Saul's 2)owntall. 

(i Samuel xiii. 13, 14.) 

Bide thou thy time! 
Watch with meek eyes the race of pride and crime, 
Sit in the gate, and be the heathen's jest. 

Smiling and self-possest, 
O thou, to whom is pledged a victor's sway, 
Bide thou the victor's day. 

— N. H. J. 

THIS chapter is the story of a great tragedy, 
since it contains the history of the incident 
which revealed Saul's unfitness to be the 
founder of a line of kings. Had he stood this test, 
there is no doubt that he would have been, not only 
the first monarch of Israel, but the father of a royal 
race, and the whole after-history of the chosen people 
might have been different. But, as we shall see — 
though, at first, his kingdom augured prosperity to 
his fatherland — it evidently lacked the elements of 
permanence and continuity and of becoming Israel's 
permanent bulwark against the invasions of the 
enemy from without and the cancer of disintegration 
or corruption within. 

Let us gather around this story, not only because 



iS6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

it has so much to do with the history of God's people, 
but because it is full of instruction for ourselves. 
Turning from Saul to David, Samuel said, " The Lord 
hath sought Him a man after his own heart." It is, 
therefore, clear that, in some way, Saul had ceased to 
be "a man after God's own heart," and it becomes 
us carefully to inquire the reason, that we may avoid 
the rocks on which this good ship split and foundered. 

You will remark that the chapter which tells the 
history of this tragedy, the overcasting of a bright 
morning, the spoiling of a fair and beautiful promise, 
also contains the story of the unutterable distress to 
which the chosen people had been reduced by another 
invasion of the Philistines. We are told, for instance, 
in ver. 6, that the people of Israel were in a strait, 
that they were distressed, that they hid themselves in 
caves and thickets, in rocks and in pits ; indeed, some 
of them even crossed the Jordan, and forsook their 
fatherland in the hour of its extremity; while those 
who were yet associated with Saul and Jonathan, as 
the nucleus of the royal army, followed him, trembling 
(ver. 7). A spirit of fearfulness had settled down 
upon the whole people ; the old national spirit had de- 
cayed; it seemed as though they could never again be 
induced to stand against the Philistines, any more 
than a flock of sheep against a pack of wolves. 

We are also informed of the numbers of the vast 
host of Philistines which had been gathered from all 
parts in order to crush out the movement towards a 



THE CAUSES OP SAUL'S DOWNFALL. 157 

national existence, of which the coronation of Saul 
and the exploits of Jonathan were symptoms (ver. 3). 
We can overhear the tidings brought to Saul (ver. 5) 
by some panic-stricken messenger, who, with the ex- 
aggeration of abject fear, described the Philistines as 
the sand which is on the seashore in multitude. 

A further proof of the hapless misery of the people 
is adduced in verse ig: there was no smith found 
throughout the whole land of Israel, and the Hebrews 
had to take their implements of agriculture down to 
the smithies of the Philistines, in order that they 
might be sharpened for their use. Never in the his- 
tory of the chosen people were there more dire 
calamity, more absolute hopelessness and despair, 
than reigned around Saul and throughout the entire 
country at this hour. 

At this juncture Saul seems to have withdrawn his 
troops, such as they were, from Michmash, and to 
have taken up his position on the ancient site of Gil- 
gal, where the act of circumcision was performed after 
Israel had crossed the Jordan under Joshua. There 
upon the level land, and therefore exposed to the 
assault of the Philistine hosts at any moment, Saul 
seems to have pitched his camps, whilst his heroic son, 
Jonathan, kept up a post of observation in the vicinity 
of the Philistine hosts. 

Whilst Saul with his soldiers remained at Gilgal, 
every day marked the diminution of his host. This 
man and that stole away, either across the Jordan as a 



158 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

fugitive, or to hide in some hole and corner of the 
hills. 

It may be asked why, at such a time, Saul did not 
make one desperate effort against the Philistines. 
Why did he wait there day after day, whilst his army 
evaporated before his eyes? Ah! thereby hangs a 
story — to understand which we must turn back a page 
or two in the inspired record. In i Sam. x. 8, in that 
early morning interview, when Samuel designated 
Saul for the crown, he told him that the crisis of his 
life would overtake him at Gilgal, a prophecy the 
fulfilment of which had now arrived. " Thou shalt 
go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will 
come down unto thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and to 
sacrifice sacrifices of peace-offerings ; seven days shalt 
thou tarry, till I come unto thee, and show thee what 
thou shalt do." 

I. Saul's Mistake. — This command, uttered three 
years before to Saul, as he stood on the threshold of 
his vast opportunities, involved two things, and each 
of them constituted a supreme test. 

First, whether he was prepared to act as God's vice- 
gerent, not as absolute monarch determining his own 
policy, and acting on his own initiative, but as God's 
servant, receiving the marching orders of his life 
through the prophet's lips; not acting as an autocrat, 
but as one to whom there had been a delegation of 
Divine authority. 



THE CAUSES OF SAUL'S DOWNFALL. 159 

Second, whether he could control his impetuous 
nature, put the curb upon his impulse, and hold him- 
self well in hand. 

It was this embargo which Samuel had laid upon 
him that made him wait, day after day. Can you not 
imagine how his chosen advisers and warriors would 
come around him and urge him to do something? 
Might they not have pointed to the Philistine hosts 
encamped at Michmash, gathering like a cloud of 
storm? Might they not have told him how, unless 
he acted quickly, his paternal estate would be wiped 
out before the invasion? Might they not have 
pointed to the dwindling hosts, and said, Rise up and 
do something; it were better to die beneath the Phil- 
istines' hand than allow them to pounce down on you 
as the bird of prey on the trembling dove ! 

But he waited, day after day. " He tarried seven 
days, according to the set time that Samuel had ap- 
pointed; but Samuel came not to Gilgal, and the 
people were scattered from him." Then it would 
seem that within a brief space of the expiry of the 
allotted time he could wait no more. He thought 
that Samuel must have forgotten the appointment, or 
had been intercepted in making his way from Ramah 
through the Philistine lines. He had waited till 
within half an hour (because to offer a bumt-ofifering 
and a peace-ofifering could not take much longer), 
and then spoiled the whole, by his inability to delay 
further; and he said to the priest, who still lingered 



i6o SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

by the ancient site where God had been worshipped 
and the Tabernacle posted, " Bring hither the ephod, 
and let us offer the sacrifice." " And it came to pass 
that as soon as he had made an end of offering the 
bumt-offering, behold, Samuel came." 

Ah! if only some sentry standing on a pinnacle of 
rack could have looked over into the adjacent valley 
and seen the form of the old man drawing nearer to 
the camp he might have warned the King, crying, 
" Samuel is coming." But there was no one to arrest 
him, nothing but the monition and remonstrance of 
his own heart. It was shown that he could not wait 
for God, in absolute faith that He could not fail nor 
deceive. He was careful to maintain an outward rite, 
but the spirit of devotion and faith was altogether 
wanting. As he was, his successors would become, 
to the undoing of Israel; therefore his kingdom could 
not continue. 

The one lesson that comes back to us with almost 
overwhelming force is that the man who is after 
God's heart is the man who will obey God to the let- 
ter, who will wait for God to the last moment, who 
will dare to stand amid a diminishing and dwindling 
army, and even see disaster imminent, but, because 
he has not received the marching orders of God, will 
stand still, until presently God sets him free. 

How many religious people there are, who, as they 
review their past life, can recall moments when they 
did not know what to do. An inner voice, still. 



THE CAUSES OF SAUL'S DOWNFALL. i6i 

sweet, but commanding, bade them wait and trust; 
but many other voices, loud and strident, summoned 
them to act; so that the still small voice of faith, of 
resignation, of absolute obedience was silenced, the 
one rash word spoken, the one irrevocable act per- 
formed, betraying the weakness of the heart, the in- 
effectiveness of the resolve. When all was over, 
Samuel has come, and we have reproached ourselves, 
saying, " Oh, if I had only thought that God was so 
near, I would not have acted as I did ; woe is me, why 
could not I wait? " Samuel always comes just at the 
last moment, but it is so hard to wait till he does 
come. "Master, Master, we perish; and He arose, 
and rebuked the storm, and said, Why are ye fearful, 
O ye of little faith?" God hath not given us the 
spirit of fear, but the spirit of power, of love, and of 
self-discipline and self-restraint. 

Man becomes so weary of waiting, and it seems as 
though God were so slow. God's mighty processes 
sweep around a wide orbit. One day is as a thousand 
years, but He is coming as the morning, as the spring, 
as the millennium. " His going forth is sure as the 
morning, and He shall come unto us as the rain, as 
the latter rain that watereth the earth." 

II. Saul's Disingenuous Plea. — Notice Saul's 
explanation to Samuel. He said : " I said to myself, 
The Philistines will come down upon me to Gilgal, 
and I have not intreated the favour of the Lord. I 



i62 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

forced myself therefore, and offered the burnt-ofiEer- 
ing." That surely was insincere. He laid the blame 
on circumstances ; he said practically : " The circum- 
stances of my lot forced my hand; I did not want to 
do it, I was most reluctant, but I could not help 
myself; the Philistines were coming; I tell you the 
sceptre was wrested from my grasp, and I had to obey 
the imperious voice of the misfortunes that fell thick 
and fast upon me." His speech reminds us of 
Aaron's, who stripped the people naked before God 
and their enemies, and sought to excuse himself by 
saying, " They gave me their earrings ; I cast them 
into the fire, and there came out this calf." 

We are all prone to speak in the same tone. When 
the rash word has been uttered, and the proud act 
done; when we have refused to obey, and have seen 
the house of our life toppling down upon us, or con- 
suming in the flames of our folly, then we have 
said, " Circumstances compelled me, I had to do it, 
and I did it; I forced myself, my hand was 
forced." 

O soul of man, thou art greater than circumstances ; 
greater than things; greater than the mob of evil 
counsellors. Thou art meant to be God's crowned 
and enthroned. king; to rule and not to be ruled; to 
obey God only, and to resist all other attempts to 
bring thee under the yoke. Rouse thee, lest it should 
be said of thee also, that thy kingdom shall not con- 
tinue. 



THE CAUSES OF SAUL'S DOWNFALL. 163 

IIL Mark the Alternative to This. — In an- 
swer to all this, Samuel, speaking in the name of God, 
said, " I have chosen a man after my own heart, who 
shall perform all my will." In Jesse's home the lad 
was being prepared who could believe and not make 
haste. Listen to the manner in which this man after 
God's own heart spake in after-years, " I waited pa- 
tiently for the Lord, and He inclined unto me, and 
heard my cry. He brought me up also out of an hor- 
rible pit, out of the miry clay, and He set my feet 
upon a rock and established my goings. And He 
hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto 
our God; many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in 
the Lord. Blessed is the man that maketh the Lord 
his trust, and respecteth not the proud, nor such as 
turn aside to lies " (Psa. xl. 1-4). 

Wait, wait thou thy Lord's leisure. Let thine heart 
stop its feverish beating, and thy pulse register no 
more its tumultuous waves of emotion ! To act now 
would only disappoint the highest hopes, mar the Di- 
vine purposes, and set stones rolling that shall never 
be stopped. Wait for God, stand still and see his 
salvation. His servant is coming up the pass; his 
steps may not be quite so speedy as we would have 
them, but He will arrive to the moment; not a mo- 
ment too soon, but not a moment too late. God's 
messenger is timed to come when the heart has al- 
most failed, the steps almost gone, and hope almost 
vanished. " The Lord is at hand ! " Oh, wait, my 



1 64 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

soul ! wait, wait upon God, for God cannot be behind, 
as He will not be before, the allotted and appointed 
moment; 

And when He comes there will be laughter for 
tears, harvest for sowing, blue skies for clouds, and 
long days of rapturous bliss that shall make thee for- 
get the shame and reproach of the past! 



XVI. 

" XCwo putting ^en Trbousanb to jfltgbt" 

(i Samuel xiv.) 

Oh! I have seen the day, 
When with a single word, — 
God helping me to say 

' My trust is in the Lord! ' 
My soul hath quelled a thousand foes, 

Fearless of all that could oppose. 

— COWPER. 

JUST two young men, with the glow of patriotism 
in their hearts^ and trust in God as their guiding- 
star — what may they not effect? 
Jonathan was a true knight of God, who anticipated 
some of the noblest traits of Christian chivalry. We 
may almost say of him that he was the Hebrew 
Bayard, a soldier without fear and without reproach. 
He lived pure, spoke true, righted wrong, was faithful 
to the high claims of human love, and followed the 
Christ, though as yet he knew Him not. His charac- 
ter serves as a bright background on which that of his 
father is but a sorry contrast. 

From the Jordan bank a noble valley, twelve miles 
in length, leads up into the hill country of Central 
Palestine, and so to the seaboard of the Mediterranean. 
Two miles from the head of this defile, and about eight 
miles due north of Jerusalem, the cliffs on either side 

165 



1 66 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

become very precipitous, and approach each other 
almost to touching. 

Conceive of a very narrow^ pass protected on either 
side by steep walls of chalky formation on which only 
the wild goats could find a footing, and almost un- 
scalable by man. The ridge on the north, which rises 
above an almost perpendicular crag into three knolls, 
was called Bozez, or " shining," because it reflects 
all day the full light of the Eastern sun, whilst that on 
the south, a few yards distant, was known as Seneh, 
" the acacia," being as constantly in the shade. Mich- 
mash crowned the former, and there the Philistines 
were encamped, whilst the little village of Geba lay 
above the latter, and thither Saul had removed his 
army, such as it was, withdrawing from the plains of 
the Jordan to watch the movements of the hostile force. 

How long the armies watched each other we have 
no means of knowing, nor can we guess what the result 
might have been had it not been for the heroic episode 
which we are to recount; but it is certain that Israel 
was absolutely spiritless. At the most the men of war 
who gathered around the pomegranate tree where 
Saul had pitched his tent numbered only 600, and 
these had only such rude weapons as clubs and goads. 

Jonathan chafed at the inaction and the disgrace 
which the whole situation attached to his countrymen. 
He was animated also by a profound faith in God, and 
was prompted by the Divine Spirit to an act which 
issued in a glorious victory and deliverance. 



PUTTING TEN THOUSAND TO FLIGHT. 167 

I. Jonathan Entered into the Divine Pur- 
pose. — It seemed to him impossible to suppose that 
God had forsaken the people of his choice or with- 
drawn from his ancient covenant. Had He promised, 
and could He not perform? Were not the peO'ple of 
Israel his chosen heritage? Had He not chosen them 
out of all the world, that they might be the custodians 
and purveyors of Divine truth to the nations? Was 
not the land of Canaan made over to them by an 
irrevocable deed of gift? Did not all the miraculous 
leadings and interpositions of the past confirm such 
an interpretation of the Divine purpose ? Surely, then, 
the present state of things could not be according to 
the Divine will! Surely the purpose of the Almighty 
was in conflict with the invasion of the land by these 
Philistine hordes, and only waited for some believing 
soul to enter into full communion with its mighty 
current, and deliverance would be secured ! 

Saul, on the other hand, had no perception of these 
things. The great past failed to speak to him. Dis- 
couraged by what met his eye and ear from morning 
to night, he had nio power to rouse himself to lay hold 
on the Divine promise of deliverance. The sentence 
of deposition, which Samuel had so recently pro- 
niounced, like a stone on the mouth of a tomb, seemed 
to shut him up to despair. 

It is of the utmost importance in this mortal life, 
when heart and flesh fail before the giant wrongs that 
assert themselves against the well-being of mankind — 



i68 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

such as the drink-traffic, the mania for betting and 
gambling, impurity, and the insensate absorption in 
pleasure, which are the Philistines of our time — to 
look away to the Divine purpose, as disclosed in the 
redemption achieved on the Cross by the blood of the 
world's Redeemer. Surely that cannot have been shed 
in vain. The power and potency of the Divine might 
are pledged to realise and accomplish that full deliver- 
ance of which the Cross was prophecy. The Son of 
Man has been manifested that He might destroy the 
works of the devil; and He will not fail nor be dis- 
couraged until that purpose has been realised. Happy 
are they who, like Jonathan, raise themselves above the 
depression of the moment in living fellowship with 
these eternal facts, and ally their weakness and help- 
lessness with the march of God, as He is ever going 
forth to establish righteousness and judgment in the 
earth, which has been redeemed by precious blood. 

II. He Yielded Himself as an Instrument. — 
God always works through human means. He calls 
us into fellowship with Himself, so that the Divine 
tides shall flow through human channels. He will 
multiply the bread, but He requires human hjmds to 
distribute it. He raises the dead, but man must roll 
away the stone and unwrap the cerements of the grave. 
He arrests Saul of Tarsus, but the words and patience 
of suffering saints must be the goad, which surely 
urge the pricks of the recreant soul to repent. God 



PUTTING TEN THOUSAND TO FLIGHT. 169 

is ever on the outjook for believing souls, who will 
receive his power and grace on the one hand, and 
transmit them on the other. He chooses themi, that 
by them He should make his mighty power known. 
Happy are they who are not insensible to the Divine 
impulse, nor disobedient to the heavenly vision. 

Jonathan was one of those blessed souls who are 
as sensitive to God as the retina of the eye to light, or 
the healthy muscle to the nerve; and " it fell upon a 
day that he said unto the young man that bore his 
armour, Come, let us go over to the Philistines' garri- 
son, that is on the other side." With a beautiful 
modesty " he told not his father " ; and in all proba- 
bility the two slipped away silently in the gray dawn, 
whilst their comrades were still wrapped in slumber. 
The intimation of a Divine purpose thrilled the ardent 
spirit of the young prince, to which he gave some 
clue in the words, " It may be that the Lord will work 
for us, for there is no restraint to the Lord to save by 
many or by few." 

Notice where Jonathan laid the emphasis. He had 
the smallest possible faith in himself, and the greatest 
faith in God. His soul waited for the Lord; in Him 
wa^ centred all his hope, and from his gracious help 
he expected great things. All that he aspired to was 
to be the humble vehicle through which the delivering 
grace of God might work. This is what God wants — 
not our strength, but our weakness, which in absolute 
despair turns to Him; not our armies, but two or 



170 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

three elect semis, who expect great things and dare 
them. It ie false to say that the Almighty is on the 
side of great battalions. All history goes to show that 
the movements which have transformed the face of 
the world have been achieved by the going forth of 
God through individuals, who have not been specially 
distinguished by outstanding talents, but have been 
led to surrender themselves absolutely to the Divine 
impulse. What shall I more say? — for time would 
fail to tell of Carey, and Wilberforce, and Livingstone, 
and George Miiller, and hundreds more. 

Yield yourselves to God — and I especially appeal to 
the young men who may read these words. There are 
wrongs that God wants to right, tyrannies He is about 
to break, foes of human peace and happiness that He 
wants to quell; but He must have agents and instru- 
ments, clean and pure, true and faithful, delivered 
from the domination of the flesh, and absolutely 
resigned to his disposal. It matters not if they be 
high-bom as Jonathan, or obscure as his armor- 
bearer ; through them He will achieve a great deliver- 
ance. 

Saul, the chosen king, had no such vision, and no 
such faith. He was not sensible to the Divine voice 
speaking in his soul, but had to depend on the inter- 
position of the priest (ver. 19 and 36) ; he spoke and 
acted as though the victory depended wholly on the 
efforts that he and his men might put forth, and in 
forbidding the use of such simple refreshment as the 



PUTTING TEN THOUSAND TO FLIGHT. 171 

wild honey of the woods might yield, he forfeited the 
full results of God's interposition. Could it be sup- 
posed that God's deliverance of his people would fall 
short because they put forth the ends of the rods that 
might be in their hands to convey the wild honey to 
their lips? Throughout the whole day, and especially 
in this senseless adjuration, which was meant to save 
time, but really hindered the full result, Saul showed 
himself oblivious of the one thought that animated 
the heart of his noble son — that God was working 
through human instruments to inflict his own judg- 
ment on the invading hosts. 

III. Jonathan Reckoned on God, and God did 
NOT Fail Him. — Faith is the indomitable power by 
which we call unto our help a whole range of laws and 
forces which are outside the lives of ordinary men. 
As we have said, they have two keyboards to their 
organ, we have three. They employ the physical and 
intellectual, whilst we, in addition, may call in the aid 
of the spiritual and eternal. Thus we are able to 
accomplish the same results, and better, by the assist- 
ance of energies which are as much greater than those 
ordinarily employed as electricity is greater than 
horse-power, or steam than hand. This was the secret 
of Jonathan's success. 

As they ascended the steep cliff-side, the young men 
agreed on the sign which should indicate that they 
were indeed in the line of the Divine will, and that 



1J2 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

God would not fail them. The heart of man, in its 
first venture on the way of faith, eagerly longs for 
some sign that it is not following a will-o'-the-wisp, 
or being misled by wreckers' lights. This was gra- 
ciously granted in the mocking voices of the advanced 
outposts, which ridiculed the idea that the Hebrews 
were to be feared (xiv. ii) even though they should 
succeed in scaling the crags. " Behold," they said, 
" the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they 
have hid themselves; and the men of the garrison 
answered Jonathan and his armour-bearer, and said. 
Come up to us, and we will show you a thing [or, we 
should like to make your acquaintance]." 

This was the heaven-given sign, and conveyed the 
assurance that the Lord had already delivered them 
into the hand of Israel (lo). By faith the soul 
appropriates the Divine answer. " Whatsoever we ask, 
we receive of Him." But it is only as we fulfil the 
one all-important condition of successful prayer, which 
is so often overlooked, " All things whatsoever ye pray 
and ask for, believe that ye have received them, and 
ye shall have them " (Mark xi. 24). 

The soul that reckons on God cannot be ashamed. 
When they reached the top, the two young Benja- 
mites used their slings with such precision that 
twenty men measured their length on the ground, and 
a trembling from God, a heaven-sent panic, spread 
from them back on the main anny behind, and to the 
bands of spoilers returning from their night raids. 



PUTTING TEN THOUSAND TO FLIGHT. 173 

The Philistines could not know that the two who 
faced them were absolutely alone. It seemed as though 
they were precursors of a host of resolute and desper- 
ate men, and, suddenly, in the panic^ each man sus- 
pected his neighbour of being in league against him. 
The foreign mercenaries and strangers, of whom there 
was a large admixture, became the objects of special 
terror; "and every man's sword was against his fel- 
low, so that there was a very great discomfiture." 
Meanwhile the Hebrews that had been allied to the 
Philistines, or silently acquiescent in their rule, even 
they also turned against them ; and all who had hid 
themselves in the hill country of Ephraim, when they 
heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed 
hard after them in battle. 

From his outlook at Gibeah, Saul beheld the wild 
confusion, and how the multitude swayed to and fro, 
and melted away. Without delay, he hurled himself 
with his soldiers on the flying foe, who fled, in head- 
long precipitancy, down the long valley, past Bethaven, 
past the Upper and then the Lower Beth-horon, in 
order to gain the Philistine frontier by the valley of 
Aijalon. Every town through which the fugitives 
passed rose in their rear, and joined the pursuit, so that 
the flying host was greatly reduced, and thousands of 
warriors dyed the highways of the land which they had 
so grievously oppressed, with their heart's blood. 
Thus did God work on behalf of his chosen people in 
answer to Jonathan's faith, 



174 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

The unwise prohibition of the king against food 
had a terrible sequel, first, in the exhaustion of the 
troops, and, secondly, in the famished eating of the 
spoils of the day, without the proper separation of 
the blood. Still worse, when the day closed in, and 
Saul asked counsel of God, the Divine Oracle was 
dumb. Some sin had silenced it, and the monarch, 
already touched with the dark suspicions and fears in 
which his soul became afterward so densely enveloped, 
realised that some sin was crying for discovery and 
expiation. He did not look for that sin, where he 
would have assuredly found it, in his own heart, but 
in the people that stood around him. Finally, he and 
Jonathan stood before the people as the objects of the 
Divine displeasure, and Saul was prepared even to 
sacrifice his son in his moody wrath. 

But the people saved him. They cried indignantly, 
" Shall Jonathan die, who hath wrought this great 
salvation in Israel ? God forbid ! As the Lord liveth, 
there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, 
for he hath wrought with God this day." Ah! the 
cause of discomfiture most surely lay between those 
two men; but it was not due to aught in Jonathan. 
Saul was alone to blame. He had not only missed the 
greatest opportunity of his life, but he was already 
enwrapping himself in the unbelief, the jealousy, and 
moroseness of temper in which his sun was to be en- 
shrouded while it was yet day. 



XVII. 

failure unber tbe Supreme tCest. 

(i Samuel xv. 26.) 

Mortal! if life smile on thee, and thou find 

All to thy mind. 
Think, Who did once from Heaven to Hell descend 

Thee to befriend! 
So Shalt thou dare forego at his dear call 

Thy Best— thine All. 

— Keble. 

ON the shores of the Dead Sea, encrusted with 
salt, lie the trunks of many noble trees which 
have been torn from their roots, and carried 
by the rapid Jordan in its flow from the uplands of 
Galilee toward the depression of that remarkable gorge ; 
and as they line those desolate shores they remind 
us of lives which God planted to bear fruit and give 
shade, which have not fulfilled his original purpose 
in their creation, and which have been torn up by the 
roots and borne down to the sea of death. Conspicu- 
ous among such failures is that of Saul, the first king 
of Israel. 

It is impossible to turn to these pages without la- 
menting that the bright promise of his early life was 
so soon overcast ; and that he, who stood forth in the 

17s 



176 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

morning of his life amid the acclaim of his people as 
likdy to do marvellous work for his fatherland, became 
one of those whom the sacred writers describe as 
having failed of the high purpose of their life, been 
rejected in their mission, and cast away as tools from 
the hands of the great Artificer. 

This chapter gives the story of the final rejection of 
Saul, which had indeed been threatened aforetime, but 
which now befell. 

I. The Test of the Divine Summons and Com- 
mand. — " Go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy 
all tliat they have, and spare them not; but slay both 
man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, 
camel and ass " (ver. 3). 

This command was given after several years had 
intervened from the incident narrated in the previous 
chapter; and during those years Saul had met with 
marvellous encouragement. The handful of men who 
had followed him, trembling, had increased to a great 
army, properly disciplined and armed, and led by 
Abner, his uncle. He had also waged very successful 
wars against Moab and the children of Ammon on the 
East, against Edom on the South, and against the 
kings of Zobah on the North. In whatever direction 
he had directed his arms, he had been victorious 
beyond his highest hopes. It is also evident that he 
had gathered around him conpiderable state, for we 
find the royal table was reserved for himself, Abner, 



FAILURE UNDER THE SUPREME TEST. 177 

and Jonathan; that he was surrounded by a body- 
guard of runners; and that his will was law. The 
kingdom that had been inaugurated amid such adverse 
circumstances was beginning to enforce respect, and 
Saul was able to vie, both in the magnificence of his 
state and in the army that followed him, with the kings 
of the lands that bordered on Canaan. 

It was at this time that the supreme test entered his 
life, as it so often comes to us in days of prosperity. In 
the warm summer days we are most in dread of cor- 
ruption and contagion, and it is in the days of pros- 
perity that the soul is oftenest subjected, not realizing 
the significance of the ordeal, to its supreme test. If 
of late you have had immunity from special adversity, 
if your circumstances have been easy and comfortable, 
if paths that were once difficult have become smooth 
and easy — be on your guard ; for, at such a time as ye 
think not, the Son of Man comes to call you to his 
bar. 

You will notice, also, that this supreme test gave 
him a final chance of retrieving the past. At Gilgal, 
years before, God had told him by the lips of Samuel 
that his kingdom should not continue; but there had 
been no sentence of his own deposition or rejection, 
and it seemed as though this last command was put 
into his life to give him an opportunity of wiping out 
his former failure and mistake, and of retrieving the 
fortunes that had seemed to be absdiutely sacrificed. 

God often comes to us, when we have made some 



178 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

sad and apparently irretrievable mistake. He gives us 
yet another opportunity of reversing the past, as when 
our Lord said to his disciples in the Garden of the 
Olive-press : " Sleep on now, and take your rest " ; a 
moment afterward adding, " Arise, let us be going," 
as though a fresh opportunity would be afforded of 
fellowship in his sufferings. 

The Divine command involved the absolute exter- 
mination of the Amalekites; for the word translated 
" utterly destroy," would be better rendered devote. 
It is the word so often used in the Book of Joshua for 
placing under the ban the sin-infected cities of the 
Canaanites. It was understood that, in the case of the 
" devoted " city, man, woman, and child, and the very 
beasts, must be destroyed, and only the precious metals 
kept, after being passed through the fires of purifica- 
tion (Num. xxxi. 21, etc.). With such absolute 
devastation and destruction was the name of Amalek 
to be wiped out from under heaven. 

There had been feud between Amalek and Israel 
from the earliest days. " Thus saith the Lord of hosts, 
I have marked that which Amalek did to Israel, how 
he set himself against him in the way, when he came 
up out of Egypt " (ver. 2). You will remember that 
Moses reared an altar, and called it Jehovah-nissi — 
" the Lord my banner " ; because he said that the Lord 
would have war with Amalekj until He had wiped out 
the reproach of his people (Ex. xvii. 16). Centuries 
had passed, and this ancient threat had remained un- 



FAILURE UNDER THE SUPREME TEST. 



179 



fulfilled until this hour, and now the command was 
given, " Go and smite Amalek." 

At first it seems very terrible that God demanded 
this act of obedience from Saul ; but on the other hand 
the Amalekites, as we are told in ver. 18, were sin- 
ners of a very black and aggravated type, " Utterly 
destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against 
them until they be consumed." We learn a!lso from 
ver. 33 that Agag with his sword had often made 
women childless. A very cruel and rapacious tribe of 
robbers were these Amalekites, who were constantly 
making raids upon the southern frontier of Judah. It 
was absolutely necessary, therefore, for the safety 
of the chosen people, that their power to injure 
should be permanently arrested, and their claws 
drawn. 

Even in this world God sets up his judgment seat; 
and as our Saviour tells us in his last wonderful dis- 
course, the Son of Man sits upon the throne of his 
glory, while the nations are gathered before Him, and 
He separates them as the sheep from the goats. These 
words, without doubt, portend some imposing event, 
which we are to witness in that great day, when the 
King of the Ages will call to his bar every nation and 
kindred, people and tongue, and will announce his 
awards. But we cannot suppose, for a single moment, 
that the judgment of the nations is to be altogether 
relegated to that final day. Throughout the history 
of the world the nations have been standing before 



i8o SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Christ's bar. Nineveh stood there, Babylon stood 
there, Greece and Rome stood there, Spain and France 
stood there, and Great Britain is standing there to-day. 
One after another has had the solemn award — depart, 
and they have passed into a destruction which has 
been absolute and irretrievable. 

The Amalekites had stood before the bar of God, 
had been weighed in his balances, and found wanting. 
Their sentence had been pronounced, and Saul was 
called upon to inflict it. But remember that Saul was 
only doing summarily and suddenly that which other- 
wise would follow in the natural process of decay, for 
God has so constituted us that when we sin against 
the laws of truth, purity, and righteousness, decay 
immediately sets in by an inevitable law. If Amalek 
had never been attacked by Saul and his hosts, the 
vices that were already at work in the heart of the 
people must have led to the utter undoing and con- 
sumption of the nation. It is said of families in our 
great cities, infected with the evils that are rife among 
us, that in five generations they die out, having lost 
the power of self-propagation ; and what is true of a 
family is equally so of a nation. We may infer that 
there was therefore mercy in this Divine ordinance. 
It was infinitely better for Amalek, and for the sur- 
rounding peoples which would have become infected 
by her slow deterioration, that by one stroke of the 
executioner's axe the existence of the nation should be 
brought to an end. 



FAILURE UNDER THE SUPREME TEST. 181 

II. Obedience with Reserve. — The story is told us 
in ver. 9 : " But Saul and the people spared Agag." 
When he raised his standard, 200,000 footmen from 
Israel, and 10,000 men of Judah, Benjamin, and 
Simeon gathered around it at Telaim, on the southern 
frontier; and they came to the chief city of Ama- 
lek, which lay, probably, a little to the south of 
Hebron. 

After lying in ambush in some dry water-course, or 
wady, and having given notice to the Kenites — a peace- 
ful, friendly people — to depart, the attacking army 
carried the city by assault, put to the sword men, 
women, and children ; pursued the fleeing remnants of 
the Amalekites from Havilah even to Shur, the great 
wall of Egypt ; and with the exception of Agag, and a 
few that may have escaped, and the choice of the 
flocks and herds, the whole country was rid of its 
inhabitants, and reduced to the deathlike silence of an 
awful solitude. 

Saul returned, flushed with triumph, reared a monu- 
ment of victory in the oasis of Carmel, near to Hebron ; 
and then came down to the sacred site of Gilgal, that 
he might sacrifice to the Lord, and perhaps divide the 
vast plunder of sheep and goats, of oxen and camiels, 
which had fallen into his hands, and which he and 
the people had been loath to destroy. " Saul and the 
people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep and of 
the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all 
that was good, and would not utterly destroy them; 



1 82 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

but everything that was vile and refuse, they destroyed' 
utterly." 

Whether this reserve was due, so far as Saul was 
concerned, to greed, as appears most likely, or because, 
as he says in ver. 24, he feared to thwart the people, 
obeying their voice rather than the voice of God, we 
cannot decide; but considerable light is thrown on the 
incident by the startling expression used by Samuel in 
ver. 19, when he says, " Why didst thou fly upon the 
spoil ? " employing the same expression as in chapter 
xiv. 32, where we are told that the people, in their 
ravenous hunger, flew upon the spoil, and ate even 
with the blood. The same passionate vehemence 
seems to have characterised Saul and the men of 
Israel. Surely rapacity and greed were at work, and 
before their boiling currents all the bulwarks of prin- 
ciple and conscience were swept away. 

There is great significance in this for us all. We 
are prepared to obey the Divine commands up to a 
certain point, and there we stay. Just as soon as " the 
best and choicest " begin to be touched, we draw the 
line and refuse further compliance. We listen to soft 
voices that bid us stay our hand, when our Isaac is on 
the altar. We are quite prepared to give up that 
which costs us nothing — our money, but not our 
children — to the missionary cause; the things which 
are clearly and disgracefully wrong, but not the self- 
indulgences which are peculiarly fascinating to our 
temperament. Skin for skin, yea, all that a man hath. 



FAILURE UNDER THE SUPREME TEST. 183 

will he give for his life — only spare him that, and he 
will cheerfully renounce his claim to all else. There 
is always a tendency with the best of us to make a 
bargain with God, and sacrifice all to his will, if only 
He will permit us to spare Agag and the best of the 
spoil. 

But an even deeper reading of this story is permissi- 
ble. Throughout the Bible Amalek stands for the 
flesh, having sprung from the stock of Esau, who, for 
a morsel of meat, steaming fragrantly in the air, sold 
his birthright. To spare the best of Amalek is surely 
equivalent to sparing some root of evil, some plausible 
indulgence, some favourite sin. For us, Agag must 
stand for that evil propensity, which exists in all of 
us, for self-gratification; and to spare Agag is to be 
mierciful to ourselves, to exonerate and palliate our 
failures, and to condone our besetting sin. 

Is this your case? You are willing to give Christ 
the key of every cupboard in your heart, save one ; but 
that contains your most cherished sin, for which you 
find manifold excuses, and to retain which you are 
prepared to sacrifice everything else. Thus Ananias 
and Sapphira kept back part of the price, and were cut 
off from the ranks of the Church. 

It is startling to learn that Saul perished, on the 
field of Gilboa, by the hand of an Amalekite (2 Sam. 
i. I -10). What a remarkable fact! The least in- 
structed can decipher the lesson. He who runs may 
read. If we spare ourselves, forbearing to cut oflf 



1 84 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

the right hand or foot, which may be causing us to 
offend, we shall certainly perish by the hand of that 
which we refused to part with. Our cherished in- 
dulgences will bring about our undoing. The love of 
God, foreseeing the risk we are incurring, pleads with 
us to destroy without mercy the enemies of our own 
peace ; but Agag comes to us delicately, we forbear to 
inflict the Divine sentence, and presently we are 
stricken down by the hand of the assassin, dye the 
greensward with our life-blood, and are despoiled of 
our crown, which is transferred to another. 

Moreover, presently, Samuel arrives to speak the 
Divine sentence of deposition : " Because thou hast 
rejected the word of the Lord, the Lord hath rejected 
thee from being king." 



XVIII. 

H IRemarftable Colloquy. 

(i Samuel xv. 12-35.) 

Thy choice was earth! Thou didst attest 
Twas fitter spirit should subserve 
The flesh, than flesh refuse to nerve 
Beneath the spirit's play! Thou art shut 
Out of the heaven of spirit! Glut 
Thy sense upon the world! 'tis thine 
For ever! — take it! 

— R. B. 

AN intimation of Saul's lapsed obedience was 
. made in the secret ear of Samuel in the dead 
of night, when God came near to him and 
said, " It repenteth Me that I have set up Saul to be 
king, for he hath turned back from following Me, and 
hath not performed my commandments." 

God requires literal obedience, and when that fails 
the results are as though He had changed his purpose 
or repented, but this is in appearance only. As a 
matter of fact, God cannot repent or change his pur- 
pose. 'Man may frustrate the working out of his 
plan, but the Almighty Workman will achieve it by 
some other method. 

The wind may be blowing steadily in the same di- 
rection, and as long as we yield to it, it will waft us to 

18s 



1 86 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

the desired haven; but it is always possible for us to 
reverse our course and go against it, and then our life 
is so powerfully affected that it would seem as though 
God had changed his purpose — the change being due 
to ourselves, because, whereas formerly we moved 
with his purpose, now by disobedience or unbelief we 
are steadily resisting it. 

Does God ever come to you at night, or when the 
world is quiet, and tell you his secrets? Happy are 
they whom God can trust with his own profound sor- 
row over the failure of his chosen servants, honouring 
them with his confidence, and appealing to them to 
watch with Him. " Shall I hide from Abraham that 
which I do? " 

The faithful soul of Samuel was deeply moved. 
We are told he was " angry " — a righteous indigna- 
tion that one who had been appointed with such 
solemn sanctions, and had bidden fair to achieve such 
glorious deliverances for his people, had so seriously 
missed his mark. Those who are true to God cannot 
but feel indignant when his purposes are frustrated, 
and his grace outraged, and the door of usefulness 
which He had set wide in front of a chosen servant is 
shut and barred by some act of careless or wilful dis- 
obedience. Samuel's soul was not only deeply 
moved, but " he cried unto the Lord all night." Ah ! 
how much we owe to the Divine Friend, and to hu- 
man friends, who when they see deterioration at work 
within us, take no rest, and give God no rest. This 



A REMARKABLE COLLOQUY. 187 

is the most priceless service tliat one soul caii afford 
another. Thfre is hope so long as lover and friend 
bear up our case before God, and plead that rather 
they should l?e accursed than that we should perish. 
How many a son now leading a reckless and profli- 
gate life, in his still hours, or when his evil courses 
have cast him on a bed of sickness, and debarred him 
from the active pursuits of life, comforts himself with 
the thought that, in some lone cottage, his mother 
does not cease to pray for him, and he secretly hopes 
that her prayers may avail against the vehemence of 
the fiery passions by which his soul is driven. 

Samuel travelled some fifteen miles to find Saul, 
following him from Carmiel, where, as we have seen, 
he seems to have set up a monument which was either 
shaped in the form of a hand, or on which the figure 
of a hand was graved (r. v. margin) to Gilgal, the 
site of the ancient shrine, where, as one of the ver- 
sions informs us, the King was engaged in offering 
sacrifices to Jehovah ; and there this most remarkable 
colloquy took place. 

Saul. — It was commenced by the King, who, see- 
ing the Prophet coming towards him, advanced to 
meet him with an unctuous phrase upon his lips, 
" Blessed be thou of the Lord," and, with great com- 
placency in his demeanour, added, " I have performed 
the commandment of the Lord." Whether Saul was 
blinded and did not really know how far he had de- 
teriorated, for it is certain that disobedience puts out 



1 88 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

our eyes, as Hubert did young Arthur's, blinding us 
to the enormity of our sin, or whether he desired to 
gloss over his failure, and to appear as a truly 
obedient son, so as to deceive the prophet, we cannot 
tell, but that " Blessed be thou of the Lord," from 
his lips, and at such a moment, has an ugly sound. It 
reminds one of certain persons who interlard their 
business talk with references to religion, so that they 
may put the unwary off their guard, and enable their 
user to take a mean advantage, under the appearance 
of a high code of morals. It is the sin of Judas who 
betrayed his Master with a kiss. Better the open foe 
than the secret assassin. Better a dozen times the 
arrow that flieth by day than the pestilence that 
walketh in darkness. 

Samuel. — At that moment the sheep began to 
bleat, and the oxen to low. A breath of wind, laden 
with the unmistakable indication of the near presence 
of a great multitude of flocks and herds, was wafted 
to the Prophet's ear. It is an unfortunate occurrence 
when, just as a man is becoming loud in his protes- 
tations of goodness, some such untoward incident 
suddenly takes place, so that the lowing of the oxen 
and the bleating of the sheep belie his words. I re- 
member once a professor of religion who desired to 
impress me with his entire sanctification, and deliver- 
ance from every kind of idol, giving unmistakable 
evidence, by the taint of tobacco on his breath, whilst 
he spoke, that he had been smoking a rather rank kind 



A REMARKABLE COLLOQUY. 189 

of tobacco. I had not said a single word about smok- 
ing. I have never feh it my business to denounce 
indulgences concerning which God may not convict 
men universally. It is our business, on matters not 
clearly forbidden, and concerning which Christian 
people are not agreed, to lay down general principles, 
and to leave our hearers to apply them for themselves. 
But when this man went out of his way to assert his 
entire deliverance, I naturally was more on the alert, 
and in the taint on his breath I detected the presence 
of the choice oxen and sheep which had been re- 
served. With sad irony the prophet said, " What 
meaneth then this bleating of sheep in mine ears, and 
the lowing of oxen which I hear ? " 

Saul. — The King excused himself by laying em^ 
phasis on the word they — " They have brought them 
from the Amalekites; for the people spared the 
best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the 
Lord thy God." Notice the subtle effort to conciliate 
the prophet by the emphasis laid upon the word thy — 
"thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed." 
It was unroyal and contemptible to lay the blame 
upon the people, and it was an excuse which could 
not be allowed. 

Samuel. — The royal backslider would probably 
have gone on speaking, but Samuel interrupted him, 
saying, " Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord hath 
said to me this night." Then the faithful old prophet 
went back to the past. He reminded Saul how in- 



190 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

significant had been his origin, and how he had 
shrunk from undertaking the great responsibihty of 
the station to which God had summoned him. He 
reminded him how he had been raised up to the 
throne, and how the Almighty King of Israel had 
delegated to him his authority, requiring that he 
should act as his designated vicegerent. He re- 
minded him also that a distinct charge had been given 
him, and that the responsibility of determining his 
line of action had been transferred from himself, as 
the agent, to the Divine Being who had issued his 
mandate of destruction. In spite of all, Saul had 
allowed his greed to hurry him into an act of dis- 
obedience. He had flown upon the spoil as a hungry 
lion upon his prey, and had done evil in the sight of 
the Lord. 

Saul. — The King reiterated his poor excuse: 
" Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have 
gone the way that the Lord sent me, and have 
brought Agag, the king of Amalek, and have utterly 
destroyed the Amalekites. But the people took of the 
spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the devoted things, 
to sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in Gilgal." It was 
as though he had said, " You have judged me wrong- 
fully. If you would wait for a little while, you would 
see the issue of my act of apparent disobedience." 
He may even have cajoled himself into thinking that 
he meant to sacrifice these spoils now that he had 
reached Gilgal; or he might have mentally resolved 



A REMARKABLE COLLOQUY. 191 

there and then that he would sacrifice them, and so 
reheve himself of the complicated position into which 
he found himself drifting. 

Samuel. — In answer to this last remark, God's 
messenger uttered one of the greatest sentences in the 
earlier books of the Bible, a sentence which is the 
seed-germ of much to the same purpose in the 
Prophets, which in subsequent centuries was repeated 
in different forms, and to which our blessed Lord 
gave his assent — " Hath the Lord as great delight in 
burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice 
of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, 
and to hearken than the fat of rams." Whatever 
Saul might be leading him to infer, as to his intention 
to offer the sacrifice, there could be no doubt that up 
to that moment, at least, he had disobeyed God's posi- 
tive command ; and, in point of fact, the whole attitude 
of his soul was towards disobedience and rebellion, 
which, in fact, were the assertion of his own will and 
way against God's. 

Then, tearing the veil aside, the old man showed 
the enormity of the sin which had been committed, 
by saying: " Rebellion is equally vile as the sin of 
witchcraft, and stubbornness is as idolatry and the 
teraphim." These sins were universally reprobated 
and held up to the contempt of good men, but in 
God's sight there was nothing to choose between them 
and the sin of which the King had been guilty. 
Then, facing the monarch, and looking at him witK 



iga SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

his searching eyes, the Prophet, in the majesty of his 
authority as God's representative, pronounced the 
final sentence of deposition, saying, " Because thou 
hast rejected the word of the Lord, He hath also re- 
jected thee from being King." 

Saul. — In a moment the King realised the brink 
of the precipice on which he stood; and with the cry 
not of a penitent, but of a fugitive from justice; not 
hating his sin, but dreading its result; eager at any 
cost to keep the crown on his brow and the empire 
in his hand; afraid of the consequences which might 
ensue if his leading men detected any break or cool- 
ness between himself and the Prophet — he cringed 
before Samuel, saying, " I liave sinned ; for I have 
transgressed the commandment of Jehovah, and thy 
words: because I feared the people, and obeyed their 
voice. Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, 
and turn again with me, that I may worship the 
Lord." 

There is a great difiference in the accent with which 
men utter those words, " / have sinned." The prodi- 
gal said them with a faltering voice, not because he 
feared the consequences of sin, but that he saw its 
heinousness in the expression of his father's face, and 
the tears that stood in the beloved eyes. Saul, how- 
ever, feared the consequences rather than the sin, and 
that he might avert the sentence he said, as though 
Samuel had the power of the keys to open and unloose, 
to pardon or to refuse forgiveness, " Pardon my sin." 



A REMARKABLE COLLOQUY. 193 

Samuel. — The Prophet saw through the subter- 
fuge. He knew that his penitence was not genuine, 
but that the King was deceiving him with his words, 
and he turned about to go away. Then Saul, in the 
extremity of his anguish, in fear that in losing him he 
might lose at once his best friend and the respect of 
the nation, seems to have sprung forward and seized 
the collar of Samuel's cloak, and as he did so with a 
strong, masterful grasp, as if to restrain and di"aw 
back to himself the retreating figure of the Prophet, 
it rent. When Samuel felt and heard the tear, he 
said, " The Lord hath rent the kingdom of Israel from 
thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of 
thine, that is better than thou." And then, referring 
to Saul's effort to turn him back, as though he would 
reverse the sentence which he had pronounced, he 
said, " Remember that the Strength of Israel will not 
lie nor repent ; his sentence is irrevocable. The 
word is gone out of his lips and cannot be called 
back. There is no opportunity of changing his 
mind though thou shalt seek it bitterly and with 
tears." 

Even at that moment, had Saul thrown himself at 
God's feet and asked for pardon, he would have been 
accepted and forgiven. Even though as a monarch 
his kingdom might have passed from him, as a man 
he would have received pardon. But there are mo- 
ments in our lives, irrevocable moments, when we 
take steps that cannot be retraced, when we assume 



194 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

positions from which we cannot retreat, when results 
are settled never to be reversed. 

Saul. — Again the King repeated the sentence, " I 
have sinned," but his real meaning was disclosed in 
the following words : " Yet honour me now before 
the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn 
again with me, that I may worship Jehovah thy God." 
His inner thought was still to stand well with the 
people, and he was prepared to make any confession 
of wrong-doing as a price of Samuel's apparent friend- 
ship. 

Finally, Samuel stayed with him, that the elders 
might not become disaffected, and that the people 
generally might have no idea of the deposition of the 
King, lest the kingdom itself might totter to its fall 
before his successor was prepared to take his place. 
He stayed therefore. The two knelt side by side be- 
fore God, but what a contrast! Here was darkest 
night; there, the brightness of the day. Here was the 
rejected; there, the chosen faithful servant. Here 
was one whose course from that moment was to be 
enwrapped in the dark clouds of moody tyranny and 
jealousy, until he died upon the field of Gilboa; tlwre 
was one, the unsullied beauty of whose character was 
to remain untarnished until his removal to that world 
where he would shine as the sun, in his heavenly 
Father's kingdom. 

Lastly, the old man summoned Agag, the King of 
the Amalekites, to his presence, and Agag came to 



A REMARKABLE COLLOQUY. 195 

him " clwerfully," hoping without doubt that he would 
be spared; and saying, as he advanced, " Surely the 
bitterness of death is past — there is no reason for me 
to fear it." Then Samuel, strengthened with some 
paroxysm of righteous indignation, seized a sword 
that lay within his reach, and hewed Agag in pieces 
before the Lord — emblem, this, of the holy zeal that 
will give no quarter to the flesh; and we are reminded 
of the words of the Apostle, " Make not provision for 
the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof." To Amalek we 
must give no quarter. 

May God help us to read deeply into this tragic 
story. Whensoever God our Father puts a supreme 
test into our lives, let us at any cost obey Him. 
Everything hinges upon absolute obedience. If you 
cannot obey, you cannot command. If you do not 
obey, you are not fit to be an instrument in God's 
hand. If the chisel is not true, the sculptor dare not 
hold it still in hand. Let us walk circumspectly and 
wisely, redeeming each opportunity, that God may 
make the most possible of us, and that, above all, we 
may not become castaways. 



XIX. 

"Bn lEvd Spirit from tbe XorJ>." 

(i Samuel xvi. 13-14.) 

Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased; 
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow? 
Raze out the written troubles of the brain, 
And with some sweet, oblivious antidote 
Cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff 
Which weighs upon the heart? 

— Shakspere. 

ALL great painters and poets whose works are 
of the first order have availed themselves of 
the force of contrast — that there should be a 
dark background to set forth some beautiful and 
radiant object. The Bible excels in its use of this 
striking method of laying emphasis. In the very first 
chapter the world is described as without form and 
void, whilst darkness broods over the face of the 
deep, and against that, as the background, is the crea- 
tion of light, leaping across the void, and upon the 
background of chaos arises the cosmos of order and 
beauty. Also at the end of this great Book, great 
even as a literary production, we have again the force 
of contrast, as from all the storm and tumult of the 
world we are borne upwards to those heavenly spaces 
where a white-robed multitude with crowns on their 
brows, and palms of victory in their hands, in perfect 

ig6 



"AN EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD." 197 

peace, chant the everlasting song. In contrast with 
the apostate Church of Babylon, there is the Bride of 
the Lamb, Jerusalem from above, prepared as for her 
marriage. All through the Bible you are constantly 
brought face to face with the greatest possible con- 
trasts, and much of its interest may be attributed to 
this source. 

The same feature is stamped on this division of the 
Book. In the opening chapters, against the wild 
licence and unbridled indulgence of the Book of the 
Judges, and especially against the dissolute and 
abominable behaviour of Eli's sons, as the back- 
ground, is the kneeling figure of the young Samuel, 
with clasped hands, engaged in prayer beneath the 
open sky. The beauty of the child's piety is the more 
exquisite because of the dark wildness, licence, and 
passion amid which it unfolds. And here, at the end 
of the Book, where it is evident that Saul is drifting 
as a wreck to the rocks, whilst from the lurid sky the 
thunderbolts fall and the lightning flashes on the 
earth, the curtain is uplifted from God's own king, 
the man after his own heart, the young and beautiful 
boy called from following the sheep to be the shep- 
herd of Israel. Against the contrast of Eli's sons you 
have Samuel, and against the contrast of Saul's rejec- 
tion you have David's anointing. This law of con- 
trast pervades this great Book — great from the 
artistic and human standpoint, altogether apart from 
its lofty, its transcendent, its Divine, origin. 



198 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

We will notice the dawn of fair promise; the dark- 
ened afternoon; and, finally, the lurid gleams of a 
false zeal. 

I. The Dawn of a Fair Promise. — " Samuel cried 
unto the Lord." His intercessions rose day and 
night for Saul, if haply he might arrest the terrible 
consequences of his sin, which seemed so imminent? 
But he was made aware that prayer would not avail. 
It seemed as though Saul had already made the fatal 
choice, and had committed the sin which is unto 
death, and concerning which we have no encourag.e- 
ment to pray. Tlie summons of the hour was, there- 
fore, not to prayer, but action. The Spirit of God 
bade Samuel go to Bethlehem, and among the sons 
of Jesse discover and anoint the new king. Samuel 
was stunned by the request, and suggested that if 
Saul heard a whisper of such a proceeding, he would 
at once take measures to avenge himself, by inflicting 
the death penalty. But the Spirit of God bade him 
go, taking his long horn of oil in one hand, and lead- 
ing a heifer with the other. Thus he made his way 
across the broken hill-country of Judea, until he came 
to the village of Bethlehem, lying along the slope of 
the hill at the foot of which, not long before, Boaz had 
courted Ruth. The halo of the immortal story of 
their love was still fresh as dew. 

When he entered the little town the elders were 
filled with consternation; it was so unusual to see the 



" AN. EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD." 



199 



great prophet visiting them without previous an- 
nouncement. They asked if he had come peaceably. 
" Peaceably ! " was the laconic reply. A sacrificial 
feast was at once prepared, the victim ofifered; but as 
some time must elapse between the offering of the 
sacrifice and the preparation of the food, Samuel ad- 
journed to spend the interim in the house of the vil- 
lage chieftain, Jesse the Bethlehemite, a mighty man 
of valour and of wealth ; and thus, in the privacy of the 
home, in a manner unlikely to attract the notice of 
the Court, David's career as king began. 

One after another the stalwart sons of Jesse passed 
before the prophet, and as he looked upon them in 
their towering stature and manly frame, he supposed 
that any one of them might be God's designated 
monarch. But his Almighty Counsellor told him 
that outward appearance was not this time to weigh 
in the scales of choice; but that the royal qualities of 
the heart were alone to determine his selection. And 
so son after son passed ; all had come but one, and he 
was with the sheep. Samuel felt that probably, be- 
cause he was the youngest and the least, he might be 
God's accepted king. He could not proceed with the 
holy exercises until the boy was summoned; and, 
anon, coming quickly from the hills, the colour 
mounting to his ruddy cheeks, his hair waving in the 
wind, his beautiful blue eyes flashing with purity and 
truth, David stood before the old man, the dawn of a 
new age, the inauguration of a better time, the key- 



200 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

stone of the great fabric of Hebrew monarchy; above 
all, the man whom God loved. As his brethren stood 
around, the old man took the horn of oil, broke the 
capsule, poured it on the bright young locks, drench- 
ing them with the holy unction, as the boy bent be- 
neath. As he anointed him, it seemed as though 
God Almighty accompanied the outward sign and 
seal by the inward grace, for we are told that the 
Spirit of God came upon that young life from that 
day forward, bathing it, permeating and filling it, so 
that he went in the power of the Holy Spirit to meet 
his great life-work, to be the sweet singer of Israel, 
the shepherd of God's people, and the inaugurator of 
Solomon's temple. 

You may have nothing in the outward semblance, 
nothing in your surroundings or circumstances, to 
indicate the true royalty within; but if you bare your 
heart to God, you shall stand revealed as his son, as 
a priest and king unto Himself. Oh, that at this 
moment the Holy Ghost might descend upon you! 
Would that you might seek and receive an unction 
from the Holy One Himself! Oh, that the Holy 
Spirit of God, who is the true anointing oil of the soul, 
might be shed upon you, so that you might go forth, 
saying, " The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, He hath 
anointed me "! 

n. An Overcast Afternoon. — We have morn- 
ing with David; we have afternoon with Saul. Here 



"AN. EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD." 201 

youth; there manhood which has passed into prime. 
Here the promise; and there the overcast meridian of 
a wrecked life. 

You will notice that, whereas it is said that the 
Spirit of God descended upon David, we are told 
that " The Spirit of the Lord had departed from Saul." 
That does not necessarily mean that all the religious 
life of Saul had become extinct, but that the special 
faculty and power by which he had been prepared for 
his kingly work were withdrawn from him. It is 
abundantly sure that the work which a man does in 
this world is not wrought only by the force of his 
genius, the brilliance of his intellect, or by those 
natural gifts with which God may have endowed him, 
but by a something beyond and behind all these — a 
spiritual endowment which is communicated by the 
Spirit of God for special office, and which is retained 
so long as the character is maintained; but when the 
character begins to deteriorate and decline, when 
there is a divorce between religion and morality, when 
a soul turns definitely from the will and way of God 
to the paths of disobedience — then that mystic power, 
which our forefathers called unction, and which the 
Bible calls the Spirit of God, seems to be dissipated, 
and to pass away as the aroma when scent has been 
long exposed to common air. So Saul lost the 
special endowment of power, which had enabled him 
to subdue his enemies and to order his kingdom. 

Secondly, we have the mysterious power of open- 



202 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

ing our nature to the Holy Spirit of God, who is the 
medium of communicating all the virtue, the energy, 
and the life of God, infilling spirit, soul, and body, 
quickening the mind, warming the heart, elevating 
and purifying the whole moral life. We have also the 
awful alternative power of yielding ourselves to the 
evil spirit, or demon spirits, of which the spiritual 
sphere is full. When we are first born into the world, 
the inner shrine of our being is not, as yet, occupied; 
it is a holy of holies not yet tenanted; but as years go 
on it is left for each to choose by which spirit he will 
be inhabited. Some, by the grace of God, are led to 
open their natures to receive the most blessed gift that 
God can bestow, since it is Himself; whilst others re- 
semble Judas, of whom it is said that " Then Satan 
entered into him " ; or Saul, of whom it is said : " Then 
the Spirit of God departed from him, and an evil spirit 
troubled him." In many cases men appear to be 
tenanted, occupied, and infilled by the spirit of evil; 
and possibly even some of the worst forms of drunk- 
enness, of lustful passion, and of jealous temper, are 
simply to be attributed to possession by some demon 
spirit. In the treatment of the insane, it would per- 
haps be wise to bear this theory in mind, and to deal 
with the tormented nature as our Lord did, who dealt 
with such as palaces occupied by legions of vinclean 
tenants, whom He commanded to go forth. 

It is affirmed that " an evil spirit from the Lord " 
troubled Saul, To interpret this aright, we must re- 



"AN EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD." 



203 



member that, in the strong terse Hebrew speech, the 
Almighty is sometimes said to do what He permits 
to be done. And surely such is the interpretation 
here. God cannot be tempted of evil, neither 
tempteth He any man, but He allows us to be tempted 
of Satan (Job i. 6-12; Luke xxii. 31). Our Lord was 
led by the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted oi 
the devil, and He taught us to ask that we should not 
be led along that dreaded path; but that the neces- 
sary discipline of life should come in some other way. 
When therefore we read that an evil spirit " from the 
Lord " troubled Saul, we must believe that, as Saul 
had refused the good and gracious influences of the 
Holy Spirit and definitely chosen the path of dis- 
obedience, there was nothing for it but to leave him 
to the working of his own evil heart. The guard of 
spiritual help was removed, and there was nothing to 
prevent Satan entering him, as in after-days he en- 
tered Judas. In the solemn words, thrice repeated in 
Rom. i., God " gave him up " to a reprobate mind 
(Rom. i. 24, 26, 28). 

HI. The Lurid Gleams that Break through 
THIS Overcast Sky. — In 2 Sam. xxi. 2 you have this : 
— " The king "—that is David—" called the Gibeon- 
ites, and said unto them (now the Gibeonites were not 
of the children of Israel, but of the remnant of the 
Amorites; and the children of Israel had sworn unto 
them: and Saul sought to slay them in his zeal to the 



204 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

children of Israel and Judah)." Saul was smarting 
under Samuel's words, writhing under the sentence of 
deposition, and his soul was stirred to neutralise, if 
possible, the Divine verdict so as to still keep the 
favour of God. It was true, and Saul knew it well, 
that he had failed in one distinct act of obedience; he 
had kept the choice of the spoil for himself, but why 
should he not, by excessive zeal in other directions, 
win back his lost inheritance? Granting that he has 
failed, he will more than compensate. Allowing that 
he has failed in what God told him to do, why should 
he not succeed in something that God had not told 
him to do? Why should he not resuscitate some old 
command, and give it unexpected obedience? 

Now there were two such commandments which 
seem to have occurred to him. The one enacted that 
when the children of Israel entered the Land of 
Promise, they should destroy all the people of the 
land. The Gibeonites, however, succeeded in secur- 
ing that they should be excepted because they had 
made a covenant with Joshua, and Joshua had sworn 
to them (Josh. ix). The Gibeonites, therefore, had 
lived amongst the children of Israel for many cen- 
turies, and had become almost an integral part of the 
nation. But in his false zeal for God Saul seems to 
have laid ruthless hands upon these peaceable people; 
and, in spite of the old covenant which bound Israel 
to respect their liberty and life, he exterminated them 
— an act that brought righteous retribution in after- 



"AN. EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD." 205 

days on his house, for you remember how, as a set- 
off to this ruthless attack, Rizpah's sons, and his own 
five grandsons, were hanged upon a tree, and left 
there until the rain rotted them (2 Sam. xxi. 8). 
Secondly, there was on the statute-book a very dras- 
tic law against necromancers and witches, and it was 
commanded that these should be exterminated from 
the land (Exod. xxii. 18). Therefore Saul turned 
his hand against them. In his heart he still believed 
in them — for at the end of his life, when a man al- 
ways casts aside his pretences and appears as he is, 
Saul sought out one of these very women and availed 
himself of her help. In order, however, to show his 
religious zeal for God, and to extort the reversal of 
his sentence, Saul began to exterminate them. 

But as his edicts went forth, there was rottenness 
in his heart. His royal state was greatly increased; 
he wore from this time a gorgeous turban, like other 
kings, which was brought from the field of Gilboa to 
David. There was a great increase of luxury in his 
Court, for he arrayed the daughters of Israel in scarlet 
and gold (2 Sam. i. 24). A subtle admixture of 
Baal worship with the recognition of Jehovah appears 
from his naming his sons, partly from the name of 
Jehovah and partly by the name of Baal. He took 
to himself concubines in imitation of his neighbours. 
While on the one hand, therefore, there was this out- 
burst of lurid zeal for God, his own heart was becom- 
ing more and more enervated and evil. 



2o6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Saul's is not an isolated case. Take, for instance, 
two examples from the New Testament, which are 
almost parallel. The one in which the apostle says, 
of Israel, that " they have a zeal for God, but not ac- 
cording to knowledge. For being ignorant of God's 
righteousness, and seeking to establish their own, they 
did not subject themselves to the righteousness of 
God." And the other, the case of that still more 
famous Benjamite, Saul's namesake, who tells us that, 
while he was kicking against the pricks, he had a 
zeal for God in the persecution of the Church (Rom. 
X. 2; Acts xxii. 3, 4). 

Dti not we know this in our own experience? 
When one has fallen under the condemnation of con- 
science, the heart has endeavoured to whisper comfort 
to itself by saying, " I will endeavour to redeem my 
cause by an extravagance of zeaJ." We have plunged 
into some compensating work to neutralise the result 
of failure. It is zeal, but it is false ; it is zeal, but it is 
strange fire; it is zeal, but it is self-originated; it is 
zeal, but it is only for self, smd not for God ; it is zeal, 
but it is zeal for the letter, for the tradition, for the 
external form; it is not the zeal of the man who is 
eaten up and devoured by a passionate love for the 
Son of God, and for the souls He has made. 

This is the story of ourselves. No man can get 
away from it. Here is the mirror in which we behold 
our own faces. The Bible is the Book of God, be- 
cause it is the Book of man; it is the timeless Biook; 



"AN EVIL SPIRIT FROM THE LORD." 207 

it is the Book that is the mirror of the soul, because 
man is always seeing himself in the experience of 
those that have preceded him. 

Let us turn from Saul for a moment to that dear 
face that bends over us to-day; to that heart that 
yearns over us; to the Christ of God that loves us. 
We, too, have disobeyed, have come short, have 
failed to fulfil his commands, but there is forgiveness 
in those flowing wounds; there is pardon in that lov- 
ing heart. Ask Him to blot out the past. And may 
the Holy Ghost kindle upon our heart-altars a fire of 
zeal which shall never be put out, which shall always 
burn for his glory, purifying our nature, making us 
living sacrifices unto Him. 



XX. 

" Sin JSringing fovtb S>eatb." 

(i Samuel xviii. 12.) 

We scatter seeds with careless hand. 
And dream we ne'er shall see them more; 

But for a thousand years 

Their fruit appears 
In weeds that mar the land, or healthful store. 

— Keble. 

NEVER has there been a truer illustration of 
the words in which the Apostle James describes 
the genealogy of sin and her fateful family 
than that furnished by the life-history of Saul. No 
sooner are we told that he had begun to yield to the 
spirit of evil than the historian hastens to tell us of 
the successive steps by which the early suggestions 
grew into a headlong passion, hurrying the monarch 
to one breach after another of the Divine law. How 
true it is that they who offend in one point are finally 
guilty in all. The first sin is like the letting in of 
water, which gradually eats away the embankment, so 
that presently the entire flood of waters inundates the 
land. 

It befeTl thus. About this time, while Saul was 
smarting under Samuel's sentence of deposition, 
David for the first time crossed his path. Two 

308 



"SIN BRINGING FORTH DEATH." 209 

accounts of the introduction of the young shepherd 
to the God-forsaken and moody monarch are given, 
but are not inconsistent. The one tells of his enter- 
ing the royal palace as a minstrel, the other of his 
prowess in war, which rendered his presence an indis- 
pensable adjunct to the court. 

The attacks of Saul's depression and despondency 
became more frequent and severe; and at last it was 
suggested by his servants — tradition says by Doeg the 
Edomite — that the effect of music should be tried on 
the poor diseased brain. " Behold now," they said, 
" an evil spirit from God troubleth thee ; let our lord 
now command thy servants, which are before thee, to 
seek out a man who is a cunning player on the harp, 
and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from 
God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and 
thou shalt be well." 

Instantly the king fell in with the suggestion; and 
presently David's name was mentioned by one of the 
young men, who had, perhaps, come from the same 
part of the country, and had often met the son of 
Jesse in their native village, may even have sat with 
him at the feet of the same Rabbi. The young shep- 
herd was possessed of the very qualities which were 
most captivating for the king. He was skilful in play- 
ing. Already he had come to be known as a man of 
valour, in the border-skirmishes which he maintained 
with them for the integrity of his father's flock. He 
was skilful in judgment, and eloquent in speech. 



2IO SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Manly beauty characterised his countenance and port. 
It seems as though that had happened to David which 
happens in measure to all God's servants — the unction 
and abiding of the Holy Spirit had brought out into 
fair and living prominence his natural traits, as when 
a spark is taken from common air and plunged into a 
jar of oxygen gas, or as though an island which had 
long Iain under the spell of Arctic winter could be 
loosed from its moorings and drifted down to southern 
seas, and beneath the genial touch of the tropic sum- 
mer all the buried seeds should burst forth into a rich 
and luxuriant growth. 

The description given to him greatly pleased the 
king, who was always on the outlook for promising 
youths, and in the exercise of that unquestioned 
autocracy which marked his reign, like that of other 
Eastern monarchs, he despatched a summons to Jesse 
to send him David, his son, who was with the sheep. 
Such a summons could not be disregarded, and making 
up a present of the produce of his fann, the old man 
despatched his Benjamin to begin to tread the difficult 
and intricate paths of royal favour. " And David came 
to Saul, and stood before him, and he loved him 
greatly." And whenever Saul was overtaken by one 
of his fits of melancholy, when the sky was overcast 
with the heavy clouds of God-forsakenness and despair, 
" when the evil spirit from God was upon him," 
David, then probably about eighteen years of age, took 
the harp and played with his hand, so that Saul was 



"SIN BRINGING FORTH DEATH." 211 

refreshed, and the evil spirit departed from him, and 
he was well. 

Robert Browning has depicted for us, with a 
wonderful luxuriance of imagination, the scene when 
the minstrel strove with all the spell of his art to tame 
and exercise the depression that mantled the royal 
brow: how he sang of the scenes in the valleys where 
the sheep were being gathered beside the brimming 
waters of the wells; and again of the pasture lands 
over which they were scattered, browsing on the 
tender grass. At one moment there was a strain of 
martial music, summoning the clans to repel a border 
foray ; at another it seemed as though the voices of 
maidens were welcoming back from the fight their 
lovers, crowned with victory. Again, the music told 
of the rising storm, the rattle of the thunder, the pelt 
of the hail, until you became aware that the fury of 
the elements had spent itself, and was dying down 
into the cadences of a summer landscape, bathed in 
peace. Now you could have heard the sough of the 
wind through the trees, or sweeping over the meadows, 
and anon the music of the spheres, as the heavens 
declared the glory of God and the firmament told of 
his handiwork. Sometimes the young poet would 
rehearse the joy of drinking the pure nectar of young 
life: 

" Oh, the wild joys of living! the leaping from rock up to 

rock; 
The strong rending of boughs from the fir-tree; the cool 

silver shock 



212 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Of the plunge in a pool's living water — the hunt of the 

bear, 
And the sultriness showing the lion is couched in his lair. 
And the meal — the rich dates yellowed over with gold-dust 

divine, 
And the locusts' flesh steeped in the pitcher! the full draught 

o£ wine, 
And the sheep in the dried river-channel where bulrushes 

tell 
That the water was wont to go warbling so softly and well. 
How good is man's life, the mere living! how fit to employ 
All the heart, and the soul, and the senses for ever in joy." 

It is probable that the spell of music with which 
David sought to relieve the king's dark moods was 
greatly successful, as afterward in the case of Philip 
V. of Spain, who was cured of a fixed melancholy by 
the music of a famous player. His fits of insanity 
became less and less frequent, the need for David's 
attendance at court was greatly relaxed, and the king 
may almost have ceased to think of him, amid the 
many suitors for his royal favour. Perhaps this very 
fickleness was part of the disease. It was due proba- 
bly to the disordered condition of the king's brain 
that he well-nigh forgot the stripling whom he had 
greatly loved, and who had become alike his armour- 
bearer and his physician (xvi. 22). 

How long a period elapsed in this way we cannot 
tell, but another series of events brought Saul and 
David into closer and more tragical contact. The 
Philistines had never forgiven the Hebrews for having 
discarded the yoke which for so long they had meekly 
borne, and at last, after a series of forays and raids 



" SIN BRINGING FORTH DEATH." 213 

on the southern borders of Canaan, the tide of invasion 
could no longer be restrained. It rolled across the 
frontiers and poured through the valleys, till the 
Philistine hosts were gathered together in the valley 
of the Terebinth, which belonged to Judah, and pitched 
their camp at Ephes-dammim, " the Boundary of 
Blood," so called probably, from the dark and bloody 
encounters which had taken place there. The valley, 
or wady, is broad and open, and about three miles 
long. It is divided in the centre by a remarkable 
ravine, or trench, formed by a mountain torrent, which 
is full of foaming water in the winter, though dry in 
summer. It was the presence of this gorge or chan- 
nel, some twenty feet wide, with steep vertical sides, 
and with a depth of ten or twelve feet, that protracted 
the issue for so long, so that the two hosts lay watch- 
ing each other for forty days, neither of them daring 
to face the hazard involved in crossing the valley and 
its ravine, in the face of the other. 

The full story of the combat with Goliath belongs 
to the Life of David; we only touch on it here as it 
concerns the ill-fated and hapless Saul. 

When the gigantic Philistine champion, whose name 
was suggested by his " shining armour," strode forth, 
and even dared to come near the lines of the Hebrew 
troops, clothed in helmet, jerkin, and greaves of bright 
copper mail, handling a mighty spear, and with a 
sword girt at his side; and when he boldly challenged 
the armies of Israel to produce a man worthy to take 



214 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

up the gage of battle, Saul was as dismayed and panic- 
stricken as any of his soldiers. It is said that he was 
"greatly afraid" (ver. ii). Though he was God's 
chosen king, and in his earlier life had stood in the 
might of a simple faith, his disobedience had severed 
the sinews of his power, and he had become as weak 
as any other. Obedience and faith are two aspects of 
the same posture of the soul; as you obey, you are 
able to believe; as you believe, you can obey. In the 
Epistle to the Hebrews, the fourth chapter, the words 
are perpetually interchanged. Let a man but have faith 
in God he waxes valiant in the fight, and turns to flight 
armies of aliens. One can chase a thousand, and two 
put thousands to flight. Oh ! beware of disobedience 
which introduces trembling and faintness into the 
heart, so that the sound of a driven leaf chases the 
fugitive! All that Saul could do, in the face of the 
braggart blasphemy of Goliath, was to hold out the 
most lavish promises of what he would do for the 
hero who would take up the challenge, and make the 
proud Gittite bite the dust. 

When, finally, David was brought into his presence, 
his soul glowing with an heroic faith, and avowing his 
determination to go alone to fight the Philistine, Saul 
endeavoured to dissuade him. " Thou art not able to 
go against this Philistine to fight with him." He had 
no idea of power other than that which came of long 
usage (ver. 33), or of helmets and coats of mail 
(ver. 38, 39). The point of David's narrative of his 



"SIN BRINGING FORTH DEATH." 215 

successful conflicts with the lion and bear was entirely 
lost on him. Saul looked on them as the result of 
superior agility and sinewy strength; he did not 
fathom David's meaning as he spoke of the great 
deliverances which Jehovah had wrought (ver. 37). 
Already the young Psalmist was saying to himself : 

" The Lord is my light and my salvation, 
Whom shall I fear? 
The Lord is the strength of my life. 
Of whom shall I be afraid?" 

But such boasts of the believer in God were an 
enigma to the king. The eyes of his heart were 
blinded, and he could not see. He had no idea that 
faith opens altogether new sources of power, touches 
stops in the great organ of nature which elude other 
hands, and avails itself of those Divine prerogatives 
which, like legions of angels, wait in harnessed squad- 
rons around the beset believer. 

As David went forth to meet the Philistine, Saul 
said to Abner, his uncle, and the trusted captain of his 
army, " Whose son is the youth ? Inquire whose 
son the stripling is " ; and when presently the young 
champion returned with the head of the Philistine in 
his hand, the one question the king put to him was, 
" Whose son art thou, thou young man ? " It was as 
though Saul thought to account for his success on the 
ground of heredity. " Surely," thought he, " this 
youth comes of a great line of ancestry; the blood of 
Caleb or Joshua must be in his veins; the best of 



2i6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Hebrew stock must have yielded this scion." It is 
thus that the man of this world tries to compute and 
reckon up the child of faith. He is always analysing 
the elements of his success, and trying to account for 
him. He has no conception of what God can be or 
do for the soul that wholly trusts Him. 

On the ground of expediency, after his return to 
Gibeah, Saul set David over the men of war. Tlie 
harp was exchanged, for the most part, for the sword ; 
and as he went forth on his expeditions against the 
hereditary foes of Israel, he became more and more 
necessary to the stability of the throne, as he became 
increasingly the darling of the nation. " Whitherso- 
ever Saul sent him, he behaved himself wisely." Out 
of this popularity originated the great sin of Saul's 
Hfe. 

On one occasion, as Saul and David were returning 
from some final and decisive victory over the Philis- 
tines (ver. 6, see margin), the people crowded to meet 
them and the troops ; and the women, dressed in gay 
attire, danced around and before the advancing 
columns, singing to the music of their tambourines and 
three-stringed instruments. As they performed the 
usual sacred dance they sang responsively, " answering 
one to another," an ode of victory, of which this was 
the refrain: 

" Saul hath slain his thousands, 
And David his ten thousands." 

Instantly the king was smitten with the dart of 



" SIN BRINGING FORTH DEATH." 217 

jealousy. All his soul was set on fire with the thought 
that not improbably David was the neighbour of whom 
Samuel had spoken, as being the divinely designated 
successor to the kingdom, which was even now passing 
from his hand. What if this bright young soldier, 
with the light of God on his life, and the love of the 
people already gathered to his person, was to dis- 
possess him ! " And Saul was very wroth, and the 
saying displeased him ; and he said : What can he have 
more than the kingdom." 

" And Saul eyed David from that day and forward." 
All the love and admiration that he had entertained 
towards him turned to gall and bitterness. The milk 
of human kindness turned sour. His old malady, 
which had been charmed away from him, came back 
with mote than its wonted force ; and on the day after 
the incident, brooding over his fancied wrongs, it 
seemed as though his whole nature were suddenly 
thrown open to an evil spirit, who possessed him, and 
swept him on to do a deed of murderous hatred. Rav- 
ing in a mad fit of frenzy, he caught up the spear that 
stood beside him as the emblem of his royal state, and 
hurled it at David, who was sitting before him, en- 
deavouring to charm away his malady. Not once, but 
twice the murderous weapon quivered through the air, 
but David avoided out of his presence twice, no doubt 
imputing the attempt on his life to the king's illness, 
and having no idea of the jealousy that was burning 
in his soul like fire. 



2i8 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

Let us take care of the first beginnings of sin, when 
the least suggestion begins to float in the air around 
us, like a microbe or germ of malignant and deadly 
disease. Then is the time to turn to Christ with it 
for deliverance, securing his gracious interposition, as 
you exercise faith in the grace of his salvation. 
" Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins ; 
let them not have dominion over mie; then shall I be 
upright, and I shall be innocent from the great trans- 
gression." 



XXI. 

Ube Stn of Jealous^?. 

(i Samuel xviii.) 

All selfish souls, whate'er they feign, 

Have still a slavish lot; 

They boast of Liberty — in vain — 

Of Love — and feel it not! 

He whose bosom glows with Thee — 

He, and he alone, is free. 

— COWPER. 

AMONG the most terrible of human sins is 
jealousy — the parent of the darkest and 
blackest crimes that have disgraced the annals 
of our race. And of all the delineations of it, which 
are frescoed on the walls of history, none is more 
absolutely true to life, and terrible in its graphic 
colouring, than this portraiture of the first king of 
Israel. 

I. Jealousy Opens the Door to the Devil. — In 
Saul's case the interval was the briefest possible. On 
the morrow after the song of the women, which first 
aroused in his heart the feeling of jealousy towards 
David, we learn that " an evil spirit " came mightily 
upon the ill-fated monarch. 

There is an impenetrable wall, as we believe, built 



2 20 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

by the providence of God between human souls and 
the evil spirits which tenant the atmosphere around 
us, and are therefore called " the spiritual hosts of 
wickedness in the heavenlies " (Eph. vi. 12,), whilst 
their leader is known as the Prince of the Power of 
the Air (Eph. ii. 2). No spirit of evil, however 
malignant, can break through that barrier from his 
side ; but it is possible for man to break it down on 
his. Every time we yield in thought or act to the 
temptations which are perpetually accosting us, we 
disintegrate and impair that barrier, and expose our- 
selves to the entrance of demon influence, which adapts 
itself to the outward mould of our sinful desires, only 
investing and filling it with an intensity of passion 
which would otherwise be impossible to us. 

This evil spirit, in Saul's case, is said to have been 
" from God " — a phrase which can only be interpreted 
on the hypothesis that God permitted it to come, and 
that this tragic result transpired in direct pursuance 
of the immutable fixtures of the universe. If a man 
tampers with his soul, God cannot save him from the 
inevitable results. Obey the law of fire, and it will 
obey you like a dutiful slave — this is God's will and 
appointment ; but it is also his will and appointment 
that, if you disobey it, it will devour your towers, 
palaces, treasures, and homes, with merciless fury. 
When men rebel and vex the Holy Spirit, He turns 
to be their enemy and fights , against them. " God," 
says one, " must be something to us ; what He shall be 



THE SIN OF JEALOUSY. 221 

depends on what we are to Him." Go with the wind, 
and it beneficently wafts you forward; go against it, 
and your progress becomes ruinous in its deadly cost. 

" With the merciful, Thou wilt show Thyself merciful; 
With the perfect man, Thou wilt show Thyself perfect; 
With the pure, Thou wilt show Thyself pure; 
And with the froward, Thou wilt show Thyself froward. 

II. Jealousy Defeats its Own Good. — David had 
suddenly become the darling of the people. With 
almost a single bound, he had leapt into the throne of 
universal homage and affection. " All Israel and 
Judah loved David " (16). In this common affection 
for one who was so accessible to them all, the people 
forgot their ancient feuds. Not only they, but the 
Court, was enamoured of him. He was set over the 
men of war, and went out with them whithersoever 
Saul sent him, and his promotion was good, not only 
" in the sight of all the people," but also " in the sight 
of Saul's servants," while Jonathan loved him with a 
love passing the love of women; and Michal, Saul's 
daughter, was tenderly attached to him. There must 
have been something of a spell in the influence of that 
pure, bright soul over all who came into contact 
with it. 

Besides this, the Lord was evidently with him. Note 
how constantly the sacred chronicle touches that 
note : " Saul was afraid of David, because the Lord 
was with him'' (12) ; " David behaved himself wisely 
in all his ways, and the Lord was with him " ( 14) ; 



2 22 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

" And Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with 
David" (28). 

Moreover, he behaved himself wisely, or prospered 
(5) ; wisely in all his ways (14) ; very wisely, so much 
so that Saul stood in awe of him (15) ; more wisely 
than all the servants of Saul, so that his name was 
much set by (30). 

Under these circumstances, how judicious it would 
have been for Saul to bind the son of Jesse to himself ! 
Admitting frankly that he was his designated succes- 
sor, and that he was enjoying the special favour of 
Jehovah, Saul might have used David for the re- 
habilitation of his waning fortunes. It was evidently 
impossible to reverse the Divine choice, but he might 
have postponed the infliction of the inevitable sentence. 
Nothing could have made the king himself more 
popular than to have identified his fortunes and those 
of his family with one who could have rendered con- 
spicuous and inestimable service to court and kingdom. 
Nothing could have been easier, nothing more politic. 
But instead of this, Saul allowed his mad passion to 
smoulder always, and sometimes burst into a flame, 
until it broke out in irresistible fury and consumed the 
house of his life. 

In the case of the higher passions of the soul, it is 
often easy to curb and restrain them by the introduc- 
tion of considerations of self-interest and personal 
prestige ; but it is not so with jealousy. At the shrine 
of this passion, which differs from the lust of the 



THE Sm OF JEALOUSY. 223 

libertine and the drink-crave of the inebriate, in being 
wholly a passion of the mind, the jealous soul is 
prepared to repeat the act of Palissy the potter, who 
tore up the very boards of his home, after having 
destroyed every atom of furniture, in order to prose- 
cute the design by which he was consumed. The 
peace of the home ; the success of some great enter- 
prise; the happiness and prosperity of some loved one 
who has been the unwitting cause of jealousy; the 
service of God; the prospect of long, happy years of 
high respect if only the passion is resisted and ex- 
tinguished — I have seen these, and more than these, 
sacrificed because jealousy has demanded its re- 
venge. 

III. Jealousy is very Inventive of Methods of 
Executing its Fell Purpose* — Its shape is protean. 
Sometimes it uses the stiletto, whose edge is so fine 
that you do not know you have been struck till after- 
wards; and sometimes the bludgeon, that fells to the 
ground with one murderous blow. The poison cup, 
or the fine meshes of a subtle stratagem, which leads 
the victim to inflict his own doom — such are the 
methods which jealousy employs. 

Trace this in the history before us. First Saul, 
under the excuse of his malady, attempts to take 
David's life with his own hand. He knew that the 
murderous deed would be imputed to the deranged 
condition of his mind, and therefore, with impunity. 



224 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

twice launched the javelin at the minstrel who sought 
to charm, away his malady. 

Then he sought to throw him into positions of 
extreme peril, by inciting him to valiant deeds on the 
field of battle, and in border warfare. For a bribe 
he promised him his elder daughter, Merab, whose 
hand should be given him in marriage, as the reward 
of heroic deeds ; and to this was added the appeal of 
religion, than which no motive could be more potent 
with this devout and chivalrous soul. " And Saul 
said to David, Behold, my elder daughter, Merab ; her 
will I give thee to wife : only be thou valiant for me, 
and fight the Lord's battles." And then, with un- 
sparing hand, the sacred writer draws aside the veil, 
and recites to us the secret thoughts that were passing 
in that dark and evil-haunted nature — " for Saul said. 
Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of 
the Philistines be upon him." We do not know the 
heroic deeds to which these allurements led, but it was 
not for want of them that the royal promise was un- 
fulfilled, and Merab given to Adriel the Meholathite. 

The stratagem had failed, but it seemed too insidious 
and too likely to realise the royal purpose, to be aban- 
doned without being put to one further proof and 
Michal, Saul's younger daughter, who really loved 
David, at this time, at least, was made the guerdon or 
prize to allure the young, unsuspecting warrior to fresh 
encounters with the Philistines. The sure evidence 
that a hundred of these doughty foes had fallen by 



THE SIN OF JEALOUSY. 225 

David's hand was the only stipulated dowry which 
was required, and the honour of becoming the king's 
son-in-law was the theme of many a hint, suggestion, 
and open conversation, between the courtiers and the 
young soul on whose career so much attention was 
being concentrated. To his servants, Saul must have 
seemed to be sincerely attached to David, and to desire, 
with genuine earnestness, to enrol him in his family; 
clearly he was playing a game of unusual adroitness. 
On the one hand, his servants really believed that the 
king delighted in David, and wanted the alliance; on 
the other, " Saul thought to make David fall by the 
hand of the PhiHstines." 

It was only after the plot had failed, and it seemed 
as though through the providence of God David was 
possessed of a charmed life, that Saul spoke to Jona- 
than his son and to all his servants, that they should 
slay David ; again hurled his javelin at him with such 
force that it stood quivering in the palace wall ; and 
finally pursued him, first to his own home, and finally 
to Samuel's home in Naioth (see chap. xix.). 

Not otherwise is it with jealousy. When a wife is 
jealous of another woman, who may be absolutely 
guiltless of any attempt to influence the husband's 
affections ; when an elder minister becomes jealous of 
his assistant, or of a neighbour ; when a person becomes 
jealous of the influence which another is obtaining 
over his friend — it becomes almost impossible to 
enumerate all the unkind suggestions, all the insinua- 



2 26 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

tions, all the wrong constructions on conduct, all the 
perversion of words, actions, and looks, through which 
the soul will vent its spleen. 

IV. Jealousy of the Innocent is Unable to 
Avail against God. — Everything that it does has a 
reverse effect from that which was intended, and so 
far from overwhelming the rival, extends his influence, 
and more thoroughly establishes his throne. 

It was remarkably so with David. Saul was bent 
on alluring him to his ruin. Through God's inter- 
position, however, each murderous intent was foiled, 
and became the cause of the still greater popularity of 
his rival. If he is set over the men of war, he prospers 
wherever he is sent ; if he is separated from the imme- 
diate proximity of the king, and permitted to go in 
and out before the people, the whole nation loves him 
(xviii. 13, 15). If he is sent to fight the Philistines, 
he slays not one hundred but two, so that his name 
is much set by (30). If Saul urges Jonathan to slay 
him, he drives his own son to a closer friendship, and 
forces him to plead the cause of the twin soul, with 
which his own was knit. Everything that is meant 
for ill turns out for good. The weapons that are 
hurled on the young life are boomerangs which return 
on the hand that launched them. The curses came 
home to roost. Saul digs privily a pit, into which he 
falls himself. 

If only jealous people would ponder such a story 



THE SIN OF JEALOUSY. 



227 



as this, surely they would see the uselessness of their 
malignant attempts to injure those who may seem 
destined to take their place. It is not thus that the 
peril can be met. The stars in their courses fight 
against Sisera. Balak may bribe Balaam with his 
wealthiest rewards to come to curse Israel, but how 
shall he curse whom God hath not cursed, and how 
shall he defy whom the Lord hath not defied ? 

There is a Nemesis in life which will certainly 
return on the evil-doer. The Lord will not leave his 
Davids to the cruel mercies of a Saul. He will raise 
up Jonathans to warn them of their peril, will cause 
Michal to ward oflf the molesting blow, will overpower 
with the mysterious spell of spiritual influences the 
murderous bands, and will still the enemy and avenger. 

" God is a righteous judge, 
If a man turn not, he will whet his sword, 
He hath bent his bow and made it ready. 
He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death. 

His mischief shall return upon his own head, 
And his violence shall come down upon his pate.'" 



XXII. 

"Cruel as tbe ©rave." 

(i Samuel xx.-xxvii.) 

'Tis greatly wise to talk with our past hours; 
And ask them what report they bore to heaven; 
And how they might have borne more welcome news. 
Their answers form what men Experience call, 
The Spirit walks of every day deceased, 
And smiles an Angel, or a fury frowns. 

— Young. 

JEALOUSY has no scruples, and will not hesitate 
to violate the most revered sanctities. Her foot 
is ruthless; it will trample upon the relationship 
of home, the bonds of friendship and kinship, and the 
reverence which attaches itself to the house and wor- 
ship of God. When once this passion has kindled, 
there is nothing on which it will forbear to feed, noth- 
ing is too sacred to be fuel for its flame. Not that it 
often, under the restraint of Christian civilisation at 
least, proceeds to murder ; rather, by whispered sus- 
picions, by the shrug of the shoulders, the movement 
of the finger, the furtive look, the suggestive question, 
it may destroy the peace which one has in husband, 
wife, child, or friend. 

The home-life is one of the most sacred institutions 
of our human life. It originates in the knitting of 



"CRUEL AS ThE CRAJ'E." 229 

spirit with spirit, so that the twain become one; and 
from that union springs the dower of blessed children, 
sowing the world with flowers, and making the race 
perennially young. Such a home, in David's case, was 
largely due to Saul's own arrangement. When 
Michal, his daughter, loved David, and they told him, 
and it pleased him, and he gave her to David to wife, 
it was the burst as of a new spring-tide to those two 
young lives — happy in each other's affection, though 
afterwards to be sadly alienated. Yet when David had 
evaded his javelin, and fled to the security of his home, 
saying to himself, " At least my father-in-law will 
respect the sanctity of his daughter's love," the madly 
jealous monarch sent messengers thither to watch him, 
and slay him in the morning, eliciting from the im- 
prisoned singer the plaintive strains preserved in one 
of his Psalms (lix.). 

" Deliver me from mine enemies, O my God; 
Set me on high from them that rise tip against me. 
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, 
And save me from bloodthirsty men. 
For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul; 
The mighty gather themselves together against me; 
Not for my transgression, nor for any sin, O Lord." 

Michal knew her father too well to trust his clem- 
ency, warned her husband of the imminence of death, 
with woman-wit (and what will not women do for 
those they love!) aided him to escape, with her own 
hands letting him down from the window. It was to 
his daughter that it was due that the newly formed 



230 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

home was not rendered desolate, and the light of its 
hearth quenched. 

The sanctuary of religious worship is next in im- 
portance to the home, if not superior. They stand or 
fall together. The one is generally the guarantee of 
the stability of the other. From the home as its fore- 
court, we pass into the house of God as our abiding- 
place. " In my Father's house," said our Lord, " are 
many mansions " ; and may we not suppose that human 
homes are included amongst them? 

But the case of Saul shows that jealousy will break 
down the precincts of the sanctuary as ruthlessly as 
of the home. David hastened to tell Samuel of the 
turn that things were taking, and of the grave suspicion 
which was forcing itself on his soul, that Saul's 
attempts on his life were not the result of a disordered 
brain, but of a wicked and murderous will. For 
greater security Samuel led him to a cluster of booths, 
perhaps woven of osiers (called Naioth), where a 
number of young men were being trained for the 
prophetic office, and were living in the fullest manifes- 
tation of spiritual power. The very atmosphere where 
they dwelt seemed charged with spiritual electricity. 

Into this sacred assembly Saul forced three succes- 
sive bands of messengers to arrest David, and finally, 
in hot wrath at their failure to return, came himself. 
In after-days it was distinctly remembered how he 
came to the great well, or cistern, in Sechu, and asked 
with peremptory vehemence for Samuel and David. 



"CRUEL AS THE GRAVE." 231 

When one told him,, he went off to Naioth; but was 
stricken down or ever he reached the place; and, 
divested of his royal robes, for a second time in his 
life lay on the ground in a kind of trance, which 
lasted for all that day and all that night. 

We cannot read of this singular incident without 
being reminded of scenes in the life of John Wesley, 
of whom it is said, " While preaching on the common 
at Bristol a young woman sank down in violent agony, 
as did five or six persons at another meeting in the 
evening. One was a young lady, whose mother was 
irritated at the scandal, as she called it, of her daugh- 
ter's conduct; but the mother was the next who 
dropped down and lost her senses in a moment, yet 
went home with her daughter, full of joy. Bold blas- 
phemers were instantly seized with agony, and cried 
aloud for the Divine mercy, and scores were some- 
times strewed on the ground at once, insensible as 
dead mien. A Quaker who was admonishing the by- 
standers against these strange scenes as affectation 
and hypocrisy was himself struck down, as by an un- 
seen hand, while the words of reproach were yet upon 
his lips." The difference, of course, between these 
two phenomena lay in the result. In the case of the 
sunken down under Wesley and Jonathan Edwards, 
the outcome was a change of heart and life, together 
with a very blessed and exalted religious experience. 
In the case of Saul, the experience was as the early 
cloud and the morning dew, which goeth away. What- 



232 



SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 



ever the nature of the experience, whether physical, 
mental, or spiritual, and probably it was the latter, it 
was transient and evanescent, and left him really worse 
than it found him, for his jealousy next threatened the 
life of his noble son Jonathan. 

The very fountains of a father's love and pride dry 
up before the volcanic fires of jealousy, and become 
the cause of even deeper and wider contortions. 
Jonathan was one of the noblest types of manhood. A 
truly princely soul was his. In any age, even of the 
most romantic age of chivalry, he would have stood 
easily, and by a universally acknowledged right, in 
the foremost rank. Whether in the court or on the 
battlefield, he shone as a star of the first magnitude. 
Grace and beauty must have adorned his person, whilst 
intrepid daring and courage characterised his be- 
haviour on the battlefield. The darling of the people, 
who once saved his life from his father, the chosen 
ideal of the maidens and youth of his time, wise in 
statesmanship, true in friendship, strong in resolution, 
there was everything to bind his father to him, for 
reasons of policy as well as of paternal pride. But 
these considerations had no weight with Saul, whilst 
jealousy of David lay heavy in the other scale. He 
might be, as his friend eloquently expressed it in his 
funeral elegy, " lovely and pleasant," swifter than an 
eagle, stronger than a lion, but Saul was prepared to 
sacrifice it all to the spirit of revenge. 

It was on the monthly festival that this new vent 



"CRUEL AS THE GRAVE." 233 

of the volcano which raged within Saul's heart re- 
vealed itself. It was the second day, and as on the 
previous one, David's seat was empty. Speaking of 
him derisively as " the son of Jesse," thus accentuating 
his lowly birth, and ignoring the relationship that 
bound him to the royal family, the king asked 
Jonathan the reason of his absence; and when he 
received the answer on which the two friends had 
previously agreed, he fell into a grievous rage, abused 
Jonathan with the vilest epithets that an Eastern can 
use, who to-day vents his scorn on the mother of the 
object of his hate, insisted on David's immediate arrest 
and execution, and ended by hurling his javelin at his 
noble son, who had interfered to mollify his wrath. 
" So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce " (and 
righteous} " anger, and did eat no meat the second 
day of the month: for he was grieved for David, 
because his father had done him shame." 

■ But jealousy is also responsive to the worst possible 
suggestions. Of this there is an illustration in the 
following chapter (xxi.). The fugitive fled this time 
to Nob, where Ahimelech, the high priest, presided over 
the relics of the ancient sanctuary. The suspicions 
excited in Ahimelech's mind by his unescorted and 
hasty advent were removed by an evasive reply, and 
the king's son-in-law was received with all deference, 
supplied with bread, with the mighty sword of Goliath, 
and such spiritual counsel as the ephod could afford. 

The incident was reported to Saul, some months 



234 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

afterwards, as he was encamped " on the height " 
(r. v. margin) above Gibeah, waiting for .tidings of 
his hated rival, that he might at once march with his 
household troops, composed of trusted Benjamites, 
men of his own tribe, to capture and slay him. It 
seemed as though all the demands of the public service 
were set aside and accounted as the small dust of the 
balance so long as the vengeance of his soul was un- 
appeased. The promulgation and execution of law, 
the hearing of suits, the defences of the kingdom — all 
were of no account in his estimation until this one 
purpose was fulfilled. 

In the heat of his spirit he gave vent to the 
complaint (and jealousy so often takes on the 
tone of injured innocence) that all his servants 
were in conspiracy against him, that no one cared for 
him, that Jonathan was at the bottom of David's con- 
spiracy, and that each was cherishing the hope of his 
speedy downfall in order to receive possessions and 
promotions as the price of treachery from the hand of 
the son of Jesse. It was an unjust and injurious taunt. 
Well might the apostle James affirm that the tongue is 
often " set on fire of hell." It was so here. Mad 
jealousy runs amuck, striking here and there, with 
absolute disregard of all that is most precious and 
true in human loyalty and love. Amid the silence that 
followed these undeserved reproaches, Doeg narrated 
what he had seen on that fateful day when he had 
happened to be detained at the Tabernacle, for some 



'CRUEL AS THE GRAVE." 



235 



ceremonial ablution or other rite, and had witnessed 
Ahimelech's attentions to the king's son-in-law (i 
Sam. xxi. 7). 

Doeg's malicious statement at once diverted the 
king's suspicions from his courtiers to the priests. 
Nob was not far distant from Gibeah; and a per- 
emptory summons, after a brief interval, brought 
Ahimelech and all his father's house, i. e., all the males 
of the high priest's family of the house of Eli, into 
the presence of the king. In unmeasured terms Saul 
accused the whole of them of connivance with David 
for the overthrow of his throne and dynasty, and would 
give no heed to Ahimelech's mild expostulations. The 
high priest pleaded that, though he had done what the 
king accused him of, he had done it quite innocently. 
He had always accounted David as one of the most 
faithful of Saul's servants, had looked on him as being 
constantly entrusted with secret commissions, and had 
frequently made similar inquiries of God on his behalf, 
believing that in this he was serving the royal will. 
But he might as well have tried to stem the swelling 
of Jordan. The king's mind was made up before he 
began his defence. Yielding to some unholy impulse 
which surely must have come to him from some 
malign and evil spirit, and to which his disordered 
nature was as susceptible as it had been to the spiritual 
afflatus of Naioth, he said, " Thou shalt surely die, 
Ahimelech, thou and all thy father's house." 

The royal bodyguard shrank from executing the 



236 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

awful sentence; but Doeg the Edomite, a foreigner, 
with his herdsmen, had no such compunctions, but 
forthwith fell on the unresisting priests, who were 
butchered one after another, until their mangled 
corpses were piled in heaps, and their white robes were 
saturated with their hearts' blood. 

It was a cowardly and dastardly deed, the tidings 
of which must have staggered the whole nation with 
dumfoundering horror. All good men must have 
felt that the foundations of society were loosed, and 
that neither life nor liberty was safe, while such frenzy 
was enthroned in their monarch's breast. The black 
current which had caught him was bearing him ever 
more swiftly to his doom: a depraved heart wrought 
on a maddened brain, and this reacted back again to 
his destruction. 

What a warning is here that we should not yield to 
the first intrusion of evil, lest the thought should lead 
to the act, and repeated acts to the habit, and habits 
congeal to character, and character become set in 
destiny ! 

Jealousy is, however, subject to strong remorse. 
These scourges are the remonstrances of that blessed 
Spirit who allows no soul to drift unwarned to the 
bottomless pit. Saul was very subject to these power- 
ful eddies in the hurrying current. 

When, in an earlier stage, Jonathan reminded his 
father of the priceless services that David had rendered, 
he hearkened attentively, relented, and pledged his 



'CRUEL AS THE GRAVE." 



'31 



royal oath that he should not be put to death (xix. 

1-7)- 

When David spared his life in the cave, near the 
Fountain of the Wild Goat, amid the wild ravines that 
border on the western shores of the Dead Sea, refus- 
ing to put forth his hand against the Lord's anointed, 
and restraining his surprised and eager followers — 
touched by a generosity which was wholly unexampled 
in those rude days, Saul lifted up his voice and wept, 
and poured out the pent-up generosity which had been 
natural to him in earlier days, but had for long been 
restrained. " If a man find his enemy," he said, " will 
he let him go well away? Wherefore the Lord re- 
ward thee good for that thou hast done for me this 
day" (xxiv. 16-22). 

And, when again he came in search of David and 
pitched his camp on the ridge of Hachilah, on the 
southern hills, and again, though David's clemency, 
his life was spared from the fatal plunge of the spear, 
which would not have needed a second thrust, Saul 
went so far as to say before all his camp : " I have 
played the fool, and have erred exceedingly. I have 
sinned ; return, my son David, for I will no more do 
thee harm" (xxvi.). 

But, alas! in every case, his remorse was of brief 
duration, and failed to produce any permanent 
change in heart or purpose. The fire still smouldered 
in his soul, awaiting the least breath of air to rekindle 
its flames. He might exclaim, " Blessed be thou, 



238 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

my son David, thou shalt both do mightily, and 
shalt surely prevail." But David dare not trust 
him, and said in his heart, " There is nothing 
better for me than that I should escape into 
the land of the Philistines '' ( i Sam. xxvi. 25 ; 
xxvii. i). 

But the cure of jealousy is clearly set forth in these 
terrible chapters. Without doubt Saul's surmises 
were well known to all the members of his family, and 
especially to Jonathan. Before ever Saul had blurted 
out his threat that Jonathan's kingdom would not be 
established, so long as the son of Jesse lived upon the 
ground, the heir-apparent had assured his friend that 
he knew the time would come when the Lord would 
cut off the enemies of David, every one from the earth 
(xx. 14, 15, 30, 31). And later, while Saul was seek- 
ing David's life amid the ravines of Ziph, urged on 
in his madness by the treacherous Ziphites, Jonathcin 
came to him, and strengthened his hand in God, and 
said : " Fear not, for the hand of Saul, my father, shall 
not find thee, and thou shalt be king over Israel, and 
I shall be next unto thee ; and that also Saul my father 
knoweth." 

Jonathan, then, was even more affected by the choice 
of David than his father was. It was certain that he 
would never succeed to the throne. Respected and 
loved he might be, but enthroned never. But not a 
cloud of jealousy ever darkened the pure heaven of 
hjs Ipye, or cast its shadow on the crystal lake of his 



"CRUEL AS THE GRAVE." 239 

peace. Perfect love had cast out hate; we are told 
that " he loved David as his own soul." 

If you are tempted to jealousy, do not brood over 
the fell passion, or allow it to grow from less to more, 
but arise to deal with it at once, and with all the 
energy of your soul. Insist on loving the one to 
whom you have felt the unholy passion. You reply 
that that is the very emotion of love. It may be 
impossible for you to command the latter, but quite 
possible to practice the former, since love consists 
primarily, not in the feeling, but in the doing; not 
in emotions, but in strong acts of self-denial and 
service. 

Find out the individual concerning whom you were 
beginning to feel jealous. Be on the alert to do kind 
acts and speak kind words. Whenever you are 
tempted to utter a depreciating remark, arrest the 
words before they cross your lips, and utter some 
kindly ones instead. Whenever you find yourself on 
the point of speaking contemptuously or judging 
harshly, go out of your way to do some generous 
deed. Overcome evil with good, hatred with love. 
Do not wait to feel kindly, but act promptly and 
heartily. Go out of your way to confer a kindness. 
Above all, avoid aloofness. Throw yourself in that 
other's company; try to enter into the anxieties, trials, 
and temptations by which his life is torn and rent; 
cultivate a near and close fellowship, and always offer 
and present yourself to God as a living sacrifice. 



240 



SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 



Believe also that God does hear you, that his Holy 
Spirit takes part with you against the enemy of your 
peace, and that He who has led you to desire perfect 
deliverance is prepared to work in you to will and do 
of his good pleasure. 



XXIII. 

B (Breat Sunset, 

(i Samuel xxv. i.) 

Life is only bright when it proceedeth 
Toward a truer, deeper Life above; 

Human Love is sweetest when it leadeth 
To a more divine and perfect Love. 

— A. A. Procter. 

AT length Samuel came to his end, so far as 
f-\ this world, at least, was concerned; and was 
borne to his grave, ag a shock of corn 
fully ripe. Though he had spent the last years in 
retirement, partly because of his great age, and 
partly because of the breach between the king and 
himself, he had never lost the love and respect 
of his people; and when finally the tidings sped 
through the country that he had fallen upon that 
blessed sleep which God giveth to his beloved, the 
event was felt to be a national calamity, so that from 
Dan in the far north to Beer-sheba on the southern 
frontier, " all Israel gathered themselves together, and 
lamented him, and buried him." 

Josephus adds this significant paragraph to the 
record of Scripture: "His moral excellence, and the 
esteem with which he was regarded, were proved by 
the continued mourning that was made for him, and 



242 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

the concern that was universally shown to conduct the 
funeral rites with becoming splendour and solemnity. 
He was buried in his own native place, and they wept 
for him many days; not regarding it as the death of 
another man or a stranger, but as that in which each 
individual was concerned. He was a righteous man, 
and of a kindly nature, and on that account very dear 
to God." 

The impression made on his contemporaries lin- 
gered, as an afterglow, long after his sundown. 
Again and again he is referred to in the sacred record. 

I Chron. ix. 22 suggests that he laid the founda- 
tions of that elaborate organisation of Levites for the 
service of the sanctuary which was perfected by David 
and Solomon. 

1 Chron. xxvi. 27, 28, asserts that he began to ac- 
cumulate the treasures by which the House of the 
Lord was ultimately erected in the reign of David's 
mighty son. 

2 Chron. xxxv. 18, contains a passing reference to 
some memorable Passover Feast, which he instituted 
and carried through. 

Psa. xcix. 6, and Jer. xv. i, commemorate the fra- 
grance of his perpetual intercessions. 

Acts iii. 24, and xiii. 20, indicate what a conspicu- 
ous landmark was furnished by his life and work in 
the history of his people. 

Heb. xi. 33 places him in the long gallery of time, 
the niches in the walls of which have been filled 



A GREAT SUNSET. 



243 



one by one by the statues of those who have lived and 
wrought in the power of a hving faith. " The time 
would fail me to tell ... of Samuel . . . who through 
faith . . . wrought righteousness . . ." 

I. The Blessedn'ess of his Life. — Though 
Samuel's career was an arduous one, it must have 
been fraught with the elements of true blessedness. 

He was pre-eminently a man of prayer. This was 
his perpetual resort. Whether for his people or his 
king, for the overthrow of the Philistines or the re- 
covery of Saul from his evil courses, he never ceased 
to pray — he would have counted it a sin if he had. 
" God forbid," he exclaimed on one memorable occa- 
sion, " that 1 should sin against the Lord in ceasing 
to pray for you." Many a sleepless night did he 
spend in tears and prayers for the king whom he had 
set up, and to whose hands he had committed the 
national interests as a precious charge (i Sam. xv. 11, 
35; xvi. i). 

It has yet to be seen, and probably we shall never 
know until the veil of eternity is lifted, whether the 
world has benefited most by our prayers or labours. 
It is more than likely that the men and women who 
have poured out perpetual supplications and interces- 
sions have, like Epaphras, wrought most effectively. 
These have resembled mighty mountains, commenc- 
ing with the skies, down whose slopes the perennial 
streams have poured, wreathed in rainbow vapour, 



244 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

and carrying the quality of the mountain soil into the 
plains. 

All books, says an eloquent writer, are dry and 
tame compared with the great unwritten book prayed 
in the closet. The prayers of exiles! The prayers 
of martyrs! The prayers of missionaries! The 
prayers of the Waldenses! The prayers of the Cov- 
enanters! The sighs, the groans, the inarticulate 
cries of suffering men, whom tyrants have buried 
alive in dungeons, whom the world may forget, but 
God never! If some angel, catching them as they 
were uttered, should drop them down from heaven, 
what a liturgy they would make! Can any epic equal 
those unwritten words which pour into the ear of God 
out of the heart's fulness? But these prayers have 
been deeds. In the words of James (ver. i6, r. v.), 
they have availed much in their working. An energy 
passes from the holy soul, striving mightily in prayer, 
which becomes a working force in the universe, an 
indestructible unit of power, not apart from God, but 
in union with his own mighty energies, of whom, and 
through whom, and to whom are all things. 

Let us pray more, especially as life advances. Let 
us seek to be enrolled among those who call upon his 
Name. Let us so live that men may shelter them- 
selves in the thought of our intercessions, as Saul in 
those of Samuel. 

" More things are wrought by prayer than this world 
dreams of," 



A GREAT SUNSET. 245 

Samuel was also characterised by great singleness af 
purpose. He could court without flinching the most 
searching scrutiny (i Sam. xii. 3). From those early 
days when, as a child, the vision of his childlike 
purity, contrasted with the evil of Eli's house, struck 
on the imagination of Israel, his had been a career of 
stainless and irreproachable honour. The interests 
of his people had been his all-absorbing concern. 
For these he had spent himself with ungrudging de- 
votion, and to find that he must withdraw from them 
in favour of another was the sorest grief of his life. 
The troubles which had befallen his land had only led 
him nearer God, and bound him more tightly to his 
fellow-countrymen; but when he discovered that they 
desired him to give up his position, it required all the 
gifts of God's grace, and all the qualities of a natu- 
rally noble nature, to sustain the shock with equanim- 
ity. But again his unselfishness, which had become 
the inner law of his life, conquered; he set himself to 
secure the best successor which the age could afiford, 
and humbly stepped down from the supreme place of 
power. 

■It was this beautiful humility and singleness of pur- 
pose that arrested the reverence of his people and at- 
tracted their veneration. And it was to this trait of 
his character that we must attribute his perception 
of the Divine purpose. The eye must be single in its 
intention, if the whole body is to be full of light. Sir 
Percivale missed, but Sir Galahad beheld, the vision 



246 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

of the Holy Grail, because the one missed what the 
other possessed. 

" O son, thou hast not true humility. 
The highest virtue, mother of them all. 

Thou though test of thy prowess and thy sins; 
Thou hast not lost thyself to save thyself. 
As Galahad." 

Oh, to be so absorbed in a consuming passion for 
the glory of God in the salvation of others, that we 
may be oblivious of ourselves, willing to take the 
second place, to be reckoned as no account, to retire 
from the blaze of light that falls on the stage to the 
retirement and twilight of the cloister, where the 
progress of the days is marked by the clock-chimes, 
and the incidence of the shadows indicates the prog- 
ress of the sun from solstice to solstice! 

Samuel was also careful to construct. When the 
whole land was disorganised, he began to lay the 
foundations of a new state. Deep down in the wel- 
tering waves his careful hands laid course upon 
course. The time and care he expended on the 
schools of the prophets, his careful administration of 
justice in his itineraries, his appeals to the people in 
their great convocations, were part of a great policy 
which resulted in a consolidated and united people. 

Do something in your life. Don't waste the 
precious time in criticising others, but put a piece of 
solid work into the great fabric which is rising around 
us, and on which the new Jerusalem will one day be 



A GREAT SUNSET. a47 

established. To criticise others is a less efficient way 

of setting them right than to do the same thing as they 

are doing, so much more quickly and deftly that they 

are led to follow our example. I like the example of 

the man who, instead of criticising the garden plots 

of his neighbours, made his own so beautiful that 

those on his right and left, to the extreme ends on 

either side, were led, one by one, to do the same. 

" We will not cease from mental strife, 
Nor shall our sword sleep in otir hand, 
Till we have built Jerusalem, 
In this our green and pleasant land." 

'As first of the prophets, as the connecting-link be- 
tween the first days of the settlement in Palestine and 
the splendour of Solomon's reign, by his unblemished 
character, by his sympathy and strength, by his evi- 
dent fellowship with the God of Israel from his boyish 
days to his old age, Samuel won from his people the 
most profound veneration; and it is not to be won- 
dered at that one of them — who owed everything to 
him, though he was unable to appreciate the majesty 
of his personality — in the supreme hour of his des- 
perate need, when all beside had deserted him, turned 
for help to the great prophet, though he had been 
withdrawn for a considerable time from earthly 
scenes, and cried, " Bring me up Samuel." 

II, His Blessed Death. — Death is not a state, 
but a step; not a chamber, but a passage; not an 
abiding-place, but a bridge over a gulf. None are 



248 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

dead. We should speak of the departed as those 
who, for a moment, passed through the shadow 
of the tunnel, but are living in the intensity of a 
vivid existence on the other side. " God is not the 
God of the dead, but of the living, for all live 
unto Him." None are dead, in the sense of re- 
maining in a condition of deadness. 'Those whom we 
call dead are those who died, and passed through 
death into the other life. They put off their earthly 
tabernacle, but the tenanting-spirit has passed into 
other scenes and activities for weal or woe, from 
which it would be an effort to tear itself, if sum- 
moned to return to the cares and responsibilities of 
this mortal existence: " Why hast thou disquieted me, 
to bring me up?" 

Remember how tlie Apostle Paul describes death. He 
speaks of his departure (2 Tim. iv. 6). His word is 
a nautical term, and signifies the loosing of a ship 
from its moorings, not that it may reach harbour, but 
that it may go out from the harbour on to the broad 
bosom of the ocean. 

This is the exact thought caught by Tennyson, 
when he sings: 

" Sunset and evening star. 
And one clear call for me ; 
And may there be no moaning of the bar 
When I put out to sea. 

" For though from out our bourne of time and 
place 
The flood may bear me far. 



A GREAT SUNSET. 

I hope to see my Pilot face to face 
When I have crossed the bar." 



249 



To recall this sonnet is to be irresistibly reminded 
of another of the noble conceptions of death given by 
this great Christian poet, which is so exactly in keep- 
ing with the apostle's thought, when he describes the 
passing of Arthur thus: 

" So said he, and the barge with oar and sail, 
Moved from the brink, like some full-breasted swan. 
That, fluting a wild carol ere her death, 
Ruffles her pure cold plume, and takes the flood, 
With swarthy webs." 

This is death. It is a moving out of the soul from 
the stagnant waters and containing walls of the har- 
bour, on to the great bosom of the ocean of eternity, 
where there are width and space, opportunity to ex- 
plore to the furthest coast-lines of thought, and to at- 
tain to the golden shores of the blessed isles. 

Speaking of the deaths of two men, whom we both 
knew and loved, a beloved friend of mine has quoted 
a poem of Bret Harte, which is exceedingly beautiful 
and apposite, because it so exactly expresses the de- 
sire of the man who is in a strait betwixt two, know- 
ing that the blessedness of this mortal life is far less 
than that of departing to be with Christ: 

" But lo, in the distance the clouds break away! 
The gates' glowing portals I see; 
And I hear from the outgoing ship in the bay 
The song of the sailors in glee. 



250 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

So I think of the luminous footprints that bore 

His comfort o'er dark Galilee, 
And wait for the signal to go to the shore, 

To the ship that is waiting for me! " 



Remember how the apostle Peter describes death. 
Speaking of his death, he uses the very word which 
had been employed in that memorable conversation 
on the Mount of Transfiguration, when Moses and 
Elijah spake with the Master of the decease which 
He was to accomplish at Jerusalem. " After my de- 
cease " (Luke ix. 31 ; 2 Peter i. 15). The Greek word 
is exodos. There is only one other place in which that 
word occurs, in the whole New Testament, when the 
reference is to the going out of the people from Egypt 
(Heb. xi. 22). 

Death, under this conception, is a going out, not 
a coming in. It begins. If it ends, it ends the life 
of slavery and pain, and opens the way into a world 
where the development of the soul will be unre- 
strained. 

Let us not dread to die. With most the soul is 
probably as unconscious of the act of death as of that 
of birth. It needs but the cracking of the frail shell, 
the withdrawing of the thin curtain, the slackening of 
the golden cord of life. In all probability we shall 
be surprised to find that heaven has been lying all 
around us, throughout the days of our mortal pil- 
grimage, and that we had come (long before we died) 
into the midst of Mount Sion, had been walking the 



A GREAT SUNSET. 



aSi 



streets of the new Jerusalem, had been mingHng with 
the innumerable hosts of angels, and the spirits of just 
men made perfect. 

The Lord justly claims the title, " the Resurrection 
and the Life." 'He has abolished death, and brought 
Life and Immortality to light through his Gospel. We 
are not now left to the dim light of a surmise, of sup- 
position, or of hesitating guess work. We know that 
there is a life beyond death, because men saw Him 
after He was risen. " We are witnesses," says one of 
them, " of all things which He did in the country of 
the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom also they slew, 
hanging Him on a tree. Him God raised up the third 
day, and gave Him to be made manifest, not to all the 
people, but unto witnesses that were chosen before 
of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with Him 
after He rose from the dead." 

Yes, He lives, and because He lives we shall live 
also. He has gone to prepare mansions for us in the 
Father's house, and He will come again to receive 
us to Himself, that where He is we may be also. And 
in that world we shall see his face, and his Name shall 
be on our foreheads, and, in company with kindred 
spirits, we shall do his commandments, hearkening to 
the voice of his Word. " His servants shall serve 
Him." Even now I suppose Moses and Aaron are 
among his priests, and Samuel among them that call 
upon his Name, " in the solemn troops, and sweet 
societies " of eternity. 



XXIV. 
En&or an5 (Bllboa. 

(Samuel xxviii.; i Chronicles x. 13.) 

Earth fades! Heaven breaks on me; I shall stand next 
Before God's throne; the moment's close at hand 
When man the first, last time, has leave to lay 
His whole heart bare before His Maker. . . . 

-R. B. 

YEARS had passed since David's sling had 
brought Goliath to the ground, and the Phil- 
istines had fled headlong at Ephesdammim 
before the onset of the men of Israel. A new inva- 
sion was now planned to revenge that disgrace, and 
re-establish the Philistine supremacy over the plain of 
Esdraelon, which was the necessary link between the 
wealthy cities of the Euphrates Valley and the vast 
market for their wares and produce furnished by the 
cities of the Nile Valley. To hold that great trade- 
route involved the right to impose very valuable taxa- 
tion on the merchandise transported to and fro — 
hence the desire to hold its keys. The tides of Philis- 
tine invasion, therefore, poured up by the seacoast 
route, which was favourable for the evolutions of the 
Philistine chariots and cavalry, and a strongly forti- 



BNDOR AND) GILBOA. 253 

fied camp was formed at Shunem, about three and a 
half miles north of Jezreel, and celebrated in after- 
time as the abode of the rich woman who so hos- 
pitably entertained the prophet Elisha. 

Hastily gathering what forces he could collect, Saul 
marched northwards, and pitched his camp on the 
slopes of Mount Gilboa, four miles distant from the 
invading army, and on the south of the Great Plain. 
" Green plains rising from the level of the Kishon 
lead to the slopes of Gilboa, swelling after a time into 
low heights, which rise bare and stony. Behind 
these the many summits of the hills shoot up abruptly 
some five or six hundred feet, bleak, white, and bar- 
ren, their only growths spots of scrub oak and moun- 
tain thorns and flowers, which in spring at least are 
never wanting in Palestine." 

The sight of the great force which was arrayed 
against him seems to have completely paralysed Saul's 
courage. He contrasted the complete accoutrements 
of the Philistines with the spears and slings of Israel, 
and "his heart trembled greatly." The heroic 
courage which faith might have brought him was not 
now possible, since the sense of God's presence was 
withdrawn. There was no rift in the black canopy of 
despair that overshadowed his terror-stricken soul. 
He could say with another, " Behold I go forward, 
but He is not there; and backward, but I cannot per- 
ceive Him; on the left hand, where He doth work, 
but I cannot behold Him; He hideth Himself on the 



854 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

right hand that I cannot see Him " (Job xxiii. 8). It 
was to this that the terrible series of tragedies, which 
we are now about to narrate, must be attributed. 
The restraining grace of God, which he had so long 
despised and resisted, no longer strove with him, and 
he was left to follow the promptings of those evil 
spirits — " the rulers of the darkness of this world " — 
who, for mysterious purposes, are permitted to assail 
the sons of men. 

True, he inquired of the Lord, for probably the first 
time after the lapse of many years; but there was no 
repentance or confession of sin, only abject terror and 
frantic despair. Therefore " the Lord answered him 
not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by 
prophets." " If I regard iniquity in my heart, the 
Lord will not hear me." 

'I. EisTDOR. — At some previous period, as we have 
seen, " Saul had put away those that had familiar 
spirits, and the wizards, out of the land." He may 
have done this in one of those strange lucid moments 
when he became conscious of the strivings of God's 
good Spirit, or as a set-off to the vn\A strivings of 
passion of which he was guiltily conscious — so often 
men seek to atone for the sins into which they have 
been betrayed, by some strong outward act, intended 
as a make-weight in the other scale, or a sop to an 
uneasy conscience. It became clear, however, that 
he had no heartfelt abhorrence of the crimes he thus 



ENDOR AND GILBOA. 255 

punished, seeing that in his own dire extremity he had 
recourse to the very arts he had striven to abolish, and 
sought from the mouth of hell the help for which he 
had appealed to heaven in vain! 

About two miles north from Shunem, in the rear, 
therefore, of the Philistine army, lay the little village of 
Endor. It was one of those spots from which Manas- 
seh had failed to expel the old population; and 
amongst these, the descendants of the ancient Ca- 
naanites, was an old woman who professed to be able 
to bring up the souls of the dead. It is likely enough 
that her claims were baseless. By ventriloquism and 
sleight of hand she no doubt simulated the voice and 
appearance of those who seemed to come from the 
other world at her bidding. If there was more than 
that, we do not hesitate to affirm our belief that in all 
ages demons have been in collusion with necro- 
mancers and spiritualists, and have answered to their 
call. This is at the root and heart of the phenomena 
of modern spiritualism. 

Heavily cloaked and disguised, accompanied by 
two trusty companions whom tradition has identified 
as Abner and Amasa, Saul set forth in the early hours 
of the night, crossed the plain, made a detour round 
the eastern shoulder of Little Hermon, and arrived 
safely at the witch's dwelling. The door opened to 
admit them to the house, and amid the dark weirdness 
of the interior, revealed by the glimmering light of a 
brazier, choked with smoke, the woman was quite 



2s6 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

unable to recog-nise the features of the haggard man 
who accosted her with the request that she should 
bring up whomsoever he should name. 

At first she hesitated, reminding him how perilous 
her profession was, and suggesting that to give him 
satisfaction might cost her life. " Behold, thou 
knowest what Saul hath done, how he hath cut oflf 
those that have familiar spirits and wizards out of the 
land; wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, 
to cause me to die?" 

With an oath which strangely implicated the God 
whom he was at that moment denying, and with a 
touch of his kingly prerogative the king assured her 
that no punishment should befall her for doing what 
he requested. " As the Lord liveth, there shall no 
punishment happen to thee for this thing." 

Thus reassured, the woman asked whom she should 
bring up ; but she must have been not a little startled, 
when in a hoarse whisper, as of one paralysed and 
awestruck by his weird surroundings, the King said, 
" Bring me up Samuel." 

Retiring from him to a distance, the wretched 
woman began her incantations, perhaps dropping a 
powder on the coals of the brazier, muttering incanta- 
tions in a low voice, making passes and adjurations. 
But before she had completed her preparations the 
Almighty seems to have interfered, sending back his 
faithful servant from the world beyond the article of 
death, so that the witch might not even appear to 



ENDOR AND GILBOA. 257 

have the credit of securing so wonderful a visitation. 
" The woman saw Samuel." 

At the same moment that she recognised Samuel, 
she seems to have recognised Saul also. Startled and 
frightened for her life she called with a loud voice, 
and spake unto Saul, saying, " Why hast thou de- 
ceived me?" Perhaps in her excited condition of 
soul, she was endowed with that supernatural insight 
which we call clairvoyance; or perhaps there was 
something in Samuel's appearance so startlingly vivid 
and real that she was led in that dread hour to con- 
nect prophet and king as in years gone by; or per- 
haps the king in his eagerness had drawn near, and 
had dropped the mantle which veiled his face and 
figure. But however it befell, she saw through his 
disguise, and in horror-stricken tones, cried, "Thou 
art Saul!" 

Again he reassured her, and asked her what she 
had seen. 

" A majestic being, worthy to be God," she replied, 
" arising as if from out of the earth." 

Pressed by Saul to describe his appearance more 
minutely, for she was beholding a mysterious form, 
which, though present in the same chamber as him- 
self, was veiled from him, she said, " He resembles an 
old man covered with a robe." " And Saul perceived 
that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the 
ground, and made obeisance." 

Very touching and thrilling was the conversation 



258 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

that followed. I am disposed to think that it was held 
without the medium of the witch, and that God per- 
mitted the prophet to speak with Saul, as afterwards 
Moses and Elijah to speak with our Lord of the de- 
cease to be presently accomplished at Jerusalem. It 
is likely that these sentences were actually inter- 
changed between the king and his former friend and 
confidant, to whom he turned remorsefully in his 
awful agony. Do you not think that if, even then, 
Saul had turned to Jehovah with tears of confession 
and the simplicity of faith, he would have been an- 
swered according to the multitude of the Divine com- 
passions? Assuredly he would; but there was no sign 
of such a change of temper. 

Samuel did not wait to be questioned, but sadly 
told the awestruck king that, even in the other life, 
his misdoings had filled his spirit with unrest, so 
much so that he could not forbear returning to speak 
to him once more. " Why hast thou disquieted me 
to bring me up?" 

Saul's answer was that of despair. " I am sore 
distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, 
and God is departed from me, and answereth me no 
more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams; therefore I 
have called thee, that thou mayest make known unto 
me what I shall do." 

But from the lips of the prophet came no words of 
comfort or hope. It was useless to ask of the servant 
the help which was denied by the Master. There 



EN DOR AND GILBOA. 259 

was no gain in evading the fact that God Himself was 
on the side of David, and against the king, whose 
reign had begun with such fair promise. The multi- 
pHed misfortunes which had befallen him and his 
realm were due to his disobedience to the direct in- 
structions issued with respect to Amalek. The sin 
which he had now perpetrated had put the last touch 
on all his transgressions. Nothing, at this hour, 
could stay or avert the descending avalanche. As he 
had sown, he must reap ; as he had fallen, so he must 
lie. It was, therefore, revealed that the Lord would 
deliver Israel also with him into the hand of the Phil- 
istines, and on the morrow Saul and his sons should 
have also passed into the world of spirits ; the Hebrew 
host would be annihilated, the camp sacked, and the 
land left to the fate which the conquered of those days 
knew well how to expect. 

Little wonder was it that the king fell straightway 
his full length upon the earth, and was sore afraid. 
He was already weak with watching and fasting 
through the previous day ; the events of the night had 
completely unnerved him; and his nervous system 
collapsed under the terrible strain. Even the callous 
nature of the witch was smitten with compunction 
and pity. Her woman's nature was thoroughly 
aroused by the awful horror that lay on the King's 
soul. She besought him to eat. By the trust she 
had reposed in him she pleaded that she had some 
claim on his mercy, to be expended not for her, but 



26o SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

for him. " Let me set a morsel of bread," she 
pleaded, " before thee ; and eat, that thou mayest have 
strength when thou goest on thy way." 

At first he refused. It seemed as though he would 
never rise again from the mud-floor on which all the 
glory of his manhood lay prone. " But his servants, 
together with the woman, constrained him; and he 
hearkened unto their voice. So he arose from the 
earth, and sat upon the bed." -What memories must 
have passed before his mind, as he sat on that divan, 
whilst the woman hasted to prepare the meal! Did 
he not remember the first happy days of his reign; 
Jabesh-gilead; the overthrow of the Philistines, not 
once or twice; and the love of his people? But, step 
by step, he saw how he had gone down from the sun- 
lit summits to the dark valley, where the black tor- 
rent ran, and the overhanging rocks met overhead. 
As with a drowning man, the whole of his previous 
career passes before him in a moment of time, so the 
whole panorama of his past must have stood in clear 
outline before the mental vision of the king. Then, 
after hastily partaking of the calf and the unleavened 
cakes, the three figures stole through the darkness, 
back to the camp. 

II. GiuBOA. — On the morrow there was some 
slight alteration in the disposition of the respective 
hosts. The Philistines moved towards Aphek, a little 
to the west of their camp; while the Israelites de- 



ENDOR AND. GILBOA. 261 

scended from the heights of Gilboa, and took up a 
position near the spring or fountain of Jezreel 
(xxix. i). 

Presently the battle was joined. In spite of the 
most desperate eflforts to withstand the onset of the 
heavily mailed troops that were opposed to them, the 
Hebrews were routed, and fled from before the Phil- 
istines. It is expressly noted by the historian that the 
lower slopes of Gilboa were covered by the wounded, 
whose hearts' blood bedewed the mountain pastures 
(xxxi. I, R. V. margin). 

Saul and Jonathan made the most desperate efforts 
to retrieve the day: 

" From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, 
The bow of Jonathan turned not back 
And the sword of Saul returned not empty." 

But it was in vain. " The battle went sore against 
Saul." "The Philistines slew Jonathan and Abina- 
dab and Melchi-shua, the sons of Saul." The flower 
of his army lay strewn around him; the chivalry of 
Israel was quenched in rivers of blood. Then, leav- 
ing all others, the Philistines concentrated their at- 
tack on that lordly figure which towered amid the 
fugitives, the royal crown on his helmet, the royal 
bracelet flashing on his arm. " The Philistines fol- 
lowed hard upon Saul . . . and the archers overtook 
him, and he was greatly distressed because of the 
archers." He knew what fate awaited him if he was 
captured whilst his life was yet in him. Exposed to 



262 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

ignominy, tortured to death, it seemed to him that 
immediate death were far preferable to such a fate. 
" Then said Saul to his armour-bearer, Draw thy 
sword and thrust me through therewith; lest these 
uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and 
make a mock of me." 

The armour-bearer dared not lift up his hand 
against the sacred person of his king, so Saul, placmg 
his sword-hilt firmly in the earth, fell upon the point, 
which pierced his heart. 

The narrative which the Amalekite gave afterwards 
to David suggests that the effort to take his life was 
not at once successful ; and he seems to have asked this 
child of a race which he was once bidden utterly to 
destroy, to give him the last finishing stroke. " He 
said unto me. Stand, I pray thee, over me, and slay 
me; for anguish hath taken hold of me; because my 
life is yet whole in me." It may be, however, that all 
this was a fabrication, intended to win David's favour; 
for we are told that when the armour-bearer saw that 
Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword, and 
died with him. 

The day of Gilboa was a veritable Chevy Chase. 
" Saul died, and his three sons, and his armour- 
bearer, and all his men, that same day together.'' 
The next day the Philistines set to work to strip 
the dead, and finding the bodies of Saul and his 
sons, they despatched their heads, armour, and de- 
capitated corpses to be carried in triumph through 



ENDOR AND GILBOA. 263 

the streets of their principal cities, and finally to be 
affixed to the walls of Beth-shan. As the tidings 
spread, the people left the towns and villages in the 
neighbourhood, and fled across the Jordan. Roving 
bands followed up the victory, and carried fire and 
sword into all parts of the land. It was the tidings 
of their approach to Gibeah that caused the accident 
to Mephibosheth. " He was five years old when the 
tidings came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and 
his nurse took him up and fled; and it came to pass, 
as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and he became 
lame " (2 Sam. iv. 4). 

One brave deed relieved the sombre hues of that 
terrible catastrophe. The men of Jabesh-gilead could 
not forget how nobly Saul had come to their aid in 
the early days of his reign ; and they resolved, at least, 
to retrieve the royal body from the ignominy to which 
Philistine malice had exposed it. The valiant men 
therefore arose, and went all night, took down the 
body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the 
temple walls, bore them reverently back to Jabesh, 
burnt them to conceal the hideous mutilation to which 
they had been subjected, buried them under " the 
tamarisk tree in Jabesh," and lamented with un- 
feigned grief this tragic close to a reign which had 
been once as a morning without clouds. 

It is an awful thing when a man persists, as Saul 
and as Judas, to the end striving against God. We 
feel that it was a dreadful thing to do as he did; we 



264 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

are horrified at his temerity; we marvel at his infatu- 
ation; yet we may fall into his wicked ways, and be 
overcome of evil as he was. We, too, may have re- 
sort to things, habits, and people which we had once 
religiously tabooed. We, too, are liable to step back 
to our undoing. If a man, having felt the evil of 
covetousness, and set himself against the love of 
money, after a while allows it again to invade his soul ; 
if a man has been a slave of his appetites, and having 
realised their degrading tendencies, has acted, for a 
while, on a vow of temperance, but has gradually al- 
lowed them to resume their former sway; if after 
years of irreligion he has begun to be in earnest about 
his soul, but has again relapsed into moral apathy — 
is not this like Saul seeking help in the cave of the 
enchantress, whose class he had proscribed? Such 
men are wells without water, clouds carried before the 
blast of the tempest, for whom, in the words of the 
apostle, is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever : 
" For if, after they have escaped the pollutions of the 
world through the knowledge of the Lord and 
Saviour, they are again entangled therein and over- 
come, the latter end is worse than the beginning; for 
it had been better for them not to have known the way 
of righteousness, than, after they had known it, to 
turn back from the holy commandment delivered 
unto them." 



XXV. 

Hn Epilogue, 

(2 Samuel i. 19, etc.) 

He who did most, shall bear most! The strongest shall 

stand the most weak! 
'Tis the weakness in strength that I cry for, my flesh that 

I seek 
In the Godhead!— I seek and I find i*! Oh, Saul! it shall be 
A Face like my face that receives thee; a Man like to me, 
Thou Shalt love and be loved by for ever; a Hand like this 

hand 
Shall throw open the gates of new life to thee! See the 

Christ stand! 

— R. B. 

" ^ I ^HE Song of the Bow," for that is the title of 
I the touching-ly beautiful elegy with which 
David's muse mourned over the tragedy of 
Gilboa, is very pathetic and inspiring. It seemed as 
though the singer had forgotten the rough experi- 
ences which had fallen to his lot through the jealous 
mania of the king; and passing over recent years, he 
was a minstrel-shepherd once more, celebrating the 
glory and powers of his king. 

" Thy glory, O Israel, is slain upon thy high places! 
How are the mighty fallen! " 

" Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, 
And in their death they were not divided." 
26s 



z66 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

It makes us think of the love of God to hear David 
sing like that. It reminds us that God has said, 
" Their sins and iniquities I will remember no more." 
Here at least, long before the Christian era, was a 
love that bore all things, believed all things, hoped 
all things, endured all things, and never failed ; which 
cast the halo of its idealism around the memory of the 
departed ; which thought only of what had been noble 
and beautiful in them, and refused to consider aught 
that had been base and unworthy. 'It is thus that we 
also would think of Saul, the first king of Israel. 

It always seems to us as though Saul were one of 
those castaways of whom the apostle speaks, and 
among whom he feared lest he should finally be 
classed; who were once selected by God for some 
high and holy purpose, who bade fair to realise it, but 
who at last were cast .aside from his use and service 
as salt which has lost its savour, and was cast out to 
be trodden under foot of men. 

It is a very solemn thought! No career could be- 
gin with fairer, brighter prospects than Saul had, and 
none could close in a more absolute midnight of de- 
spair; and yet such a fate may befall us, unless we 
watch, and pray, and walk humbly with our God. 

We cannot forget that representation on the pages 
of the " Immortal Dreamer," of the man in an Iron 
Cage. The man said, " I was once a fair and flour- 
ishing professor, both in mine own eyes and in the 



AN EPILOGUE. 267 

eyes of others; I once was, as I thought, fair for the 
Celestial City, and had then even joy at the thoughts 
that I should get thither; but I left ofif to watch and 
be sober; I laid the reins upon the neck of my lusts; 
I sinned against the light of the Word and the good- 
ness of God; I have grieved the Spirit, and He is 
gone; I tempted the devil, and he has come to me; I 
have provoked God to anger, and He has left me; I 
have so hardened my heart that I cannot repent." 
"Well," said Christian, "this is fearful! God help 
me to watch and be sober, and to pray that I may 
shun the cause of this man's misery! " 

But those who are most fearful of falling into such 
a case are they who are least liable to it. It is the 
disciple who says, Lord, is it I? in lowly distrust of 
himself is he who will never be found guilty of tread- 
ing the Son of God beneath his feet, or crucifying 
Him afresh. 

But, deeper than all, the dispensational aspect of 
Saul's reign appeals to us with profoundest interest. 
He seems to represent the prince of this present age 
(or, as it might be called, "the world"), who was 
once Lucifer, the Son of the Morning; who was ap- 
pointed as God's vicegerent to rule over his heritage; 
who fell from his high estate, and in his fall dragged 
down not only a noble retinue of bright and beautiful 
spirits, but cast a blighting influence over the entire 
realm over which he had been set. In each of these 



2 68 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

points there is a close analogy between Saul, the king, 
and Satan, the fallen archangel. Both were favoured 
above most; both began with high promise; both 
were vicegerents over God's heritage; both were dis- 
obedient, wilful, and proud; both fell from their pri- 
mal estate, and in their fall dragged many in their 
train, and left an entail of woe as their legacy and 
memento. And both incurred the sentence of depo- 
sition in favour of another kingdom, which was 
springing up in the heart of their kingdom. In the 
case of Saul, this was David's; in the case of Satan, it 
is that kingdom which can never be removed, but 
abideth for ever! 

That gathering to the Cave of Adullam of all who 
were in desperate circumstances until, by careful dis- 
cipline and the infusion of his own heroic spirit, David 
moulded them into a great army, and won the empire 
of that time and land; that generous and noble dis- 
position which stood out in such striking contrast 
to the character of his adversary; that incessant per- 
secution and pursuit by the crowned prince of the 
realm — what are these but striking analogies, which 
have their highest counterpart only in the history of 
the Son of Man, who from his cradle to his grave was 
always subjected to the hatred and opposition of 
Satan ! 

Notwithstanding all that Saul's malice could do to 
thwart and frustrate the Divine plan, yet Jehovah set 
his king upon the holy hill of Zion, and he came forth 



AN EPILOGUE. 269 

to declare the decree of his enthronement and corona- 
tion. Similarly the Divine purpose with regard to 
our Lord must stand, though demons and men oppose 
it. The Son of God is destined to be the crowned 
King of men. His kingdom is now hidden and in 
mystery; his followers are not manifested to the eyes 
of men; the full proportions of his empire are con- 
cealed. It has yet " to come." The overthrow of 
its great antagonist must precede its establishment. 
For the universe also there is to be an Armageddon, 
just as there was a field of Gilboa, and only when 
that last fight has been fought, and the powers of 
darkness have been shattered, never to be recon- 
structed, shall there be heard the sound of many 
voices, as of the tumultuous sound of vast multitudes, 
saying, " Hallelujah, the kingdoms of this world have 
become the kingdoms of our God and of his Christ, 
and He shall reign for ever." 

" Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom, that shall 
not be removed, let us have grace, whereby we may 
serve God acceptably, with reverence and in godly 
fear, for our God is a consuming fire." 

The reign of Saul would be almost too bitter to 
contemplate, unless under its rough cuticle and rind 
we could detect the formation of the luscious fruit of 
David's kingdom, destined to sow eternal seed over 
the world. Similarly we might despair of the condi- 
tion to which the Trinity of Evil has reduced our 
world, did we not know that in the days of these kings 



270 SAMUEL THE PROPHET. 

the God of Heaven shall set up a kingdom which shall 
never be destroyed, nor shall the sovereignty thereof 
be left to another people; but it shall break in pieces, 
and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand 
for ever (see Dan. ii. 4). 

" Samuel the Prophet " thus practically bridges 
the gulf between Samson the Judge and David the 
King: and there is deep significance in the fact that 
his name is identified with the two Books of Scrip- 
ture which describe this great transitional period, 
every event of which was affected by his influence. 



Ii|lf!!!!|l|l1i 

,!!i,l'iriil! 



'ih,M^ii 



I , 






I 



Li " I. 



llj'l 



'iniil'f'llliiL 
■ liljlll ill 

! 



\i^ 



mm 



wmmi 



I Vl.i', 'i 



ilil I'i 

ij 



llJillllllill ! 



II iiiii 



iiniiHiiiiii! 

,:,<|| ji! ililillliliir 



llllil i!lil!.l 

III! 



'I« 111 



III 



lL:.;.iilii;i.U,LliiUlliJ.lliijJ., 1 Uli lJ,iiJ 



